Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\d81db\documents\Epicfiles\2007\P527.SGM (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 ContentsCat. No. 15052W
Reminder ...................... 1Department
of the Introduction ..................... 1ResidentialTreasury Rental Income ................... 2
Internal
Rental Expenses ................. 2Revenue Rental Repairs and Improvements ........ 3Service
Other Expenses ................ 3
Condominiums and Cooperatives .... 4Property
Not Rented for Profit .............. 5
Property Changed to Rental Use ...... 5
(Including Renting Part of Property ............ 5
Rental of Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home) ....... 5Vacation Homes) Dwelling Unit Used as Home ....... 6
Figuring Days of Personal Use ...... 6
How To Divide Expenses .......... 7For use in preparing How To Figure Rental Income
and Deductions ............. 7
2007 Returns Depreciation .................... 7
Special Depreciation Allowance ..... 9
MACRS ..................... 10
MACRS Depreciation Under GDS .... 13
Optional Tables ................ 14
MACRS Depreciation Under ADS .... 15
Casualties and Thefts .............. 15
Limits on Rental Losses ............ 15
At-Risk Rules ................. 15
Passive Activity Limits ............ 15
How To Report Rental Income and
Expenses ................... 16
Schedule E (Form 1040) .......... 16
How To Get Tax Help .............. 19
Index .......................... 20
Reminder
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected
by the Center may appear in this publication on
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at the
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication discusses rental income and
expenses, including depreciation, and explains
how to report them on your return. It also covers
casualty losses on rental property and the pas-
sive activity and at-risk rules.
Get forms and other information
Sale of rental property. For information onfaster and easier by: how to figure and report any gain or loss from
the sale or other disposition of your rental prop-
Internet • www.irs.gov erty, get Publication 544, Sales and Other Dis-
positions of Assets.

Page 2 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of main home used as rental property. See How To Get Tax Help at the end of this it from the normal rent payment. Under the terms
For information on how to figure and report any publication for information about getting these of the lease, your tenant does not have to pay
gain or loss from the sale or other disposition of publications and forms. this bill. Include the utility bill paid by the tenant
your main home that you also used as rental and any amount received as a rent payment in
property, get Publication 523, Selling Your your rental income. You can deduct the utility
Home. payment made by your tenant as a rental ex-
pense.Rental Income
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your Example 2. While you are out of town, theYou generally must include in your gross income
suggestions for future editions. furnace in your rental property stops working.all amounts you receive as rent. Rental income
You can write to us at the following address: Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs andis any payment you receive for the use or occu-
deducts the repair bill from the rent payment.pation of property. In addition to amounts you
Include the repair bill paid by the tenant and anyreceive as normal rent payments, there areInternal Revenue Service amount received as a rent payment in yourother amounts, discussed later, that may beIndividual Forms and Publications Branch rental income. You can deduct the repair pay-rental income.SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I ment made by your tenant as a rental expense.1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 When to report. When you report rental in-
Washington, DC 20224 Property or services. If you receive propertycome on your return depends on whether you
or services, instead of money, as rent, includeare a cash basis taxpayer or use an accrual
the fair market value of the property or servicesmethod.We respond to many letters by telephone.
in your rental income.If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you reportTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
If the services are provided at an agreedrental income on your return for the year youclude your daytime phone number, including the
upon or specified price, that price is the fairactually or constructively receive it. You are aarea code, in your correspondence.
market value unless there is evidence to thecash basis taxpayer if you report income in theYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
contrary.year you receive it, regardless of when it wasasterisk must be included in the address.)
earned. You constructively receive incomePlease put “Publications Comment” on the sub- Example. Your tenant is a painter. He offerswhen it is made available to you, for example, byject line. Although we cannot respond individu- to paint your rental property instead of paying 2being credited to your bank account.   ally to each email, we do appreciate your months’ rent. You accept his offer. If you use an accrual method, you generallyfeedback and will consider your comments as Include in your rental income the amount thereport income when you earn it, rather thanwe revise our tax products. tenant would have paid for 2 months’ rent. Youwhen you receive it. You generally deduct your
Ordering forms and publications. Visit can deduct that same amount as a rental ex-expenses when you incur them, rather than
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and pense for painting your property.when you pay them.
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the  For more information about when you con- Lease with option to buy. If the rental agree-address below and receive a response within 10 structively receive income and accrual methods ment gives your tenant the right to buy yourdays after your request is received. of accounting, see Publication 538, Accounting rental property, the payments you receive underPeriods and Methods. the agreement are generally rental income. If
National Distribution Center your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-Advance rent. Advance rent is any amountP.O. Box 8903 erty, the payments you receive for the periodyou receive before the period that it covers.Bloomington, IL 61702-8903 after the date of sale are considered part of theInclude advance rent in your rental income in the
selling price.year you receive it regardless of the period cov-
ered or the method of accounting you use.Tax questions. If you have a tax question, Rental of property also used as a home. Ifcheck the information available on www.irs.gov you rent property that you also use as yourExample. You sign a 10-year lease to rentor call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax home and you rent it fewer than 15 days duringyour property. In the first year, you receivequestions sent to either of the above addresses. the tax year, do not include the rent you receive$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rent in your income and do not deduct rental ex-for the last year of the lease. You must includeUseful Items penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule$10,000 in your income in the first year.You may want to see: A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty
Security deposits. Do not include a security and theft losses that are allowed for nonrental
Publication deposit in your income when you receive it if you property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the (Including Vacation Home), later.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
lease. But if you keep part or all of the securityExpenses Part interest. If you own a part interest indeposit during any year because your tenant
rental property, you must report your part of the❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in does not live up to the terms of the lease, include
rental income from the property.Service Before 1987 the amount you keep in your income in that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to be❏ 535 Business Expenses
used as a final payment of rent, it is advance
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts rent. Include it in your income when you receive
Rental Expensesit.❏ 551 Basis of Assets
Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenant❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules This section discusses expenses of renting
pays you to cancel a lease, the amount you property that you ordinarily can deduct from your❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property receive is rent. Include the payment in your rental income. It includes information on the
income in the year you receive it regardless of expenses you can deduct if you rent a condo-Form (and Instructions) your method of accounting. minium or cooperative apartment, if you rent
❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization part of your property, or if you change yourExpenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays property to rental use. Depreciation, which you❏ 5213 Election To Postpone any of your expenses, the payments are rental can also deduct from your rental income, isDetermination as To Whether the income. You must include them in your income. discussed later under Depreciation.Presumption Applies That an You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses , When to deduct. You generally deduct your
later, for more information. rental expenses in the year you pay them.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental Example 1. Your tenant pays the water and Vacant rental property. If you hold property
Income and Loss sewage bill for your rental property and deducts for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct
Page 2 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 3 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ- •  Taxes.Repairs and Improvements
ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or •  Interest.maintaining the property while the property is You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rental
•  Points.vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-
rental income for the period the property is va- provements. You recover the cost of improve- •  Commissions.cant. ments by taking depreciation (explained later).
•  Tax return preparation fees.Separate the costs of repairs and im-Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your •  Travel expenses.provements, and keep accurate rec-ordinary and necessary expenses for managing, ords. You will need to know the cost ofRECORDS
conserving, or maintaining rental property from •  Rental payments.improvements when you sell or depreciate yourthe time you make it available for rent. •  Local transportation expenses.property.
Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate Some of these expenses are discussed next.Repairs. A repair keeps your property in goodrental property when it is ready and available for
operating condition. It does not materially add torent. See Placed-in-Service Date under Depre- Rental payments for property. You can de-the value of your property or substantially pro-ciation, later. duct the rent you pay for property that you uselong its life. Repainting your property inside or for rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold forout, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-Expenses for rental property sold. If you sell rental purposes, you can deduct an equal part ofing, and replacing broken windows are exam-property you held for rental purposes, you can the cost each year over the term of the lease.ples of repairs.deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the If you make repairs as part of an extensivemanaging, conserving, or maintaining the prop-
rent you pay for equipment that you use forremodeling or restoration of your property, theerty until it is sold.
rental purposes. However, in some cases, leasewhole job is an improvement.
contracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,Personal use of rental property. If you
Improvements. An improvement adds to the you cannot deduct these payments. You cansometimes use your rental property for personal
value of property, prolongs its useful life, or recover the cost of purchased equipmentpurposes, you must divide your expenses be-
adapts it to new uses. Table 1 shows examples through depreciation.tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental
of many improvements.expense deductions may be limited. See Per- Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you If you make an improvement to property, thesonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation pay an insurance premium for more than onecost of the improvement must be capitalized.Home), later. year in advance, each year you can deduct theThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci-
part of the premium payment that will apply toated as if the improvement were separate prop-Part interest. If you own a part interest in
that year. You cannot deduct the total premiumerty.rental property, you can deduct your part of the
in the year you pay it.expenses that you paid.
Other Expenses Local benefit taxes. Generally, you cannotUncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax- deduct charges for local benefits that increasepayer, you do not report uncollected rent. Be- In addition to depreciation and the cost of re- the value of your property, such as charges forcause you do not include it in your income, you pairs, you can deduct the following expenses putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewercannot deduct it. from your rental income. systems. These charges are nondepreciableIf you use an accrual method, you report capital expenditures. You must add them to the•  Advertising.income when you earn it. If you are unable to basis of your property. You can deduct localcollect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as a •  Cleaning and maintenance. benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-business bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica- ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits.•  Utilities.tion 535 for more information about business
bad debts. •  Insurance. Interest expense. You can deduct mortgage
interest you pay on your rental property. Chapter
Table 1. Examples of Improvements 4 of Publication 535 explains mortgage interest
in detail.
Caution. Work you do (or have done) on your home that does not add much to either Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.the value or the life of the property, but rather keeps the property in good condition, is Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgageconsidered a repair, not an improvement. on your rental property cannot be deducted as
interest. These expenses, which include mort-Additions Heating & Air Conditioning
gage commissions, abstract fees, and recordingBedroom Heating system
fees, are capital expenses. However, you canBathroom Central air conditioning
amortize them over the life of the mortgage.Deck Furnace
Garage Duct work Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more ofPorch Central humidifier mortgage interest on your rental property to anyPatio Filtration system one person, you should receive a Form 1098,
Mortgage Interest Statement, or similar state-Lawn & Grounds Plumbing
ment showing the interest you paid for the year.Landscaping Septic system
If you and at least one other person (other thanDriveway Water heater
your spouse if you file a joint return) were liableWalkway Soft water system
for, and paid interest on, the mortgage, and theFence Filtration system
other person received the Form 1098, reportRetaining wall
your share of the interest on Schedule E (FormSprinkler system Interior Improvements
Swimming pool Built-in appliances 1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your return
Kitchen modernization showing the name and address of the other
Miscellaneous Flooring person. In the left margin of Schedule E, next to
Storm windows, doors Wall-to-wall carpeting line 13, enter “See attached.”
New roof
Points.   The term “points” is often used toCentral vacuum Insulation
describe some of the charges paid by a bor-Wiring upgrades Attic
Satellite dish Walls, floor rower to take out a loan or a mortgage. These
Security system Pipes, duct work charges are also called loan origination fees,
maximum loan charges, or premium charges. If
Publication 527 (2007) Page 3

Page 4 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any of these charges (points) are solely for the 2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to To deduct travel expenses, you must
use of money, they are interest. keep records that follow the rules inmaturity.
chapter 5 of Publication 463.Points paid when you take out a loan or
RECORDS
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-mortgage result in original issue discount (OID). ments from the result in (2). This is theIn general, the points (OID) are deductible as Local transportation expenses. You can de-OID you can deduct in the first year.interest unless they must be capitalized. How duct your ordinary and necessary local transpor-
To figure your deduction in any subsequentyou figure the amount of points (OID) you can tation expenses if you incur them to collect rental
year, you start with the adjusted issue price. Todeduct each year depends on whether or not income or to manage, conserve, or maintain
get the adjusted issue price, add to the issueyour total OID, including the OID resulting from your rental property.
price any OID previously deducted. Then followthe points, is insignificant or de minimis. If the Generally, if you use your personal car,
OID is not de minimis, you must use the con- steps (2) and (3) above. pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you
stant-yield method to figure how much you can can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-The yield to maturity (YTM) is generally
deduct. ods: actual expenses or the standard mileageshown in the literature you receive from your
rate. For 2007, the standard mileage rate is 481/2lender. If you do not have this information, con-De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it cents a mile for all business miles. For moresult your lender or tax advisor. In general, theis less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the information, see chapter 4 of Publication 463.  YTM is the discount rate that, when used instated redemption price at maturity multiplied by
computing the present value of all principal andthe number of full years from the date of original To deduct car expenses under either
interest payments, produces an amount equal toissue to maturity (the term of the loan). method, you must keep records that
the principal amount of the loan. follow the rules in chapter 5 of Publica-If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one
RECORDS
tion 463. In addition, you must complete FormQualified stated interest (QSI) is stated inter-of the following ways to figure the amount you
4562, Part V, and attach it to your tax return.est that is unconditionally payable in cash orcan deduct each year.
property (other than another loan of the issuer)• On a constant-yield basis over the term of Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as aat least annually over the term of the loan at athe loan. rental expense, the part of tax return preparationsingle fixed rate.
fees you paid to prepare Schedule E (Form• On a straight line basis over the term of
1040), Part I. For example, on your 2007 Sched-Example of constant yield. The facts arethe loan.
ule E you can deduct fees paid in 2007 to pre-the same as in the previous example. The yield• In proportion to stated interest payments. pare Part I of your 2006 Schedule E. You canto maturity on your loan is 10.2467%, com-
also deduct, as a rental expense, any expense• In its entirety at maturity of the loan. pounded annually.
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidYou figure the amount of points (OID) youYou make this choice by deducting the OID in a to resolve a tax underpayment related to yourcan deduct in 2007 as follows.manner consistent with the method chosen on rental activities.your timely filed tax return for the tax year in Principal amount of the loan ..... $100,000which the loan is issued. Minus: Points .............. 1,500 Condominiums
Issue price of the loan ......... $ 98,500 and CooperativesExample of de minimis amount. On Janu- Multiplied by: YTM ........... × .102467ary 1, 2007, you took out a loan for $100,000. Total .................... 10,093 If you rent out a condominium or a cooperativeThe loan matures on January 1, 2017 (a 10-year Minus: QSI ................ 10,000 apartment, special rules apply. Condominiumsterm), and the stated principal amount of the Points (OID) deductible in 2007 $ 93 are treated differently from cooperatives.loan ($100,000) is payable on that date. An
interest payment of $10,000 is payable to the You figure the deduction for 2008 as follows.bank on January 2 of each year, beginning on
CondominiumJanuary 2, 2008. When the loan was made, you Issue price ................ $98,500paid $1,500 in points to the bank. The points Plus: Points (OID) deducted in 2007 93 If you own a condominium, you own a dwellingreduced the issue price of the loan from Adjusted issue price .......... $98,593 unit in a multi-unit building. You also own a$100,000 to $98,500, resulting in $1,500 of OID. Multiplied by: YTM ........... × .102467 share of the common elements of the structure,You determine that the points (OID) you paid are Total .................... 10,103 such as land, lobbies, elevators, and servicede minimis based on the following computation. Minus: QSI ................ 10,000 areas. You and the other condominium ownersPoints (OID) deductible in 2008 . . $ 103 may pay dues or assessments to a special cor-Redemption price at maturity poration that is organized to take care of the(principal amount of the loan) ..... $100,000 Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or common elements.Multiplied by: The term of the loan in mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any If you rent your condominium to others, youcomplete years .............. × 10 remaining points (OID) in the tax year in which can deduct:Multiplied by ................ × .0025 the loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgageDe minimis amount $ 2,500 • Depreciation,may end due to a refinancing, prepayment, fore-
closure, or similar event. However, if the refi-The points (OID) you paid ($1,500) are less than • Repairs,
nancing is with the same lender, the remainingthe de minimis amount. Therefore, you have de • Upkeep,points (OID) generally are not deductible in theminimis OID and you can choose one of the four
year in which the refinancing occurs, but may beways discussed earlier to figure the amount you • Dues,
can deduct each year. Under the straight line deductible over the term of the new mortgage or • Interest and taxes, andmethod, you can deduct $150 each year for 10 loan.
years. • Assessments for the care of the common
parts of the structure.Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-Constant-yield method. If the OID is not de nary and necessary expenses of traveling awayminimis, you must use the constant-yield You cannot deduct special assessments youfrom home if the primary purpose of the trip wasmethod to figure how much you can deduct each pay to a condominium management corporationto collect rental income or to manage, conserve,year. for improvements. But you may be able to re-or maintain your rental property. You must prop- cover your share of the cost of any improvementYou figure your deduction for the first year in erly allocate your expenses between rental and by taking depreciation.the following manner. nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost
of traveling away from home if the primary pur-1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- Cooperativepose of the trip was the improvement of yourerally, this equals the proceeds of the loan.
property. You recover the cost of improvementsIf you paid points on the loan, the issue If you have a cooperative apartment that you
by taking depreciation. For information on travelprice generally is the difference between rent to others, you can usually deduct, as a
expenses, see chapter 1 of Publication 463.the proceeds and the points. rental expense, all the maintenance fees you
Page 4 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 5 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay to the cooperative housing corporation. are presumed to be renting your property to For example, if you paint a room that you  rent, or
However, you cannot deduct a payment make a profit. You may choose to postpone the if you pay premiums for liability insurance in
earmarked for a capital asset or improvement, decision of whether the rental is for profit by filing connection with renting a ro om in your home,
or otherwise charged to the corporation’s capital Form 5213. your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install
account. For example, you cannot deduct a pay- a second phone line strictly for your tenant’sSee Publication 535 for more information.
ment used to pave a community parking lot, use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-
install a new roof, or pay the principal of the ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-
corporation’s mortgage. You must add the pay- ciation, discussed later, on the part of the
ment to the basis of your stock in the corpora- property used for rental purposes as well as onProperty Changed
tion. the furniture and equipment you use for rental
Treat as a capital cost the amount you were purposes.to Rental Use
assessed for capital items. This cannot be more
How to divide expenses. If an expense is forthan the amount by which your payments to the If you change your home or other property (or a
both rental use and personal use, such as mort-corporation exceeded your share of the corpora- part of it) to rental use at any time other than the
gage interest or heat for the entire house, yoution’s mortgage interest and real estate taxes. beginning of your tax year, you must divide
must divide the expense between rental use andYour share of interest and taxes is the yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,
personal use. You can use any reasonableamount the corporation elected to allocate to between rental use and personal use.
method for dividing the expense. It may be rea-you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses for You can deduct as rental expenses only the
sonable to divide the cost of some items (foryour apartment. Otherwise, figure your share in part of the expense that is for the part of the year
example, water) based on the number of peoplethe following way. the property was used or held for rental pur-
using them. However, the two most commonposes.
1. Divide the number of your shares of stock methods for dividing an expense are one basedFor depreciation purposes, treat the propertyby the total number of shares outstanding, on the number of rooms in your home and oneas being placed in service on the conversionincluding any shares held by the corpora- based on the square footage of your home.date.tion. You cannot deduct depreciation or insurance Example. You rent a room in your house.for the part of the year the property was held for2. Multiply the corporation’s deductible inter- The room is 12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet.personal use. However, you can include theest by the number you figured in (1). This Your entire house has 1,800 square feet of floorhome mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in-is your share of the interest. space. You can deduct as a rental expense 10%surance premiums, and real estate tax ex- of any expense that must be divided between3. Multiply the corporation’s deductible taxes penses for the part of the year the property was rental use and personal use. If your heating billby the number you figured in (1). This is held for personal use as an itemized deduction for the year for the entire house was $600, $60your share of the taxes. on Schedule A (Form 1040).    ($600 × 10%) is a rental expense. The balance,In addition to the maintenance fees paid to $540, is a personal expense that you cannotExample. Your tax year is the calendarthe cooperative housing corporation, you can deduct.year. You moved from your home in May anddeduct your direct payments for repairs, upkeep,
started renting it out on June 1. You can deductand other rental expenses, including interest
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlypaid on a loan used to buy your stock in the
expenses, such as taxes and insurance.corporation. The depreciation deduction allowed Personal Use ofStarting with June, you can deduct as rentalfor cooperative apartments is discussed at Co-
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-operative apartments, under Depreciation, later. Dwelling Unitally billed monthly, such as utilities.
When figuring depreciation, treat the prop- (Including Vacationerty as placed in service on June 1.
Not Rented for Profit Home)
If you do not rent your property to make a profit, If you have any personal use of a dwelling unitRenting Part ofyou can deduct your rental expenses only up to (defined later) (including a vacation home) that
the amount of your rental income. You cannot you rent, you must divide your expenses be-Propertycarry forward to the next year any rental ex- tween rental use and personal use. See Figuring
penses that are more than your rental income for Days of Personal Use and How To Divide Ex-If you rent part of your property, you must dividethe year. For more information about the rules penses, later.certain expenses between the part of the prop-for an activity not engaged in for profit, see If you used a dwelling unit for personal pur-erty used for rental purposes and the part of theNot-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica- poses, it may be considered a “dwelling unitproperty used for personal purposes, as thoughtion 535. used as a home.” If it is, you cannot deductyou actually had two separate pieces of prop- rental expenses that are more than your rentalerty.Where to report. Report your not-for-profit income for the unit. See Dwelling Unit Used asYou can deduct the expenses related to therental income on Form 1040 or Form 1040NR, Home and How To Figure Rental Income andpart of the property used for rental purposes,line 21. You can include your mortgage interest Deductions, later. If the dwelling unit is not con-such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort-and any qualified mortgage insurance premiums sidered a dwelling unit used as a home, you cangage insurance premiums, and real estate(if you use the property as your main home or deduct rental expenses that are more than yourtaxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formsecond home), real estate taxes, and casualty rental income for the unit, subject to certain1040). You can also deduct as a rental expenselosses on the appropriate lines of Schedule A limits. See Limits on Rental Losses, later.a part of other expenses that normally are non-(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
deductible personal expenses, such as ex-Claim your other rental expenses, subject to Exception for minimal rental use. If you use
penses for electricity, or painting the outside ofthe rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
your house.  535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions on than 15 days during the year, do not include any
You can deduct the expenses for the part ofline 23 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can of the rent in your income and do not deduct any
the property used for personal purposes, subjectdeduct these expenses only if they, together of the rental expenses. See Dwelling Unit Used
to certain limitations, only if you itemize yourwith certain other miscellaneous itemized de- as Home, later.
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).ductions, total more than 2% of your adjusted
You cannot deduct any part of the cost of the Dwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes agross income.
first phone line even if your tenants have unlim- house, apartment, condominium, mobile home,
Postponing decision. If your rental income is ited use of it. boat, vacation home, or similar property. A
more than your rental expenses for at least 3 You do not have to divide the expenses that dwelling unit has basic living accommod ations,
years out of a period of 5 consecutive years, you belong only to the rental part of your property. such as sleeping space, a toil et, and cooking
Publication 527 (2007) Page 5

Page 6 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
facilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop- During June (30 days), your brothers stayed Example 2. On January 31, you moved out
of the condominium where you had lived for 3erty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar with you and lived in the basement apartment
years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental priceestablishment. rent free.
beginning on February 1. You were unable toProperty is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, Your basement apartment was used as a
rent it until April. On September 15, you sold theor similar establishment if it is regularly available home because you used it for personal pur-
condominium.for occupancy by paying customers and is not poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth-
The days you used the condominium as yourused by an owner as a home during the year. ers is considered personal use. Your personal
main home from January 1 to January 31 are notuse (30 days) is more than the greater of 14 counted as days of personal use when deter-Example. You rent a room in your home days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27 mining whether you used it as a home.that is always available for short-term occu- days).
pancy by paying customers. You do not use the
Figuring Daysroom yourself and you allow only paying cus- Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom
tomers to use the room. The room is used solely in your home at a fair rental price during the local of Personal Use
as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment college’s homecoming, commencement, and
and is not a dwelling unit. A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anyfootball weekends (a total of 27 days). Your
day that the unit is used by any of the followingsister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the
persons.last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%Dwelling Unit Used as Home
of the total days rented to others at a fair rental 1. You or any other person who has an inter-The tax treatment of rental income and ex- price is 3 days. est in it, unless you rent it to another ownerpenses for a dwelling unit that you also use for The room was used as a home because you as his or her main home under a sharedpersonal purposes depends on whether you use used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is equity financing agreement (defined later).it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the However, see Use as Main Home Beforeand Deductions, later). 27 days it was rented (3 days). or After Renting under Dwelling Unit UsedYou use a dwelling unit as a home during the As Home, earlier.tax year if you use it for personal purposes more Example 3. You own a condominium apart-
2. A member of your family or a member ofthan the greater of: ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental
the family of any other person who has anprice for a total of 170 days during the year. For1. 14 days, or interest in it, unless the family member12 of these days, the tenant was not able to use
uses the dwelling unit as his or her mainthe apartment and allowed you to use it even2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others home and pays a fair rental price. Familythough you did not refund any of the rent. Yourat a fair rental price. includes only brothers and sisters,family actually used the apartment for 10 ofSee Figuring Days of Personal Use, later. half-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-those days. Therefore, the apartment is treated cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) andIf a dwelling unit is used for personal pur- as having been rented for 160 (170 – 10) days. lineal descendants (children, grandchild-poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price, You figure 10% of the total days rented to others ren, etc.).do not count that day as a day of rental use in at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your family also
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of used the apartment for 7 other days during the 3. Anyone under an arrangement that letspersonal use in applying both (1) and (2) above. year. you use some other dwelling unit.This rule does not apply when dividing expenses You used the apartment as a home because 4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.between rental and personal use.  you used it for personal purposes for 17 days.
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% Main home. If the other person or member ofFair rental price. A fair rental price for your of the 160 days it was rented (16 days). the family in (1) or (2) above has more than oneproperty generally is the amount of rent that a
home, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneperson who is not related to you would be willing
he or she lived in most of the time.to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental Use as Main Home
price if it is substantially less than the rents Before or After Renting Shared equity financing agreement. This ischarged for other properties that are similar to an agreement under which two or more personsyour property. For purposes of determining whether a dwelling acquire undivided interests for more than 50unit was used as a home, you may not have toAsk yourself the following questions when years in an entire dwelling unit, including thecount days you used the property as your maincomparing another property with yours. land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-home before or after renting it or offering it for tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home• Is it used for the same purpose? rent as days of personal use. Do not count them upon payment of rent to the other co-owner or• Is it approximately the same size? as days of personal use if: owners.
• Is it in approximately the same condition? • You rented or tried to rent the property for
Donation of use of property. You use a12 or more consecutive months.• Does it have similar furnishings? dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
• You rented or tried to rent the property for• Is it in a similar location? • You donate the use of the unit to a charita-a period of less than 12 consecutive ble organization,If any of the answers are no, the properties months and the period ended because
probably are not similar. you sold or exchanged the property. • The organization sells the use of the unit
at a fund-raising event, andThis special rule does not apply when dividingExamples expenses between rental and personal use. • The “purchaser” uses the unit.
The following examples show how to determine
Example 1. On February 28, you moved outwhether you used your rental property as a Examplesof the house you had lived in for 6 years be-home.
cause you accepted a job in another town. You The following examples show how to determinerent your house at a fair rental price from MarchExample 1. You converted the basement of days of personal use.15 of that year to May 14 of the next year (14your home into an apartment with a bedroom, a
months). On the following June 1, you movebathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the Example 1. You and your neighbor are
back into your old house.basement apartment at a fair rental price to co-owners of a condominium at the beach. You
college students during the regular school year. The days you used the house as your main rent the unit to vacationers whenever possible.
You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 home from January 1 to February 28 and from The unit is not used as a main home by anyone.
days). You figured 10% of the total days rented June 1 to December 31 of the next year are not Your neighbor uses the unit for 2 weeks every
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days. counted as days of personal use. year.
Page 6 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 7 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Because your neighbor has an interest in the • Any day that the unit is rented at a fair Property Used as a Home
rental price is a day of rental use even ifunit, both of you are considered to have used the
If you use a dwelling unit as a home during theyou used the unit for personal purposesunit for personal purposes during those 2
year, how you figure your rental income andthat day. This rule does not apply whenweeks.
deductions depends on how many days the unitdetermining whether you used the unit as
was rented at a fair rental price.Example 2. You and your neighbors are a home.
co-owners of a house under a shared equity Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use a• Any day that the unit is available for rentfinancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerbut not actually rented is not a day ofhouse and pay you a fair rental price. than 15 days during the year, do not include anyrental use. rental income in your income. Also, you cannotEven though your neighbors have an interest
deduct any expenses as rental expenses.in the house, the days your neighbors live there
Example. Your beach cottage was avail-are not counted as days of personal use by you. Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell-able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92This is because your neighbors rent the house ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or moredays). Your family uses the cottage during theas their main home under a shared equity fi- during the year, you include all your rental in-last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unablenancing agreement. come in your income. See How To Reportto find a renter for the first week in August (7 Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had adays). The person who rented the cottage forExample 3. You own a rental property that net profit from the rental property for the yearJuly allowed you to use it over a weekend (2you rent to your son. Your son has no interest in (that is, if your rental income is more than thedays) without any reduction in or refund of rent.this property. He uses it as his main home. He total of your rental expenses, including depreci-The cottage was not used at all before May 17 orpays you a fair rental price for the property. ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How-after August 31.Your son’s use of the property is not personal ever, if you had a net loss, your deduction for
You figure the part of the cottage expenses certain rental expenses is limited.use by you because your son is using it as his
to treat as rental expenses as follows.main home, he has no interest in the property, Limit on deductions. If your rental ex-and he is paying you a fair rental price. • The cottage was used for rental a total of penses are more than your rental income, you
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail- cannot use the excess expenses to offset in-Example 4. You rent your beach house to able for rent but not rented (7 days) are come from other sources. The excess can beRosa. Rosa rents her house in the mountains to not days of rental use. The July weekend carried forward to the next year and treated asyou. You each pay a fair rental price. (2 days) you used it is rental use because rental expenses for the same property. Any ex-
You are using your house for personal pur- you received a fair rental price for the penses carried forward to next year will be sub-
weekend.poses on the days that Rosa uses it because ject to any limits that apply next year. You can
your house is used by Rosa under an arrange- deduct the expenses carried over to a year only• You used the cottage for personal pur-ment that allows you to use her house. up to the amount of your rental income for thatposes for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in
year, even if you do not use the property as yourMay).Example 5. You rent an apartment to your home for that year.
• The total use of the cottage was 99 daysmother at less than a fair rental price. You are To figure your deductible rental expenses
(14 days personal use + 85 days rentalusing the apartment for personal purposes on and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet
use).the days that your mother rents it because you 1.
rent it for less than a fair rental price. • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of
the cottage expenses.
Days Used for When determining whether you used the cot- DepreciationRepairs and Maintenance tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you
used it is personal use even though you re- You recover the cost of income producing prop-Any day that you spend working substantially full erty through yearly tax deductions. You do thisceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-time repairing and maintaining (not improving) by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83your property is not counted as a day of personal ing some of the cost on the tax return each year.days of rental use for this purpose. Because youuse. Do not count such a day as a day of per- Three basic factors determine how much de-used the cottage for personal purposes moresonal use even if family members use the prop- preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) yourthan 14 days and more than 10% of the days oferty for recreational purposes on the same day. basis in the property, (2) the recovery period forrental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you
the property, and (3) the depreciation methodhave a net loss, you may not be able to deductExample. You own a cabin in the mountains used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgageall of the rental expenses. See Property Used asthat you rent during the summer. You spend 3 or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,a Home in the following discussion.days at the cabin each May, working full time to fixtures and equipment, as an expense.repair anything that was damaged over the win- You can deduct depreciation only on the part
How To Figure Rentalter and get the cabin ready for the summer. You of your property used for rental purposes. De-Income and Deductionsalso spend 3 days each September, working full preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or
time to repair any damage done by renters and loss on a later sale or exchange.How you figure your rental income and deduc-getting the cabin ready for the winter. You may have to use Form 4562 to figuretions depends on whether you used the dwellingThese 6 days do not count as days of per- and report your depreciation. See How To Re-unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used assonal use even if your family uses the cabin port Rental Income and Expenses, later. AlsoHome, earlier) and, if you used it as a home,while you are repairing it. see Publication 946.how many days the property was rented at a fair
Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.rental price.
How To Divide Expenses You should claim the correct amount of depreci-
ation each tax year. Even if you did not claimIf you use a dwelling unit for both rental and depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,Property Not Used as a Homepersonal purposes, divide your expenses be- you must still reduce your basis in the propertytween the rental use and the personal use based If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home, by the full amount of depreciation that you could
on the number of days used for each purpose. report all the rental income and deduct all the have deducted. See Decreases to basis,  later,
You can deduct expenses for the rental use of rental expenses. See How To Report Rental under Adjusted Basis for more information. If
the unit under the rules explained in How To Income and Expenses, later. you did not deduct the correct amount of depre-
Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later. Your deductible rental expenses can be ciation for property in any year, you may be able
When dividing your expenses, follow these more than your gross rental income. However, to make a correction for that year by filing Form
rules. see Limits on Rental Losses, later. 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Publication 527 (2007) Page 7

Page 8 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1. Enter rents received ........................................................
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums
(see instructions) ..........................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes ..........................................
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ..................
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ........................................
e. Fully deductible rental expenses.  Add lines 2a – 2d (see instructions) .......................
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ....................................
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as
repairs, insurance, and utilities) .................................................
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums (see
instructions) ..............................................................
c. Add lines 4a and 4b ........................................................
d. Allowable expenses.  Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c (see instructions) ....................
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ....................................
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ....................
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ................................
c. Add lines 6a and 6b ........................................................
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation.  Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c (see
instructions) ..............................................................
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year.  Subtract line 4d from line 4c ...............
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.  Subtract line 6d
from line 6c ..............................................................
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet above. To find the rental portion of your expenses for lines 2a – 2c, 4a – 4b, and 6a – 6b, follow the directions
given earlier under How To Divide Expenses. If you were unable to deduct all your expenses last year because of the rental income limit, add these unused
amounts to your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example, do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal
loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A (Form 1040), if you had not rented the
unit. See page A-7 of the Schedule A (Form 1040) instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38) without your rental income
and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct part of the qualified mortgage insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted
gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount from Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the personal portion on a separate
Schedule A.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented the dwelling
unit. To do this, complete Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, Section A, treating the losses as personal losses. On Form 4684, line 17, enter 10% of your
adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of the result from Form 4684, line 18, on
line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for rental activities
other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in
your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are more than your rental
income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could deduct on Schedule A if
you had not rented the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this worksheet the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums
you could not deduct on Schedule A because it is more than the limit on home mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4d. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a and 4b as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than the amount on line 4d.
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 .........................................................
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...............................................................
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet .....................................................
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet ................................
Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or 6c this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you
wish among the expenses included on line 4c or 6c. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Line 6d. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a and 6b as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more than the amount on line 6d.
Page 8 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 9 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Return. If you are not allowed to make the cor- Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent • ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-rection on an amended return, you can change on property, you cannot depreciate that prop- tem) for property placed in service afteryour accounting method to claim the correct erty. Usually, only the owner can depreciate it. If 1980 but before 1987.amount of depreciation. See Changing your ac- you make permanent improvements to the prop-
counting method, later. erty, you may be able to depreciate the improve- • Useful lives and either straight line or an
ments. See Additions or improvements to accelerated method of depreciation, suchFiling an amended return. You can file an property, later, under MACRS. as the declining balance method, for prop-amended return to correct the amount of depre-
erty placed in service before 1981.ciation claimed for any property in any of the Cooperative apartments. If you are a ten-
following situations. ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration and rent your cooperative apartment to This publication discusses MACRS• You claimed the incorrect amount be-
others, you can deduct depreciation for your only. If you need information about de-cause of a mathematical error made in
stock in the corporation. preciating property placed in serviceany year.
CAUTION
!
before 1987, see Publication 534.Figure your depreciation deduction as fol-• You claimed the incorrect amount be- lows. If you placed property in service before 2007,cause of a posting error made in any year. continue to use the same method of figuring1. Figure the depreciation for all the deprecia-• You have not adopted a method of ac- depreciation that you used in the past.ble real property owned by the corporation.counting for the property.
(Depreciation methods are discussed Section 179 deduction. You cannot claim thelater.) If you bought your cooperative stockIf an amended return is allowed, you must file section 179 deduction for property held to pro-after its first offering, figure the depreciableit by the later of the following dates. duce rental income. See chapter 2 of Publicationbasis of this property as follows. 946.• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
nal return for the year in which you did not a. Multiply your cost per share by the total
Alternative minimum tax. If you use acceler-deduct the correct amount. (A return filed number of outstanding shares.
ated depreciation, you may have to file Formearly is considered filed on the due date.) b. Add to the amount figured in (a) any 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals.• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for mortgage debt on the property on the Accelerated depreciation can be determinedthat year. date you bought the stock. under MACRS, ACRS, and any other method
that allows you to deduct more depreciation thanc. Subtract from the amount figured in (b)Changing your accounting method. To you could deduct using a straight line method.any mortgage debt that is not for thechange your accounting method, you must file depreciable real property, such as theForm 3115, Application for Change in Account- part for the land. Special Depreciationing Method, to get the consent of the IRS. In
Allowancesome instances, that consent is automatic. For 2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) anymore information, see Changing Your Account- depreciation for space owned by the cor- You can take a special depreciation allowanceing Method in chapter 1 of Publication 946. poration that can be rented but cannot be (in addition to your regular MACRS depreciation
lived in by tenant-stockholders. deduction) for qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone
(GO Zone) property you placed in service in3. Divide the number of your shares of stockWhat Property Can be Depreciated 2007. The allowance is 50% of the property’sby the total number of shares outstanding, depreciable basis. You figure the special depre-You can depreciate your property if it meets all including any shares held by the corpora- ciation allowance before you figure your regularthe following requirements. tion. MACRS deduction.
• You own the property. 4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage
you figured in (3). This is your depreciation Choosing not to use the special allowance.• You use the property in your business or on the stock. If you want to take only the regular MACRSincome-producing activity (such as rental
depreciation deduction, you must elect out of theproperty). Your depreciation deduction for the year special allowance. The election must be madecannot be more than the part of your adjusted• The property has a determinable useful separately for each class of property that hasbasis (defined later under MACRS) in the stocklife. qualifying property. To make the election, attachof the corporation that is allocable to your rental a statement to your return indicating that you are• The property is expected to last more than property. electing out of the special depreciation allow-1 year. See Cooperative apartments  under What ance under IRC 1400N(d)(2)(B)(iv) and theProperty Can Be Depreciated?  in chapter 1 of• The property is not excepted property class(es) of property for which you are makingPublication 946 for more information.(such as property placed in service and the election.
disposed of in the same year and section
No deduction greater than basis. The total197 intangibles).
of all your yearly depreciation deductions cannot Qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone
be more than the cost or other basis of the PropertyProperty having a determinable useful life. property. For this purpose, your yearly deprecia-To be depreciable, your property must have a Your property is qualified GO Zone property if ittion deductions include any depreciation thatdeterminable useful life. This means that it must meets the following requirements.you were allowed to claim, even if you did notbe something that wears out, decays, gets used claim it.up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from 1. It is one of the following types of property.natural causes.
a. Property depreciated under MACRSLand. You can never depreciate the cost of Depreciation Methods with a recovery period of 20 years orland because land does not wear out, become less.obsolete, or get used up. The costs of clearing, There are three ways to figure depreciation. The
grading, planting, and landscaping are usually depreciation method you use depends on the b. Water utility property.
all part of the cost of land and cannot be depreci- type of property and when it was placed in serv- c. Certain computer software.ated. ice. For property used in rental activities you use
d. Qualified leasehold improvement prop-one of the following.Property you own. To claim depreciation, erty.• MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost Re-you usually must be the owner of the property.
e. Certain nonresidential real property andcovery System) for property placed inYou are considered as owning property even if it
residential rental property.service after 1986.is subject to a debt.
Publication 527 (2007) Page 9

Page 10 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. It meets the tests explained next under More information. For more information falls into one of the following classes. Also see
Table 2.about the special depreciation allowance, seeOther tests to be met.
Publication 946. • 5-year property. This class includes com-3. It is not excepted property explained later
puters and peripheral equipment, office ma-under Excepted property.
MACRS chinery (typewriters, calculators, copiers,
etc.), automobiles, and light trucks.Most business and investment property placedOther tests to be met. To be qualified GO This class also includes appliances, car-in service after 1986 is depreciated usingZone property, the property must meet all of the peting, furniture, etc., used in a residentialMACRS.following tests. rental real estate activity.
MACRS consists of two systems that deter-• Acquisition date test. Depreciation on automobiles, certain com-mine how you depreciate your property—the puters, and cellular telephones is limited.• Placed-in-service date test. General Depreciation System (GDS) and the See chapter 5 of Publication 946.Alternative Depreciation System (ADS). GDS is• Substantial use test.
used to figure your depreciation deduction for • 7-year property. This class includes office
• Original use test. property used in most rental activities, unless furniture and equipment (desks, files, etc.).
you elect ADS. This class also includes any property that
Acquisition date test. You must have ac- does not have a class life and that has notTo figure your MACRS deduction, you needquired the property by purchase after August 27, been designated by law as being in anyto know the following information about your
2005, with no binding written contract for the other class.property:
acquisition in effect before August 28, 2005. • 15-year property. This class includes• Its recovery period,
Placed-in-service date test. The property roads and shrubbery (if depreciable).• Its placed-in-service date, andmust be placed in service for use in your trade or • Residential rental property. This classbusiness or for the production of income before • Its depreciable basis. includes any real property that is a rentalJanuary 1, 2008 (January 1, 2009, in the case of building or structure (including a mobilequalifying nonresidential real property and resi- home) for which 80% or more of the grossPersonal home changed to rental use. Youdential rental property). rental income for the tax year is frommust use MACRS to figure the depreciation on
dwelling units. It does not include a unit inproperty used as your home and changed toSubstantial use test. Substantially all (80
a hotel, motel, inn, or other establishmentrental property in 2007.percent or more) of the use of the property must
where more than half of the units are usedbe in the GO Zone and in the active conduct of
on a transient basis. If you live in any partExcluded property. You cannot use MACRSyour trade or business in the GO Zone. of the building or structure, the grossfor certain personal property placed in service inOriginal use test. The original use of the rental income includes the fair rental valueyour rental property in 2007 if it had been previ-property in the GO Zone must have begun with of the part you live in. The recovery periodously placed in service before MACRS becameyou after August 27, 2005. for residential rental property is 27.5effective. Generally, personal property is ex-
years.Used property can be qualified GO Zone cluded from MACRS if you (or a person related
property if it has not previously been used within to you) owned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant
the GO Zone. Also, additional capital expendi- is a person (or someone related to the person) The other property classes do not gen-tures you incurred after August 27, 2005, to who owned or used it in 1986. However, the erally apply to property used in rentalrecondition or rebuild your property meet the property is not excluded if your 2007 deduction activities. These classes are not dis-CAUTION
!
under MACRS (using a half-year convention) isoriginal use test if the original use of the property cussed in this publication. See Publication 946less than the deduction you would have underin the GO Zone began with you. for more information.ACRS. See What Method Can You Use To De-If you sold property you placed in service
preciate Your Property? in chapter 1 of Publica-after August 27, 2005, and you leased it back Qualified Indian reservation property.tion 946 for more information.within 3 months after you originally placed the Shorter recovery periods are provided under
property in service, the lessor is considered to MACRS for qualified Indian reservation property
be the original user of the property. placed in service on Indian reservations beforeRecovery Periods Under GDS 2008. For more information, see chapter 4 of
Publication 946.Excepted property. Qualified GO Zone prop- Each item of property that can be depreciated is
erty does not include any of the following. assigned to a property class. The recovery pe- Additions or improvements to property.riod of the property depends on the class the
• Property required to be depreciated using Treat depreciable additions or improvementsproperty is in. Under GDS, the recovery periodthe Alternative Depreciation System you make to any property as separate propertyof an asset is generally the same as its property(ADS). items for depreciation purposes. The recoveryclass. The property classes under GDS are: period for an addition or improvement to prop-• Property any portion of which is financed • 3-year property, erty begins on the later of:with the proceeds of a tax-exempt obliga-
• 5-year property,tion under section 103 of the Internal Rev- • The date the addition or improvement is
placed in service, orenue Code. • 7-year property,
• The date the property to which the addi-• Any qualified revitalization building for • 10-year property, tion or improvement was made is placedwhich you have elected to claim a com-
• 15-year property, in service.mercial revitalization deduction for quali-
fied revitalization expenditures. • 20-year property, The property class and recovery period of the• Any property used in connection with any • Nonresidential real property, and addition or improvement is the one that would
private or commercial golf course, country apply to the original property if it were placed in• Residential rental property.club, massage parlor, hot tub facility, sun- service at the same time as the addition or
tan facility, or any store, the principal busi- improvement.
The class to which property is assigned isness of which is the sale of alcoholic
determined by its class life. Class lives and re-beverages for consumption off premises. Example. You own a residential rental
covery periods for most assets are listed in Ap- house that you have been renting since 1986• Any gambling or animal racing property. pendix B in Publication 946. and that you are depreciating under ACRS. You
• Property for which you elected not to claim Under GDS, property that you placed in serv- put an addition onto the house and placed it in
any special depreciation allowance. ice during 2007 in your rental activities generally service in 2007. You must use MACRS for the
Page 10 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 11 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost BasisTable 2. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property Used in Rental Activities
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.
MACRS Recovery Period The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, in
debt obligation, in other property, or in services.General Alternative Your cost also includes amounts you pay for:Depreciation Depreciation
Type of Property System System • Sales tax charged on the purchase (but
see Exception below),Computers and their peripheral equipment ............. 5  years 5 years
Office machinery, such as: • Freight charges to obtain the property, and
Typewriters • Installation and testing charges.Calculators
Copiers ................................. 5  years 6 years
Exception. You can elect to deduct stateAutomobiles ................................. 5  years 5 years
and local general sales taxes instead of stateLight trucks .................................. 5  years 5 years
and local income taxes as an itemized deductionAppliances, such as: on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you make thatStoves
choice, you cannot include those sales taxes asRefrigerators ............................. 5  years 9 years
part of your cost basis.Carpets .................................... 5  years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property .................... 5  years 9 years Loans with low or no interest. If you buy
property on any time-payment plan that chargesOffice furniture and equipment, such as:
little or no interest, the basis of your property isDesks
your stated purchase price, less the amountFiles ................................... 7  years 10 years
considered to be unstated interest. See Un-Any property that does not have a class life and that has not
stated Interest and Original Issue Discountbeen designated by law as being in any other class .... 7  years 12 years
(OID) in Publication 537, Installment Sales.Roads ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years
Shrubbery ................................... 1 5  years 20 years Real property. If you buy real property, such
Fences ..................................... 1 5  years 20 years as a building and land, certain fees and other
expenses you pay are part of your cost basis inResidential rental property (buildings or structures) the property.and structural components such as furnaces,
waterpipes, venting, etc. ...................... 27.5 years 40 years Real estate taxes. If you buy real property
and agree to pay real estate taxes on it that wereAdditions and improvements, such as a new roof ......... The same recovery period as owed by the seller and the seller did not reim-that of the property to which burse you, the taxes you pay are treated as partthe addition or improvement is of your basis in the property. You cannot deductmade, determined as if the them as taxes paid.property were placed in
If you reimburse the seller for real estateservice at the same time as
taxes the seller paid for you, you can usuallythe addition or improvement.
deduct that amount. Do not include that amount
in your basis in the property.
addition. Under GDS, the addition is depreciated and available for rent. You can begin to depreci- Settlement fees and other costs. Settle-
as residential rental property over 27.5 years. ate the house in July. ment fees and closing costs that are for buying
the property are part of your basis in the prop-
Example 3. You moved from your home in erty. These include:
Placed-in-Service Date July. During August and September you made
• Abstract fees,several repairs to the house. On October 1, you
You can begin to depreciate property when you listed the property for rent with a real estate • Charges for installing utility services,place it in service in your trade or business or for company, which rented it on December 1. The • Legal fees,the production of income. Property is considered property is considered placed in service on Oc-
placed in service in a rental activity when it is tober 1, the date when it was available for rent. • Recording fees,ready and available for a specific use in that
• Surveys,activity.
Depreciable Basis • Transfer taxes,Example 1. On November 22 of last year,
you purchased a dishwasher for your rental • Title insurance, andThe depreciable basis of property used in a
property. The appliance was delivered on De- rental activity is generally its adjusted basis • Any amounts the seller owes that youcember 7, but was not installed and ready for when you place it in service in that activity. This agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-use until January 3 of this year. Because the is its cost or other basis when you acquired it, est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesdishwasher was not ready for use last year, it is adjusted for certain items occurring before you for improvements or repairs, and salesnot considered placed in service until this year. place it in service in the rental activity. commissions.If the appliance had been ready for use when If you depreciate your property under
it was delivered in December of last year, it MACRS, you may also have to reduce your Some settlement fees and closing costs youwould have been considered placed in service in basis by certain deductions and credits with re- cannot include in your basis in the property are:December, even if it was not actually used until spect to the property.
this year. 1. Fire insurance premiums,Basis and adjusted basis are explained in
the following discussions. 2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-Example 2. On April 6, you purchased a
pancy of the property before closing, andhouse to use as residential rental property. You If you used the property for personal
made extensive repairs to the house and had it purposes before changing it to rental 3. Charges connected with getting or refi-
ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertise use, its depreciable basis is the lesserCAUTION
!
nancing a loan, such as:
the house for rent in July and actually rented it of its adjusted basis or its fair market value when
beginning September 1. The house is consid- you change it to rental use. See Basis of Prop- a. Points (discount points, loan origination
ered placed in service in July when it was ready erty Changed to Rental Use,  later. fees),
Publication 527 (2007) Page 11

Page 12 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Mortgage insurance premiums, The costs you may be able to choose toAdjusted Basis
deduct or to capitalize include carrying charges,
c. Loan assumption fees, Before you can figure allowable depreciation, such as interest and taxes, that you must pay to
you may have to make certain adjustments (in- own property.d. Cost of a credit report, and creases and decreases) to the basis of the prop- For more information about deducting or
erty. The result of these adjustments to the basis capitalizing costs, see chapter 7 in Publicatione. Fees for an appraisal required by a is the adjusted basis. 535.lender.
Increases to basis. You must increase the Decreases to basis. You must decrease the
basis of any property by the cost of all items basis of your property by any items that repre-Also, do not include amounts placed in es-
properly added to a capital account. This in- sent a return of your cost. These include:crow for the future payment of items such as
cludes:taxes and insurance. • The amount of any insurance or other pay-
• The cost of any additions or improvements ment you receive as the result of a casu-Assumption of a mortgage. If you buy
having a useful life of more than one year, alty or theft loss,property and become liable for an existing mort-
gage on the property, your basis is the amount • Any deductible casualty loss not covered• Amounts spent after a casualty to restore
you pay for the property plus the amount that still by insurance,the damaged property,
must be paid on the mortgage. • Any amount you receive for granting an• The cost of extending utility service lines
easement,to the property, andExample. You buy a building for $60,000
• Any residential energy credit you were al-cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it. • Legal fees, such as the cost of defending
lowed before 1986, or after 2005, if youand perfecting title.Your basis is $300,000.
added the cost of the energy items to the
basis of your home, andAdditions or improvements. Add to theLand and buildings. If you buy buildings and basis of your property the amount an addition or • The amount of depreciation you couldyour cost includes the cost of the land on which improvement actually cost you, including any have deducted on your tax returns underthey stand, you must divide the cost between the amount you borrowed to make the addition or the method of depreciation you selected. Ifland and the buildings to figure the basis for improvement. This includes all direct costs, such you took less depreciation than you coulddepreciation of the buildings. The part of the cost as material and labor, but not your own labor. It have under the method you selected, youthat you allocate to each asset is the ratio of the also includes all expenses related to the addition must decrease the basis by the amount
fair market value of that asset to the fair market or improvement. you could have taken under that method.
value of the whole property at the time you buy For example, if you had an architect draw up
it. plans for remodeling your property, the archi- If you deducted more depreciation than you
tect’s fee is a part of the cost of the remodeling. should have, you must decrease your basis byIf you are not certain of the fair market values
Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up a the amount you should have deducted, plus theof the land and the buildings, you can divide the fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost part of the excess you deducted that actuallycost between them based on their assessed of the fence. lowered your tax liability for any year.values for real estate tax purposes. Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad-
ditions or improvements made after you placeExample. You buy a house and land for Basis of Propertythe property in service in your rental activity. For$100,000. The purchase contract does not information on depreciating additions or im- Changed to Rental Usespecify how much of the purchase price is for the provements, see Additions or improvements tohouse and how much is for the land. When you change property you held for per-property, earlier, under Recovery Periods Under
sonal use to rental use (for example, you rentThe latest real estate tax assessment on the GDS.
your former home), you figure the basis for de-property was based on an assessed value of The cost of landscaping improvements preciation using the lesser of fair market value or$80,000, of which $68,000 is for the house and is usually treated as an addition to the adjusted basis.$12,000 is for the land. basis of the land, which is not deprecia-CAUTION
!
You can allocate 85% ($68,000 ÷ $80,000) ble. See What Property Can Be Depreciated, Fair market value. This is the price at which
earlier. the property would change hands between aof the purchase price to the house and 15%
buyer and a seller, neither having to buy or sell,($12,000 ÷ $80,000) of the purchase price to the Assessments for local improvements. and both having reasonable knowledge of all theland. Assessments for items which tend to increase relevant facts. Sales of similar property, on orYour basis in the house is $85,000 (85% of the value of property, such as streets and side- about the same date, may be helpful in figuring$100,000) and your basis in the land is $15,000 walks, must be added to the basis of the prop- the fair market value of the property.erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on(15% of $100,000).
the street in front of your house, and assesses Figuring the basis. The basis for deprecia-
you and your neighbors for the cost of curbing, tion is the lesser of:
Basis Other Than Cost you must add the assessment to the basis of
• The fair market value of the property onyour property. Also add the cost of legal fees
the date you changed it to rental use, orThere are many times when you cannot use cost paid to obtain a decrease in an assessment
as a basis. You cannot use cost as a basis for levied against property to pay for local improve- • Your adjusted basis on the date of the
property that you received: ments. You cannot deduct these items as taxes change—that is, your original cost or
or depreciate them. other basis of the property, plus the cost of• In return for services you performed,
 Assessments for maintenance or repair or permanent additions or improvements
• In an exchange for other property, meeting interest charges are deductible as since you acquired it, minus deductions for
taxes. Do not add them to your basis in the any casualty or theft losses claimed on• As a gift,
property. earlier years’ income tax returns and other
• From your spouse, or from your former decreases to basis.Deducting vs. capitalizing costs. Youspouse as the result of a divorce, or
cannot add to your basis costs that are deducti-
• As an inheritance. ble as current expenses. However, there are Example. Several years ago you built your
certain costs you can choose either to deduct or home for $140,000 on a lot that cost you
If you received property in one of these ways, to capitalize. If you capitalize these costs, in- $14,000. Before changing the property to rental
see Publication 551 for information on how to clude them in your basis. If you deduct them, do use last year, you added $28,000 of permanent
figure your basis. not include them in your basis. improvements to the house and claimed a
Page 12 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 13 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$3,500 deduction for a casualty loss to the on the next page. However, if you elect to use 2. Multiply the remaining basis ($900) by
house. Because land is not depreciable, you can the 150% declining balance method for 5- or 22.22%. The depreciation for the seco nd
only include the cost of the house when figuring 7-year property, figure the declining balance year is $200.
the basis for depreciation. rate by dividing 1.5 (150%) by the recovery pe-
The adjusted basis of the house at the time riod for the property. Residential rental property. In the first year
of the change in use was $164,500 ($140,000 + In the first tax year, multiply the adjusted that you claim depreciation for residential rental
$28,000 − $3,500). basis of the property by the declining balance property, you can only claim depreciation for the
On the date of the change in use, your prop- rate and apply the appropriate convention to number of months the property is in use, and
erty had a fair market value of $168,000, of figure your depreciation. In later years (before you must use the mid-month convention (ex-
which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000 the year you switch to the straight line method), plained under Conventions, next).
was for the house. use the following steps to figure your deprecia-
The basis for depreciation on the house is tion.
the fair market value at the date of the change
Conventions1. Reduce your adjusted basis by the depre-($147,000), because it is less than your adjusted
ciation allowable for the earlier years. Under MACRS, conventions establish when thebasis ($164,500).
recovery period begins and ends. The conven-2. Multiply the new adjusted basis in (1) by tion you use determines the number of monthsthe same rate used in earlier years.MACRS Depreciation for which you can claim depreciation in the yearUnder GDS See Conventions, later, for information on de- you place property in service and in the year you
preciation in the year you dispose of property. dispose of the property.You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-
duction under GDS in one of two ways. The Mid-month convention.  A mid-month con-Declining balance rates. The following table
deduction is substantially the same both ways. vention is used for all residential rental propertyshows the declining balance rate that applies for
(The difference, if any, is slight.) You can either: and nonresidential real property. Under this con-each class of property and the first year for
vention, you treat all property placed in service,which the straight line method will give an equal• Actually compute the deduction using the
or disposed of, during any month as placed inor greater deduction. (The rates for 5- anddepreciation method and convention that
service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that7-year property are based on the 200% declin-apply over the recovery period of the prop-
month.ing balance method. The rate for 15-year prop-erty, or
erty is based on the 150% declining balance Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter con-• Use the percentage from the optional method.) vention must be used if the mid-month conven-MACRS tables, shown later.
tion does not apply and the total depreciableClass Declining Balance Rate YearIf you actually compute the deduction, the de- basis of MACRS property placed in service in5 40% 4thpreciation method you use depends on the class the last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non-7 28.57% 5thof the property. residential real property, residential rental prop-15 10% 7th
erty, and property placed in service and5-, 7-, or 15-year property. For property in the disposed of in the same year) is more than 40%5- or 7-year class, use the 200% declining bal- of the total basis of all such property you place inance method and a half-year convention. How- Straight Line Method service during the year.ever, in limited cases you must use the Under this convention, you treat all propertyTo figure your MACRS deduction under themid-quarter convention, if it applies. These con- placed in service, or disposed of, during anystraight line method, you must apply a differentventions are explained later. For property in the quarter of a tax year as placed in service, ordepreciation rate to the adjusted basis of your15-year class, use the 150% declining balance disposed of, at the midpoint of the quarter.property for each tax year in the recovery period.method and a half-year convention.
In the first year, multiply the adjusted basis ofYou can also choose to use the 150% declin- Example. During the tax year, Tom Martinthe property by the straight line rate. You musting balance method for property in the 5- or purchased the following items to use in his rentalfigure the depreciation for the first year using the7-year class. The choice to use the 150% property. He elects not to claim the special de-convention that applies. (See Conventions,method for one item in a class of property ap- preciation allowance, discussed earlier.later.)plies to all property in that class that is placed in
• A dishwasher for $400 that he placed inservice during the tax year of the election. You Straight line rate. For any tax year, figure the service in January.make this election on Form 4562. In Part III, straight line rate by dividing the number 1 by thecolumn (f), enter “150 DB.” • Used furniture for $100 that he placed inyears remaining in the recovery period at theIf you use either the 200% or 150% declining service in September.beginning of the tax year. When figuring thebalance method, you figure your deduction us- number of years remaining, you must take into • A refrigerator for $500 that he placed ining the straight line method in the first tax year account the convention used in the first year. If service in October.that the straight line method gives you an equal the remaining recovery period at the beginningor larger deduction. Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year. Theof the tax year is less than 1 year, the straightYou can also choose to use the straight line total basis of all property placed in service thatline rate for that tax year is 100%.method with a half-year or mid-quarter conven- year is $1,000. The $500 basis of the refrigeratortion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to placed in service during the last 3 months of hisExample. You place in service property withuse the straight line method for one item in a tax year exceeds $400 (40% × $1,000). Toma basis of $1,000 and a 5-year recovery period.class of property applies to all property in that must use the mid-quarter convention instead ofThe straight line rate is 20% (1 divided by 5) forclass that is placed in service during the tax year the half-year convention for all three items.the first tax year. After you apply the half-yearof the election. You elect the straight line method convention, the first year rate is 10% (20% di-on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter “S/L.” Half-year convention.  The half-year conven-vided by 2). Depreciation for the first year isOnce you make this election, you cannot tion is used if neither the mid-quarter convention$100.change to another method. nor the mid-month convention applies. UnderAt the beginning of the second year, the
this convention, you treat all property placed inremaining recovery period is 41/2 years becauseResidential rental property. You must use
service, or disposed of, during a tax year asof the half-year convention. The straight line ratethe straight line method and a mid-month con-
placed in service, or disposed of, at the midpointfor the second year is 22.22% (1 divided by 4.5).vention for residential rental property.
of that tax year.To figure your depreciation deduction for the
If this convention applies, you deduct asecond year:
half-year of depreciation for the first year and theDeclining Balance Method
1. Subtract the depreciation taken in the first last year that you depreciate the property. You
To figure your MACRS deduction, first deter- year ($100) from the basis of the property deduct a full year of depreciation for an y other
mine your declining balance rate from the table ($1,000), and year during the recovery period.
Publication 527 (2007) Page 13

Page 14 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
without reduction for MACRS depreciation pre-
viously claimed.
Once you begin using an optional table to
figure depreciation, you must continue to use it
for the entire recovery period unless there is an
adjustment to the basis of your property for a
reason other than:
1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2. An addition or improvement that is depreci-
ated as a separate item of property.
If there is an adjustment for any reason other
than (1) or (2) (for example, because of a de-
ductible casualty loss) you can no longer use the
table. For the year of the adjustment and for the
remaining recovery period, figure depreciation
using the property’s adjusted basis at the end of
the year and the appropriate depreciation
method, as explained earlier under MACRS De-
preciation Under GDS.
Tables 3-A, 3-B, and 3-C. The percentages in
these tables take into account the half-year and
mid-quarter conventions. Use Table 3-A for
5-year property, Table 3-B for 7-year property,
and Table 3-C for 15-year property. Use the
percentage in the second column (half-year con-
vention) unless you must use the mid-quarter
convention (explained earlier). If you must use
the mid-quarter convention, use the column that
corresponds to the calendar year quarter in
which you placed the property in service.
Example 1. You purchased a stove and re-
frigerator and placed them in service in June.
Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis in
the refrigerator is $1,000. Both are 5-year prop-
erty. Using the half-year convention column in
Table 3-A, you find the depreciation percentage
for year 1 is 20%. For that year your depreciation
deduction is $120 ($600 × .20) for the stove and
$200 ($1,000 × .20) for the refrigerator.
For year 2, you find your depreciation per-
centage is 32%. That year’s depreciation deduc-
tion will be $192 ($600 × .32) for the stove and
$320 ($1,000 × .32) for the refrigerator.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
Example 1 , except you buy the refrigerator in
October instead of June. You must use the
mid-quarter convention to figure depreciation on
the stove and refrigerator. The refrigerator was
placed in service in the last 3 months of the tax
year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than 40% of
the total basis of all property placed in service
during the year ($1,600 × .40 = $640).
Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-
ice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
umn of Table 3-A and find that the depreciation
percentage for year 1 is 5%. Your depreciation
deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 ×
Table 3. Optional MACRS Tables
Table 3-A. MACRS 5-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
Table 3-B. MACRS 7-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 3-C. MACRS 15-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 3-D. Residential Rental Property (27.5-year)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
.05).
Because you placed the stove in service in
If you elect to use the straight line method forOptional Tables June, you use the second quarter column of
5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% declining Table 3-A and find that the depreciation percent-
balance method for 5- or 7-year property, useYou can use the percentages in Table 3 to age for year 1 is 25%. For that year, your depre-
the tables in Appendix A of Publication 946.compute annual depreciation under MACRS. ciation deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 ×
The tables show the percentages for the first 6 .25).How to use the tables. The following sectionyears. See Appendix A of Publication 946 for
explains how to use the optional tables.complete tables. The percentages in Tables Table 3-D.  Use this table for residential rental
Figure the depreciation deduction by multi-3-A, 3-B, and 3-C make the change from declin- property. Find the row for the month that you
plying your unadjusted basis in the property bying balance to straight line in the year that placed the property in service. Use the percent-
the percentage shown in the appropriate table.straight line will yield a larger deduction. See ages listed for that month to figure your depreci-
Declining Balance Method, earlier. Your unadjusted basis is your depreciable basis ation deduction. The mid-month convention is
Page 14 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 15 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taken into account in the percentages shown in How to report.    If you had a casualty or theft credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
the table. that involved property used in your rental activ- cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next
ity, you figure the net gain or loss in Section B of tax year.
Example. You purchased a single family Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Also, you For a detailed discussion of these rules, see
rental house and placed it in service in February. may have to report the net gain or loss from Publication 925.Your basis in the house is $160,000. Using Ta- Form 4684 on Form 4797, Sales of Business You may have to complete Form 8582 toble 3-D, you find that the percentage for property Property. (Follow the instructions for Form figure the amount of any passive activity loss forplaced in service in February of year 1 is 4684.) the current tax year for all activities and the3.182%. That year’s depreciation deduction is amount of the passive activity loss allowed on$5,091 ($160,000 × .03182). your tax return. See Form 8582 not required
under Losses From Rental Real Estate Activi-Limits onMACRS Depreciation ties, later, to determine whether you have to
Under ADS complete Form 8582.Rental Losses
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for
Rental real estate activities are generally con-most property. Under ADS, you use the straight Exception for Real Estatesidered passive activities, and the amount ofline method of depreciation. Professionalsloss you can deduct is limited. Generally, youTable 2 shows the recovery periods for prop-
cannot deduct losses from rental real estateerty used in rental activities that you depreciate Rental activities in which you materially partici-activities unless you have income from otherunder ADS. pated during the year are not passive activitiespassive activities. However, you may be able toSee Appendix B in Publication 946 for other if, for that year, you were a real estate profes-deduct rental losses without regard to whetherproperty. If your property is not listed, it is con- sional. Losses from these activities are not lim-you have income from other passive activities ifsidered to have no class life. Under ADS, per- ited by the passive activity rules.you “materially” or “actively” participated in yoursonal property with no class life is depreciated For this purpose, each interest you have in arental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later.using a recovery period of 12 years. rental real estate activity is a separate activity,Losses from passive activities are first sub-Use the mid-month convention for residential unless you choose to treat all interests in rentalject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit therental property and nonresidential real property. real estate activities as one activity.amount of deductible losses from holding mostFor all other property, use the half-year or
real property placed in service after 1986.  If you were a real estate professional formid-quarter convention.
2007, complete line 43 of Schedule E (FormException. If your rental losses are less than 1040).Election. For property placed in service dur- $25,000, and you actively participated in theing 2007 you choose to use ADS by entering the rental activity, the passive activity limits probably Real estate professional. You qualified as adepreciation on Form 4562, Part III, line 20. do not apply to you. See Losses From RentalThe election of ADS for one item in a class of real estate professional for the tax year if youReal Estate Activities, later.property generally applies to all property in that met both of the following requirements.
class that is placed in service during the tax year Property used as a home. If you used the • More than half of the personal servicesof the election. However, the election applies on rental property as a home during the year, the you performed in all trades or businessesa property-by-property basis for residential passive activity rules do not apply to that home. during the tax year were performed in realrental property and nonresidential real property. Instead, you must follow the rules explained property trades or businesses in whichOnce you choose to use ADS, you cannot under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including you materially participated.change your election. Vacation Home), earlier.
• You performed more than 750 hours of
services during the tax year in real prop-At-Risk Rules
erty trades or businesses in which you
The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount youCasualties and Thefts materially participated.
can deduct as losses from activities often de-
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have a scribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real Do not count personal services you performed
loss related to your property. You may be able to property (other than mineral property) placed in as an employee in real property trades or busi-
deduct the loss on your income tax return. For service before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk nesses unless you were a 5% owner of your
information on casualty and theft losses (busi- rules. employer. You were a 5% owner if you owned
ness and nonbusiness), see Publication 547. Generally, any loss from an activity subject (or are considered to have owned) more than
to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of 5% of your employer’s outstanding stock, orCasualty. Damage to, destruction of, or loss the total amount you have at risk in the activity at capital or profits interest.of property is a casualty if it results from an the end of the tax year. You are considered at If you file a joint return, do not count youridentifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or risk in an activity to the extent of cash and the spouse’s personal services to determineunusual. adjusted basis of other property you contributed whether you met the preceding requirements.to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for However, you can count your spouse’s partici-Theft. The unlawful taking and removing of use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more pation in an activity in determining if you materi-your money or property with the intent to deprive information. ally participated.you of it is a theft.
Real property trades or businesses. APassive Activity LimitsGain from casualty or theft. When you have real property trade or business is a trade ora casualty to, or theft of, your property and you In general, all rental activities (except those business that does any of the following with realreceive money, including insurance, that is more meeting the exception for real estate profession- property.than your adjusted basis in the property, you als, below) are passive activities. For this pur-generally must report the gain. However, under • Develops or redevelops it.pose, a rental activity is an activity from whichcertain circumstances, you may defer paying tax you receive income mainly for the use of tangi- • Constructs or reconstructs it.by choosing to postpone reporting the gain. To ble property, rather than for services. • Acquires it.do this, you must generally buy replacement
property within 2 years after the close of the first Limits on passive activity deductions and • Converts it.tax year in which any part of your gain is real- credits. Deductions for losses from passive
• Rents or leases it.ized. The cost of the replacement property must activities are limited. You generally cannot offset
be equal to or more than the net insurance or income, other than passive income, with losses • Operates or manages it.other payment you received. For more informa- from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes
• Brokers it.tion, see Publication 547. on income, other than passive income, with
Publication 527 (2007) Page 15

Page 16 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Material participation. Generally, you materi- Example. Mike is single and had the follow- • Your only passive activities were rental
ally participated in an activity for the tax year if ing income and losses during the tax year: real estate activities in which y ou actively
you were involved in its operations on a regular, participated.
Salary ..................... $42,300continuous, and substantial basis during the • Your overall net loss from these activitiesDividends ................... 3 0 0year. For more information, see Publication 925. is $25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if mar-Interest .................... 1,400Participating spouse. If you are married, ried filing separately).Rental loss .................. (4,000)
determine whether you materially participated in • You do not have any prior year unallowedThe rental loss resulted from the rental of aan activity by also counting any participation in losses from any passive activities.house Mike owned. Mike had advertised andthe activity by your spouse during the year. Do
rented the house to the current tenant himself. • If married filing separately, you lived apartthis even if your spouse owns no interest in the
He also collected the rents, which usually came from your spouse all year.activity or files a separate return for the year.
by mail. All repairs were either done or con- • You have no current or prior year unal-tracted out by Mike.Choice to treat all interests as one activity. lowed credits from passive activities.If you were a real estate professional and had Even though the rental loss is a loss from a
• Your modified adjusted gross income ismore than one rental real estate interest during passive activity, because Mike actively partici-
$100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if mar-the year, you can choose to treat all the interests pated in the rental property management, he
ried filing separately).as one activity. You can make this choice for any can use the entire $4,000 loss to offset his other
year that you qualify as a real estate profes- income. • You do not hold any interest in a rentalsional. If you forgo making the choice for one real estate activity as a limited partner orMaximum special allowance. If your modi-year, you can still make it for a later year. as a beneficiary of an estate or a trust.fied adjusted gross income is $100,000 or lessIf you make the choice, it is binding for the
($50,000 or less if married filing separately), youtax year you make it and for any later year that If you meet all of the conditions listed above,can deduct your loss up to $25,000 ($12,500 ifyou are a real estate professional. This is true your rental real estate activities are not limitedmarried filing separately). If your modified ad-even if you are not a real estate professional in by the passive activity rules and you do not havejusted gross income is more than $100,000any intervening year. (For that year, the excep- to complete Form 8582. Enter each rental real(more than $50,000 if married filing separately),tion for real estate professionals will not apply in estate loss from line 22 of Schedule E (Formthis special allowance is limited to 50% of thedetermining whether your activity is subject to 1040) on line 23 of Schedule E.difference between $150,000 ($75,000 if mar-the passive activity rules.) If you do not meet all of the conditions listedried filing separately) and your modified ad-See the instructions for Schedule E (Form above, see the instructions for Form 8582 to findjusted gross income. If your modified adjusted1040) for information about making this choice. out if you must complete and attach that form togross income is $150,000 or more ($75,000 or your tax return.more if you are married filing separately), you
generally cannot use the special allowance.Losses From Rental
Real Estate Activities Modified adjusted gross income. This is
your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, How To ReportIf you or your spouse actively participated in a line 38, or Form 1040NR, line 36, figured withoutpassive rental real estate activity, you can de- taking into account: Rental Incomeduct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity from
your nonpassive income. This special allowance 1. Taxable social security or equivalent tier 1 and Expensesis an exception to the general rule disallowing railroad retirement benefits,
losses in excess of income from passive activi- If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and2. Deductible contributions to an IRA or cer-ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,tain other qualified retirement plans,activity against the tax on up to $25,000 of you normally report your rental income and ex-
nonpassive income after taking into account any 3. The exclusion allowed for qualified U.S. penses on Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I. How-
losses allowed under this exception. savings bond interest used to pay higher ever, do not use that schedule to report a
educational expenses,If you are married, filing a separate return, not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented For Profit,
and lived apart from your spouse for the entire earlier.4. The exclusion allowed for em-tax year, your special allowance cannot be more If you provide significant services that areployer-provided adoption benefits,than $12,500. If you lived with your spouse at primarily for your tenant’s convenience, such as
5. Any passive activity income or loss in-any time during the year and are filing a sepa- regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid serv-
cluded on Form 8582,rate return, you cannot use the special allow- ice, you report your rental income and expenses
ance to reduce your nonpassive income or tax on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From6. Any passive income or loss or any losson nonpassive income. Business, or Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit Fromallowable by reason of the exception for
Business. Significant services do not include theThe maximum amount of the special allow- real estate professionals discussed earlier,
furnishing of heat and light, cleaning of publicance is reduced if your modified adjusted gross
7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded areas, trash collection, etc. For information, seeincome is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-
partnership (see Publicly Traded Partner- Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.ried filing separately).
ships (PTPs) in the instructions for Form You also may have to pay self-employment tax
8582),Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 in on your rental income. See chapter 10 in Publi-
wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limited cation 334.8. The deduction for one-half of
partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss from a self-employment tax,
rental real estate activity in which she actively Schedule E (Form 1040)9. The deduction allowed for interest on stu-participated. $2,000 of Jane’s $3,500 loss off-
dent loans, orsets her passive income. The remaining $1,500 Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to report
loss can be deducted from her $40,000 wages. your rental income and expenses. List your total10. The deduction for qualified tuition and re-
income, expenses, and depreciation for eachlated expenses, or
rental property. Be sure to answer the questionActive participation. You actively partici- 11. The deduction for income attributable to on line 2.pated in a rental real estate activity if you (and domestic production activities (see the in-your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental If you have more than three rental or royaltystructions for Form 8903).property and you made management decisions properties, complete and attach as many
in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage- Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.
ment decisions include approving new tenants, Form 8582 not required. Do not complete Complete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
deciding on rental terms, approving expendi- Form 8582 if you meet all of the following condi- ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only one
tures, and similar decisions. tions. Schedule E. The figures in the “Totals” column
Page 16 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 17 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on that Schedule E should be the combined Eileen must divide the real estate taxes, On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasher
totals of all Schedules E. mortgage interest, and fire insurance between for the rental property at a cost of $425. The
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in- the personal use of the property and the rental dishwasher is personal property used in a rental
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations, use of the property. She can deduct real estate activity, which has a 5-year recovery
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest- eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex- period. She uses the percentage under
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of penses. She can include the balance of the “Half-year convention” in Table 3-A to figure her
Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule E allowable taxes and mortgage interest on MACRS depreciation deduction for the dish-
you used to enter the combined totals in Part I. Schedule A (Form 1040) if she itemizes. She washer.
On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter the cannot deduct the balance of the fire insurance On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have adepreciation you are claiming. You must com- because it is a personal expense. furnace installed in the house. The furnace isplete and attach Form 4562 for rental activities Eileen bought this house in 1982 for residential rental property. Because she placedonly if you are claiming: $35,000. Her property tax was based on as- the property in service in May, she finds thesessed values of $10,000 for the land and• Depreciation on property placed in service percentage from Table 3-D to be 2.273%.$25,000 for the house. Before changing it toduring 2007, Eileen figures her net rental income or lossrental property, Eileen added several improve-
• Depreciation on listed property (such as a for the house as follows:ments to the house. She figures her adjusted
car), regardless of when it was placed in basis as follows:
Total rental income receivedservice, or
($750 × 1 1 )............. $8,250Improvements Cost• Any car expenses reported on a form Minus: ExpensesHouse ..................... $25,000other than Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Mortgage interest ($1,800 ×Remodeled kitchen ............ 4,2001040) or Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. 11/12) ................ $1,650Recreation room .............. 5,800
Fire insurance ($100 × 11/12)9 2New roof ................... 1,600Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your own Miscellaneous repairs .... 2 9 7Patio and deck ............... 2,400worksheet. You do not have to attach these Real estate taxes ($1,200 ×Adjusted basis ............... $39,000computations to your return. 11/12) ................ 1,100
On February 1, when Eileen changed her Total expenses ......... 3,139Illustrated Example house to rental property, the property had a fair Balance ............... $5,111
market value of $152,000. Of this amount, Minus: DepreciationIn January, Eileen Johnson bought a condomin- $35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for House ($39,000 × 3.182%) $1,241ium apartment to live in. Instead of selling the the house. Dishwasher ($425 × 20%) 85house she had been living in, she decided to Furnace ($4,000 × 2.273%) 91Because Eileen’s adjusted basis is less thanchange it to rental property. Eileen selected a Total depreciation ....... 1,417the fair market value on the date of the change,tenant and started renting the house on Febru- Net rental income for house $3,694Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-ary 1. Eileen charges $750 a month for rent and tion.collects it herself. Eileen received a $750 secur- Eileen uses Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I,Because the house is residential rental prop-ity deposit from her tenant. Because she plans to report her rental income and expenses. Sheerty, she must use the straight line method ofto return it to her tenant at the end of the lease, enters her income, expenses, and depreciationdepreciation using either the GDS recovery pe-she does not include it in her income. Her house for the house in the column for Property A. Sheriod or the ADS recovery period. She choosesexpenses for the year are as follows: uses Form 4562 to figure and report her depreci-the GDS recovery period of 27.5 years. ation. Eileen’s Schedule E (Form 1040) isShe uses Table 3-D to find her depreciationMortgage interest .............. $1,800 shown next. Her Form 4562 is not shown. Seepercentage. Because she placed the property inFire insurance (1-year policy) ...... 1 0 0 Publication 946 for information on how to pre-service in February, she finds the percentage toMiscellaneous repairs (after renting) 297 pare Form 4562.Real estate taxes imposed and paid 1,200 be 3.182%.
Publication 527 (2007) Page 17

Page 18 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Eileen Johnson 123 00 4567
Brick House
123 Main Street, Hometown, MN 56200 /H12011
8,250
92
1,650
297
1,100
3,139
1,417
4,556
3,694
8,250
1,650
3,139
1,417
3,694
3,694
SCHEDULE E OMB No. 1545-0074
Supplemental Income and Loss
(Form 1040) (From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment 
Sequence No. 13
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties Note. If you are in the business of renting personal property, use
Schedule C or C-EZ (see page E-3). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40.
List the type and location of each rental real estate property:1
A
B
C
NoYes2
A
B
C
Properties Totals
(Add columns A, B, and C.)Income: CBA
333 Rents received
4 Royalties received 44
Expenses:
5Advertising5
6Auto and travel (see page E-4)6
7Cleaning and maintenance7
8Commissions8
9Insurance9
1010 Legal and other professional fees
11
Mortgage interest paid to banks,
etc. (see page E-4) 12
11
12
Other interest
12
13
Repairs
13
14
Supplies
14
15
Taxes
15
16
Utilities
16
1717
Other (list) /H1707518
18
1919Add lines 5 through 1819
Depreciation expense or depletion
(see page E-5)
20
20 20
21Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 2021
Income or (loss) from rental real
estate or royalty properties.
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is a
(loss), see page E-5 to find out if
you must file Form 6198
22
22
Deductible rental real estate loss.
Caution. Your rental real estate
loss on line 22 may be limited. See
page E-5 to find out if you must
file  Form 8582. Real estate
professionals must complete line
43 on page 2
23
)() ()(23
2424 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22. Do not include any losses
)(25Losses. Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here.25
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, 
line 17, or Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2
26
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page E-7 of the instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2007
Part I
Management fees
(99)
For each rental real estate property
listed on line 1, did you or your family
use it during the tax year for personal
purposes for more than the greater of:
● 14 days or
● 10% of the total days rented at
fair rental value?
(See page E-3)
2007
Page 18 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 19 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
security number, your filing status, and the we use several methods to evaluate the quality
exact whole dollar amount of your refund. of our telephone services. One method is for aHow To Get Tax Help
second IRS representative to listen in on or• Download forms, instructions, and publica- record random telephone calls. Another is to askYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, tions. some callers to complete a short survey at theorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
• Order IRS products online. end of the call.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best • Research your tax questions online. Walk-in. Many products and servicesfor you, you will have quick and easy access to are available on a walk-in basis.• Search publications online by topic ortax help.
keyword.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The • Products. You can walk in to many post• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uppublished in the last few years.pendent organization within the IRS whose em-
certain forms, instructions, and publica-ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing • Figure your withholding allowances using tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- the withholding calculator online at stores, copy centers, city and county gov-ing tax problems that have not been resolved www.irs.gov/individuals. ernment offices, credit unions, and officethrough normal channels, or who believe that an
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed us- supply stores have a collection of productsIRS system or procedure is not working as it
ing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) available to print from a CD or photocopyshould.
Assistant. from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-toll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or • Sign up to receive local and national tax
enue Code, regulations, Internal RevenueTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- news by email.
ble for assistance. You can also call or write to Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
• Get information on starting and operatingyour local taxpayer advocate, whose phone able for research purposes.
a small business.number and address are listed in your local • Services. You can walk in to your localtelephone directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-Taxpayer Advocate Service - Your Voice at the ness day for personal, face-to-face taxPhone. Many services are available byIRS. You can file Form 911, Request for Tax- help. An employee can explain IRS letters,phone.payer Advocate Service Assistance (And Appli- request adjustments to your tax account,cation for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an
or help you set up a payment plan. If youIRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur- tions about how the tax law applies to your
rent-year forms, instructions, andTaxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The individual tax return, or you’re more com-publications, and prior-year forms and in-TAP listens to taxpayers, identifies taxpayer is- fortable talking with someone in person,structions. You should receive your ordersues, and makes suggestions for improving IRS visit your local Taxpayer Assistancewithin 10 days.services and customer satisfaction. If you have Center where you can spread out yoursuggestions for improvements, contact the TAP, records and talk with an IRS representa-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withtoll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.www.improveirs.org. essary, but if you prefer, you can call your• Solving problems. You can getLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). local Center and leave a message re-face-to-face help solving tax problemsLITCs are independent organizations that pro- questing an appointment to resolve a taxevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-vide low income taxpayers with representation account issue. A representative will callsistance Centers. An employee can ex-in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free you back within 2 business days to sched-plain IRS letters, request adjustments toor for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide ule an in-person appointment at your con-your account, or help you set up a pay-tax education and outreach for taxpayers with venience. To find the number, go to www.ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-limited English proficiency or who speak English irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phonetance Center for an appointment. To findas a second language. Publication 4134, Low book under United States Government, In-the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Income Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informa- ternal Revenue Service.tacts or look in the phone book undertion on clinics in your area. It is available at www. United States Government, Internal Reve-irs.gov or at your local IRS office. Mail. You can send your order fornue Service.
forms, instructions, and publications toFree tax services. To find out what services • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access the address below. You should receiveare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to to TTY/TDD equipment, call a response within 10 days after your request isFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to received.publications and describes other free tax infor- order forms and publications.mation services, including tax education and
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- National Distribution Center
ics. ten to pre-recorded messages covering P.O. Box 8903
Accessible versions of IRS published prod- various tax topics. Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
ucts are available on request in a variety of • Refund information. To check the status of CD/DVD for tax products. You canalternative formats for people with disabilities. your 2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 order Publication 1796, IRS Tax Prod-Internet. You can access the IRS web- and press 1 for automated refund informa- ucts CD/DVD, and obtain:site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-days a week to: wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
lications.filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-• E-file your return. Find out about commer- tronically). Have your 2007 tax return • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-cial tax preparation and e-file services available because you will need to know tions.available free to eligible taxpayers. your social security number, your filing
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD -• Check the status of your 2007 refund. status, and the exact whole dollar amount
Ships with the final release.Click on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least of your refund.
6 weeks from the date you filed your re- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andturn (3 weeks if you filed electronically). Evaluating the quality of our telephone finding aid.Have your 2007 tax return available be- services. To ensure IRS representatives give
cause you will need to know your social accurate, courteous, and professional answers, • Tax law frequently asked questions.
Publication 527 (2007) Page 19

Page 20 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling • Web links to various government agen-
sponse system. cies, business associations, and IRS orga-fee). Price is subject to change.
nizations.• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax CD for small businesses. Publication
forms. • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-3207, The Small Business Resource
nity to suggest changes for future editions.Guide CD for 2007, is a must for every• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
small business owner or any taxpayer about to • A site map of the CD to help you navigate• Toll-free and email technical support. start a business. This year’s CD includes: the pages of the CD with ease.
• The CD which is released twice during the • Helpful information, such as how to pre- • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thatyear. pare a business plan, find financing for gives practical tips for teens about starting– The first release will ship the beginning your business, and much more. their own business, creating a businessof January 2008. plan, and filing taxes.• All the business tax forms, instructions,– The final release will ship the beginning
and publications needed to successfullyof March 2008. An updated version of this CD is availablemanage a business. each year in early April. You can get a free copyPurchase the CD/DVD from National Techni- • Tax law changes for 2007. by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.cal Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ gov/smallbiz.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andcdorders for $35 (no handling fee) or call
1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free to finding aid.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Apartments: Cash method taxpayers ...... 2 Basis (See Basis)A
Change of accountingBasement apartments ....... 6 Casualty losses ............. 1 5Accelerated Cost Recovery
method ................... 9Dwelling units ............... 5System (ACRS)  (See also Change of accounting
Change of property to rentalAppraisal fees ............... 1 2Modified Accelerated Cost method .................... 9
u s e....................5 ,  1 0Recovery System Assessments for Charitable contributions: Claiming correct amount(MACRS)) ................. 1 0 maintenance .............. 1 2 Use of property .............. 6 o f ........................ 7Effective date ............... 9 Assessments, local  (See Local Cleaning and Declining balanceassessments)Accounting methods: maintenance ............... 3 method ................9 ,  1 3Accrual method ............. 2 Assistance  (See Tax help) Closing costs ............... 1 1 Duration of property expected toCash method ............... 2 Assumption of mortgage .... 1 2 Comments on publication .... 2 last more than one year . . . 9Change of method ........... 9 At-risk rules ................. 1 5 Commissions ................ 3 Eligible property ............. 9
Constructive receipt of Attorneys’ fees.......... 11, 12 Computers: Excepted property ........... 9
income ................... 2 Automobiles: MACRS recovery First-year expensing ......... 9
Accrual method taxpayers ... 2 MACRS recovery periods .................. 1 0 MACRS (See Modified
periods .................. 1 0ACRS (Accelerated Cost Accelerated Cost RecoveryCondominiums .............4 ,  5
Recovery System): System (MACRS))Constructive receipt of
Effective date ............... 9 Methods .................9 ,  1 3income ..................... 2B Ownership of property ....... 9Active participation ......... 1 6 Cooperative housing .... 4 ,  5 ,  9Basis: Placement in service ........ 5Activities not for profit ....... 5 Cost basis ................... 1 1Adjusted basis ............. 1 2 Rental expense ............. 3Additions to property  (See also Credit reports ............... 1 2Assessments for local Rented property ............. 9Improvements) ............. 1 0 Credits:improvements ............ 1 2 Section 179 deduction ....... 9Basis ...................... 1 2 Residential energy credit beforeBasis other than cost ....... 1 2 Special depreciationMACRS recovery period .... 1 0 1986 .................... 1 2Cost basis ................. 1 1 allowances ............... 9Adjusted basis: Decreases to ............... 1 2 Straight line method ......9 ,  1 3MACRS depreciation ....... 1 2 Deductions: Useful life ................... 9DAdjusted gross income (AGI): Capitalization of costs Vacant rental property ....... 2Days of personal use ......... 6Modified (See Modified adjusted v s . .................... 1 2 Discount, bonds and notesDays used for repairs andgross income (MAGI)) Not greater than basis ..... 9 issued at  (See Original issuemaintenance ............... 7Fair market value ........... 1 2Advance rent ................. 2 discount (OID))Deductions  (See also RentalIncreases to ................ 1 2Security deposits ............ 2 Dividing of expenses  (Seeexpenses) .................. 2MACRS depreciableAdvertising ................... 3 Allocation of expenses)Capitalizing costs vs. effect onbasis .................... 1 1Allocation of expenses: Dwelling units:basis .................... 1 2Property changed to rental Definition ................... 5Change of property to rental Depreciation (See Depreciation)u s e...................... 1 2 Fair rental price ............. 6u s e....................... 5 How to figure rental Personal use of ...........5 ,  6How to divide expenses ...... 7 deductions ................ 7Part of property rented ....... 5 C Limitations on ............7 ,  1 5Personal use of rental Passive activity losses (See ECapital expenditures:property ................3 ,  5 Passive activity)Deductions vs. effect on Easements .................. 1 2Alternative Depreciation System Property not used asbasis .................... 1 2 Equipment rental expense .... 3(ADS): home ..................... 7Improvements ............... 3 Expenses  (See RentalElection of ................. 1 5 Property used as home ...... 7Local benefit taxes .......... 3 expenses)MACRS ............... 10, 14 Mortgages, payments to Depreciation .............. 7-15
Alternative minimum tax (AMT): obtain .................... 3 Alternative Depreciation System
FAccelerated depreciation Cars: (ADS) (See Modified
methods .................. 9 Fair market value (FMV) ..... 1 2MACRS recovery Accelerated Cost Recovery
periods .................. 1 0 System (MACRS))Amended returns ............. 9 Fair rental price ............6 ,  7
Page 20 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 21 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fees: Interest payments  (See also Change of property to rental Rent ......................... 1 1
Loan origination fees .....3 ,  1 1 Mortgages) ................. 3 u s e....................... 5 Advance rent ................ 2
Points (See Points) End of, OID ................. 4Loan origination fees ........ 3 Fair price ................... 6
Settlement fees and other Interest ...................3 ,  5Rental expenses ............ 3 Rental expenses ............. 2
costs .................... 1 1 Mortgage insurance Advertising .................. 3
Tax return preparation premiums ................ 1 2 Allocation between rental and
Lfees ....................3 ,  4 Part of property rented ....... 5 personal uses ............. 7
Land:First-year expensing ......... 9 Change of property to rental
Cost basis ................. 1 2 u s e....................... 5Form 1040: NDepreciation ................ 9 Cleaning andNot rented for profit Nonresidential real maintenance .............. 3Leases:income ................... 5 property ................... 1 0 Commissions ............... 3Cancellation payments ...... 2Part of property rented ....... 5 Not-for-profit activities ....... 5 Deductions, how to figure .... 7Rental income and Equipment leasing ........... 3
Depreciation ................ 3expenses ................ 1 6 Limits:
OSchedule E ................ 1 6 Dwelling unit used asPassive activity losses and
home ..................... 6Original issue discountForm 1098: credits ................... 1 5
Equipment rental ............ 3(OID) ....................... 4Mortgage interest ........... 3 Rental expense
Home, property also useddeductions ................ 7Form 4684:
a s......................2 ,  7Rental losses .............. 1 5Casualties and thefts ....... 1 5 P Improvements ............... 3Loans:Form 4797: Part interest: Insurance ................... 3Assumption fees ........... 1 2Sales of business Expenses ................... 3 Interest payments ........... 3property ................. 1 5 Charges connected with getting Income ..................... 2 Local transportationor refinancing, costForm 8582: Passive activity ............. 1 5 expenses ...............3 ,  4basis .................... 1 2Passive activity losses ..... 1 5 , Maximum special Not used as home ........... 7Low or no interest .......... 1 116 allowance ................ 1 6 Part of property rented ....... 5Origination fees ............. 3Free tax services ............ 1 9 Personal property: Points ...................... 3Local assessments .......... 1 2 Rental income from .......... 2 Pre-rental expenses ......... 3Losses  (See Gains and losses) Personal use of rental property Rental payments ............ 3G (See also Property changed to Repairs ..................... 3Gains and losses: rental use) ................ 5 - 7 Sale of property ............. 3At-risk rules ................ 1 5 M Placed-in-service date ....... 1 1 Tax return preparationCasualty and theft Material participation ........ 1 5 fees ....................3 ,  4Points .....................3 ,  1 1losses ................... 1 5 Minimal rental use Taxes ...................... 3Pre-rental expenses .......... 3Limits on rental losses ...... 1 5 exception .................. 5 Tenant, paid by ............. 2Principal residence  (See Home)Passive activity losses ...... 1 5 Missing children, photographs Travel expenses ............ 3Rental real estate Profit, property not rentedof .......................... 1 Utilities ..................... 3activities ................. 1 6 for ......................... 5Modified Accelerated Cost Vacant rental property ....... 2Sale of rental property ....1 ,  1 5 Property changed to rentalRecovery System Rental income:General depreciation system use ......................... 5(MACRS) ............... 10-15 Advance rent ................ 2(GDS)  (See Modified Basis ...................... 1 2Additions or improvements to Cancellation of leaseAccelerated Cost Recovery MACRS depreciation ....... 1 0property ................. 1 0 payments ................. 2System (MACRS)) Property not used as home:Adjusted basis ............. 1 2 Dwelling unit used asRental income andAlternative Depreciation System home ..................... 6deductions ................ 7(ADS) ............... 10, 15H Figuring .................... 7Property used as home  (SeeBasis other than cost ....... 1 2 Lease with option to buy ..... 2Help  (See Tax help) Use of home)Conventions ............... 1 3 Minimal rental useHome: Publications  (See Tax help)Cost basis ................. 1 1 exception ................. 5Main home .................. 6 Declining balance Not rented for profit .......... 5Use as rental property (See Use method .................. 1 3 Not used as home ........... 7Qof home) Depreciable basis .......... 1 1 Part interest ................. 2Qualified Gulf Opportunity ZoneDetermination of Property received fromproperty:deduction ................ 1 0I tenant .................... 2Acquisition date test ........ 1 0Effective date ............... 9Improvements  (See also Reporting ................2 ,  1 6Excepted property .......... 1 0Excluded property .......... 1 0Repairs) .................... 3 Security deposit ............. 2Original use test ............ 1 0General Depreciation SystemAssessments for local Services received fromPlaced in service date(GDS) ............... 10, 13improvements ............ 1 2 tenant .................... 2test ...................... 1 0Nonresidential rentalBasis ...................... 1 2 Uncollected rent ............. 3Substantial use test ........ 1 0property ................. 1 0Depreciation of rented Used as home ............2 ,  7Qualified Gulf Opportunity ZonePersonal home changed toproperty .................. 9 Rental losses  (See also Gainsproperty, requirements for therental use ................ 1 0MACRS recovery period .... 1 0 and losses; Passivespecial allowance .......... 9Property used in rental activitiesIndian reservation activity) .................... 1 6(Table 2) ................. 9property ................... 1 0 Repairs  (See alsoRRecovery periods .........9 ,  1 3Insurance .................... 3 Improvements) .............. 3Real estateResidential rentalCasualty or theft loss Assessments forprofessionals ............. 1 5property ............. 10, 13payments ................ 1 2 maintenance ............. 1 2Passive activity rules, exceptionSpecial depreciationChange of property to rental Personal use of rental propertyt o ....................... 1 5allowances ............... 9u s e....................... 5 exception for days used forStraight line method ........ 1 3 Real estate taxes ............ 1 1Fire insurance premiums, cost repairs and
Modified adjusted gross income Real property trades orbasis .................... 1 1 maintenance .............. 7
(MAGI) .................... 1 6 businesses ................ 1 5Part of property rented ....... 5
More information  (See Tax help) Recordkeeping requirements:Premiums paid in
Travel and transportation SMortgages .................... 3advance .................. 3
expenses ................. 4Title insurance, cost Assumption of, cost Sale of property:
basis .................... 1 1 basis .................... 1 2 Recovery periods ........... 1 0 Expenses ................... 3
Publication 527 (2007) Page 21

Page 22 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of property: (Cont.) Transfer taxes ............. 1 1 Passive activity rulesT
Gain or loss ..............1 ,  1 5 exception ................ 1 5Taxpayer Advocate .......... 1 9Tables and figures:
Main home .................. 2 Personal use as dwellingDeclining balance depreciation Theft losses ................. 1 5
unit ....................... 5Section 179 deductions ...... 9 rates .................... 1 3 Title insurance .............. 1 1 Rental income andImprovements, examples ofSecurity deposits ............ 2 Transfer taxes ............... 1 1 deductions ................ 7(Table 1) ................. 3Settlement fees ............. 1 1 Travel and transportation Utilities ....................3 ,  1 2MACRS optional tables (TableShared equity financing expenses:3–D ) .................... 1 4agreements ................ 6 Local transportationMACRS optional tables (TablesSpecial depreciation allowance: expenses ...............3 ,  4 V3–A, 3–B, and 3–C) ..... 1 4Qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone Recordkeeping .............. 4 Vacant rental property ........ 2MACRS recovery periods forproperty .................. 9 Rental expenses ............ 3 Vacation homes:rental activity property (Table Standard mileage rate ....... 4Special depreciation Dividing of expenses ........ 72 ) ........................ 9allowances ................. 9 TTY/TDD information ........ 1 9 Dwelling unit ................ 5Tax credits:Spouse: Fair rental price ............. 6Residential energy creditMaterial participation ....... 1 6 Minimal rental useUallowed before 1986, effect exception ................. 5Standard mileage rates ....... 4 Uncollected rent:on basis ................. 1 2 Personal use of ............. 5Suggestions for Income ..................... 3Tax help ..................... 1 9 Valuation:publication ................. 2 Use of home:Tax return preparation Fair market value ........... 1 2Surveys ..................... 1 1 Before or after renting ....... 6fees ......................3 ,  4
Change to rental use .....5 ,  1 0 ■Taxes:
Days of personal use ........ 6Deduction of ................ 3
Fair rental price ............. 6Local benefit taxes .......... 3
Minimal rental useReal estate taxes ........... 1 1
exception ................. 5
Page 22 Publication 527 (2007)

Page 23 of 23 of Publication 527 15:43 - 23-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2008
Highlights of 2007 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2008
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Publication 527 (2007) Page 23