Userid: SD_T81KB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...s and Instruct\2010 Cycle Year\P 525\10P525 - 12-21-10 - EPIC - 2.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047D
What's New .................... . 1Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Taxable and 
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Employee Compensation .......... . 3Nontaxable Service Miscellaneous Compensation ....... . 3
Fringe Benefits ................ . 4
Retirement Plan Contributions ...... . 8Income Stock Options ................ . 10
Restricted Property ............. . 12
Special Rules for Certain
For use in preparing Employees .................. . 14
Clergy ..................... . 14
Members of Religious Orders ...... . 142010 Returns Foreign Employer .............. . 14
Military ..................... . 14
Volunteers .................. . 15
Business and Investment Income .... . 15
Rents From Personal Property ..... . 15
Royalties ................... . 16
Partnership Income ............ . 16
S Corporation Income ........... . 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ........ . 16
Disability Pensions ............. . 17
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ................ . 17
Workers' Compensation ......... . 18
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits ................. . 18
Miscellaneous Income ............ . 19
Bartering ................... . 19
Canceled Debts ............... . 19
Host or Hostess ............... . 21
Life Insurance Proceeds ......... . 21
Recoveries .................. . 22
Survivor Benefits .............. . 29
Unemployment Benefits ......... . 29
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits ......... . 30
Other Income ................ . 31
Repayments ................... . 36
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 37
Index ......................... . 39
What's New
Roth IRAs. Half of any income that results
from a rollover or conversion to a Roth IRA from
another retirement plan in 2010 is included in
income in 2011, and the other half in 2012,
unless you elect to include all of it in 2010.
Exclusions from income. The exclusion of
up to $2,400 of unemployment compensation
expired and is not available for 2010.
Gulf oil spill. You are required to include inGet forms and other information
your gross income payments you received for
faster and easier by: lost wages, lost business income, or lost profits.
See Gulf oil spill under Other Income.
Internet IRS.gov
Dec 21, 2010

Page 2 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Photographs of missing children. The Inter- You can write to us at the following address:Reminders nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Internal Revenue ServiceTerrorist attacks. You can exclude from in- dren. Photographs of missing children selected Individual Forms and Publications Branchcome certain disaster assistance, disability, and by the Center may appear in this publication on SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ideath payments received as a result of a terror- pages that otherwise would be blank. You can 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526ist or military action. For more information, see help bring these children home by looking at the Washington, DC 20224Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter- photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
rorist Attacks. (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Astronauts. You also can exclude death pay- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
ments for astronauts dying in the line of duty clude your daytime phone number, including the
after 2002. area code, in your correspondence.Introduction
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheQualified settlement income. If you are a You can receive income in the form of money, asterisk must be included in the address.)qualified taxpayer, you can contribute all or part property, or services. This publication discusses Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-of your qualified settlement income, up to many kinds of income and explains whether ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-$100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, includ- they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis- ally to each email, we do appreciate youring an IRA. Contributions to eligible retirement cussions on employee wages and fringe bene- feedback and will consider your comments asplans, other than a Roth IRA or a designated fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, S we revise our tax products.Roth contribution, reduce the qualified settle- corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-
Ordering forms and publications. Visitment income that you must include in income. mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andSee Exxon Valdez settlement income  under ceeds, and welfare and other public assistance
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theOther Income. benefits. Check the index for the location of a
address below and receive a response within 10specific subject.
Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or days after your request is received.Generally, an amount included in your in-
resident alien, you must report income from come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-
sources outside the United States (foreign in- empted by law. Income that is taxable must be Internal Revenue Servicecome) on your tax return unless it is exempt by reported on your return and is subject to tax. 1201 N. Mitsubishi MotorwayU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside Income that is nontaxable may have to be Bloomington, IL 61705-6613or outside the United States and whether or not shown on your tax return but is not taxable.
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
Constructively received income. You arement, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
generally taxed on income that is available toapplies to earned income (such as wages and check the information available on IRS.gov or
you, regardless of whether it is actually in your call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxtips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-
possession. questions sent to either of the above addresses.est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents,
A valid check that you received or that wasand royalties).
made available to you before the end of the tax Useful Items If you reside outside the United States, you year is considered income constructively re- You may want to see:may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign ceived in that year, even if you do not cash thesource earned income. For details, see Publica- check or deposit it to your account until the next Publicationtion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- year. For example, if the postal service tries todent Aliens Abroad. ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business (Fordeliver a check to you on the last day of the tax
Individuals Who Use Schedule C oryear but you are not at home to receive it, youDisaster mitigation payments. You can ex-
C-EZ)must include the amount in your income for thatclude from income grants you use to mitigate
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it could(reduce the severity of) potential damage from ❏ 523 Selling Your Homenot possibly reach you until after the end of thefuture natural disasters that are paid to you ❏ 527 Residential Rental Propertytax year, and you otherwise could not get thethrough state and local governments. For more (Including Rental of Vacationfunds before the end of the year, you include theinformation, see Disaster mitigation payments Homes)amount in your income for the next tax year.under Welfare and Other Public Assistance
Benefits. ❏ 541 PartnershipsAssignment of income. Income received
by an agent for you is income you constructively ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofNonqualified deferred compensation plans. received in the year the agent received it. If you AssetsGenerally, all amounts deferred under a non- agree by contract that a third party is to receivequalified deferred compensation plan for all tax ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesincome for you, you must include the amount inyears are included in gross income for the cur- (Including Capital Gains andyour income when the third party receives it.rent year, unless certain requirements are met. Losses)
See Nonqualified deferred compensation plans Example. You and your employer agree ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andunder Employee Compensation. that part of your salary is to be paid directly to Administratorsyour former spouse. You must include thatHealth Savings Account (HSA). You can ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsamount in your income when your formerfund your HSA with a one-time direct transfer spouse receives it.from your individual retirement plan, health reim- ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income
bursement account, or health flexible spending Prepaid income. Prepaid income, such as ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalentaccount and exclude the amount of the transfer compensation for future services, generally is Railroad Retirement Benefitsfrom income. However, you must include the included in your income in the year you receive
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Educationamount transferred in your income, as well as it. However, if you use an accrual method of
pay a 10% additional tax, if you do not remain an accounting, you can defer prepaid income you ❏ 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures,eligible individual for at least 12 months after the receive for services to be performed before the Repossessions, andmonth of the transfer. See Accident or Health end of the next tax year. In this case, you include AbandonmentsPlan under Fringe Benefits. the payment in your income as you earn it by See How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofperforming the services. this publication, for information about gettingQualified joint venture. A qualified joint ven-
these publications.ture conducted by you and your spouse may not Comments and suggestions. We welcome
be treated as a partnership if you file a joint your comments about this publication and your
return for the tax year. See Partnership Income. suggestions for future editions.
Page 2 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 3 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
received safety achievement awards dur-MiscellaneousEmployee ing the year. CompensationCompensation
This section discusses many types of employee Example. Ben Green received three em-
compensation. The subjects are arranged in al- ployee achievement awards during the year: aGenerally, you must include in gross income
phabetical order. nonqualified plan award of a watch valued ateverything you receive in payment for personal
$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoservices. In addition to wages, salaries, commis- Advance commissions and other earnings. valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atsions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms of If you receive advance commissions or other $500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-compensation such as fringe benefits and stock amounts for services to be performed in the fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachoptions. future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you award by itself would be excluded from income.must include these amounts in your income in   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage and However, because the $1,750 total value of thethe year you receive them.Tax Statement, from your employer showing the awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeIf you repay unearned commissions or otherpay you received for your services. Include your $150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.amounts in the same year you receive them,pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on
reduce the amount included in your income byline 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re- Differential wage payments. This is any pay-the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxceive a Form W-2. ment made by an employer to an individual foryear, you can deduct the repayment as an item-If you performed services, other than as an any period during which the individual is, for aized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),independent contractor, and your employer did period of more than 30 days, an active dutyor you may be able to take a credit for that year.not withhold social security and Medicare taxes member of the uniformed services and repre-See Repayments, later. sents all or a portion of the wages the individualfrom your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol-
Allowances and reimbursements.   If you would have received from the employer for thatlected Social Security and Medicare Tax on
receive travel, transportation, or other business period. These payments are treated as wagesWages, with your Form 1040. These wages
expense allowances or reimbursements from and are subject to income tax withholding, butmust be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See
your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En- not FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments areForm 8919 for more information.
tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are reported as wages on Form W-2.
reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, Government cost-of-living allowances.tion 521, Moving Expenses.
either in the child's home or in your home or Cost-of-living allowances generally are includedBack pay awards. Include in income amountsother place of business, the pay you receive in your income. However, cost-of-living al-you are awarded in a settlement or judgment formust be included in your income. If you are not lowances are not included in your income if youback pay. These include payments made to youan employee, you are probably self-employed were a federal civilian employee or a federalfor damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,and must include payments for your services on court employee who was stationed in Alaska,and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheySchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Hawaii, or outside the United States. Beginningshould be reported to you by your employer on January 1, 2010, these federal employees areBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Form W-2. being transitioned from a nontaxableProfit From Business. You generally are not an
cost-of-living adjustment to a taxable local-employee unless you are subject to the will and Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
ity-based comparability payment.control of the person who employs you as to you receive for outstanding work are included in
Allowances and differentials that increasewhat you are to do and how you are to do it. your income and should be shown on your Form
your basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessW-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripsBabysitting. If you babysit for relatives or desirable post of duty are part of your compen-for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youneighborhood children, whether on a regular sation and must be included in income. Forreceive is goods or services, you must includebasis or only periodically, the rules for childcare example, your compensation includes Foreignthe fair market value of the goods or services inproviders apply to you. Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicalyour income. However, if your employer merely
differentials. For more information, see Publica-promises to pay you a bonus or award at some
tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesfuture time, it is not taxable until you receive it orBankruptcy. If you filed for bankruptcy under
Stationed Abroad.it is made available to you.Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you must
allocate your wages and withheld income tax. Employee achievement award. If you re- Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.Your W-2 will show your total wages and with- ceive tangible personal property (other than Your employer will report to you the total amountheld income tax for the year. On your tax return, cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as of deferrals for the year under a nonqualifiedyou report the wages and withheld income tax an award for length of service or safety achieve- deferred compensation plan. This amount isfor the period before you filed for bankruptcy. ment, you generally can exclude its value from shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. ThisYour bankruptcy estate reports the wages and your income. However, the amount you can ex- amount is not included in your income.withheld income tax for the period after you filed clude is limited to your employer's cost and However, if at any time during the tax year,for bankruptcy. If you receive other information cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or isreturns (such as Form 1099-DIV or 1099-INT) that are not qualified plan awards) for all such not operated under those requirements, allthat report gross income to you, rather than to awards you receive during the year. Your em- amounts deferred under the plan for the tax yearthe bankruptcy estate, you must allocate that ployer can tell you whether your award is a and all preceding tax years are included in yourincome. qualified plan award. Your employer must make income for the current year. This amount is in-the award as part of a meaningful presentation,The only exception is for purposes of figuring cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, boxunder conditions and circumstances that do notyour self-employment tax, if you are 1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, usingcreate a significant likelihood of it being dis-self-employed. For that purpose, you must take code Z.guised pay.into account all your self-employment income for However, the exclusion does not apply to the Nonqualified deferred compensation plansthe year from services performed both before following awards. of nonqualified entities. Generally, any com-and after the beginning of the case.
pensation deferred under a nonqualified de-• A length-of-service award if you received itYou must file a statement with your income ferred compensation plan of a nonqualifiedfor less than 5 years of service or if youtax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11 entity is included in gross income when there isreceived another length-of-service awardbankruptcy case. The statement must show the no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights toduring the year or the previous 4 years. allocation and describe the method used to such compensation. For this purpose, a non-
make the allocation. For a sample of this state- • A safety achievement award if you are a qualified entity is:
ment and other information, see Notice 2006-83, manager, administrator, clerical employee,
1. A foreign corporation unless substantially2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ or other professional employee or if more
all of its income is:2006-40_IRB/ar12.html. than 10% of eligible employees previously
Publication 525 (2010) Page 3

Page 4 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Effectively connected with the conduct • An association of employers or employ- fringe benefits by using either of the following
ees. rules.of a trade or business in the United
States, or • An insurance company, if your employer • The general rule: benefits are reported for
paid for the plan. a full calendar year (January 1±Decemberb. Subject to a comprehensive foreign in-
31).come tax. However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you • The special accounting period rule: bene-2. A partnership unless substantially all of its receive under the policy are not taxable. For fits provided during the last 2 months ofincome is allocated to persons other than: more information, see Other Sickness and Injury the calendar year (or any shorter period)
Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits, are treated as paid during the followinga. Foreign persons for whom the income
later. calendar year. For example, each yearis not subject to a comprehensive for-
your employer reports the value of bene-eign income tax, and Social security and Medicare taxes paid by fits provided during the last 2 months of
b. Tax-exempt organizations. employer. If you and your employer have an the prior year and the first 10 months of
agreement that your employer pays your social the current year.
security and Medicare taxes without deducting Your employer does not have to use the sameNote received for services. If your employer them from your gross wages, you must report accounting period for each fringe benefit, butgives you a secured note as payment for your the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages must use the same period for all employees whoservices, you must include the fair market value on your tax return. The payment is also treated receive a particular benefit.(usually the discount value) of the note in your as wages for figuring your social security and
income for the year you receive it. When you Medicare taxes and your social security and You must use the same accounting period
later receive payments on the note, a propor- Medicare benefits. However, these payments that you use to report the benefit to claim an
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of are not treated as social security and Medicare employee business deduction (for use of a car,
the fair market value that you previously in- wages if you are a household worker or a farm for example).
cluded in your income. Do not include that part worker. Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-again in your income. Include the rest of the
able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherStock appreciation rights. Do not include apayment in your income in the year of payment.
compensation) of Form W-2. The total value ofstock appreciation right granted by your em-If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.ployer in income until you exercise (use) theunsecured note as payment for your services, The value of your fringe benefits may be addedright. When you use the right, you are entitled topayments on the note that are credited toward to your other compensation on one Form W-2, ora cash payment equal to the fair market value ofthe principal amount of the note are compensa- you may receive a separate Form W-2 showingthe corporation's stock on the date of use minustion income when you receive them. just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 withthe fair market value on the date the right was
a notation in box 14.granted. You include the cash payment in in-Severance pay. You must include in income
come in the year you use the right.amounts you receive as severance pay and any
payment for the cancellation of your employ- Accident or Health Planment contract. Fringe Benefits
Generally, the value of accident or health planAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed- Fringe benefits received in connection with the coverage provided to you by your employer iseral employee and receive a lump-sum payment performance of your services are included in not included in your income. Benefits you re-for accrued annual leave when you retire or your income as compensation unless you pay ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-resign, this amount will be included as wages on fair market value for them or they are specifically plained, later, under Sickness and Injuryyour Form W-2. excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform- Benefits.If you resign from one agency and are reem- ance of services (for example, under a covenant For information on the items covered in thisployed by another agency, you may have to not to compete) is treated as the performance of section, other than Long-term care coverage,repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- services for purposes of these rules. see Publication 969, Health Savings Accountsment to the second agency. You can reduce See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.gross wages by the amount you repaid in the discussion, for information on how to determine
same tax year in which you received it. Attach to Long-term care coverage. Contributions bythe amount to include in income.
your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement your employer to provide coverage for long-term
given to you by the agency you repaid to explain Recipient of fringe benefit. You are the re- care services generally are not included in your
the difference between the wages on your return cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform the income. However, contributions made through a
and the wages on your Forms W-2. services for which the fringe benefit is provided. flexible spending or similar arrangement (such
You are considered to be the recipient even if it as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourOutplacement services. If you choose to is given to another person, such as a member of income. This amount will be reported as wagesaccept a reduced amount of severance pay so your family. An example is a car your employer in box 1 of your Form W-2.that you can receive outplacement services gives to your spouse for services you perform.(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interview Archer MSA contributions. Contributions byThe car is considered to have been provided totechniques), you must include the unreduced your employer to your Archer MSA generally areyou and not to your spouse.amount of the severance pay in income. not included in your income. Their total will beYou do not have to be an employee of theHowever, you can deduct the value of these reported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. Ifoutplacement services (up to the difference be- You must report this amount on Form 8853,you are a partner, director, or independent con-tween the severance pay included in income Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurancetractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringeand the amount actually received) as a miscella- Contracts. File the form with your return.benefit.neous deduction (subject to the Health flexible spending arrangement2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on Provider of benefit. Your employer or an- (health FSA). If your employer provides aSchedule A (Form 1040). other person for whom you perform services is health FSA that qualifies as an accident or
the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of health plan, the amount of your salary reduction,Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer whether that person actually provides the fringe and reimbursements of your medical care ex-while you are sick or injured is part of your salary benefit to you. The provider can be a client or penses, generally are not included in your in-or wages. In addition, you must include in your customer of an independent contractor. come.income sick pay benefits received from any of
the following payers. Accounting period. You must use the same Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA
accounting period your employer uses to report can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis-• A welfare fund. your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em- tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee
• A state sickness or disability fund. ployer has the option to report taxable noncash by your employer. Generally, the distribution is
Page 4 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 5 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not included in your income and is not deducti- • The total amount of qualified expensesAdoption Assistance
you incurred during the year,ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for
You may be able to exclude from your incomethese qualified HSA distributions. • Your earned income,amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- • Your spouse's earned income, orHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
nection with your adoption of an eligible child.If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-See Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adop-as an accident or health plan, coverage and rately).tion Expenses, for more information.reimbursements of your medical care expenses
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-generally are not included in your income. Your employer must show the total amount of
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They dependent care benefits provided to you duringQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can also are included as social security and Medi- the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourmake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are Form W-2. Your employer also will include anytion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by not included as wages in box 1. To determine dependent care benefits over $5,000 in youryour employer. Generally, the distribution is not the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.included in your income and is not deductible. complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form with  To claim the exclusion, you must completeSee Publication 969 for the requirements for your return. Part III of Form 2441, Child and Dependent Carethese qualified HSA distributions.
Expenses. See the instructions for Form 2441
for more information.Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are Athletic Facilities
an eligible individual, you and any other person,
If your employer provides you with the free orincluding your employer or a family member, Educational Assistancelow-cost use of an employer-operated gym orcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- other athletic club on your employer's premises,tions, other than employer contributions, are de- You can exclude from your income up to $5,250the value is not included in your compensation.ductible on your return whether or not you of qualified employer-provided educational as-The gym must be used primarily by employees, sistance. For more information, see Publicationitemize deductions. Contributions made by your their spouses, and their dependent children. 970.employer are not included in your income. Distri-
If your employer pays for a fitness programbutions from your HSA that are used to pay
provided to you at an off-site resort hotel orqualified medical expenses are not included in athletic club, the value of the program is in- Employee Discountsyour income. Distributions not used for qualified cluded in your compensation.medical expenses are included in your income. If your employer sells you property or services atSee Publication 969 for the requirements of an a discount, you may be able to exclude the
HSA. amount of the discount from your income. TheDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide exclusion applies to discounts on property or
If your employer provides you with a product orpartner's HSA are not contributions by an em- services offered to customers in the ordinary
service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- course of the line of business in which you work.
be unreasonable for the employer to account for However, it does not apply to discounts on realbution of money and are not included in the
it, the value is not included in your income. property or property commonly held for invest-partner's gross income. Contributions by a part-
Generally, the value of benefits such as dis- ment (such as stocks or bonds).nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeare treated as guaranteed payments that are The exclusion is limited to the price chargedwhen working overtime, and company picnicsincludible in the partner's gross income. In both nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-are not included in your income. Also see Em-situations, the partner can deduct the contribu- lowing percentage.
ployee Discounts, later.tion made to the partner's HSA. • For a discount on property, your em-Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% ployer's gross profit percentage (grossHoliday gifts. If your employer gives you ashareholder-employee's HSA for services ren- profit divided by gross sales) on all prop-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atdered are treated as guaranteed payments and erty sold during the employer's previousChristmas or other holidays, do not include theare includible in the shareholder-employee's tax year. (Ask your employer for this per-value of the gift in your income. However, if yourgross income. The shareholder-employee can centage.)employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or adeduct the contribution made to the share- similar item that you easily can exchange for • For a discount on services, 20%.holder-employee's HSA. cash, you include the value of that gift as extra
Qualified HSA funding distribution. You salary or wages regardless of the amount in- Financial Counseling Feescan make a one-time distribution from your indi- volved.
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and Financial counseling fees paid for you by your
you generally will not include any of the distribu- employer are included in your income and mustDependent Care Benefitstion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi- be reported as part of wages. If the fees are for
vidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for the tax or investment counseling, they can be de-If your employer provides dependent care bene-requirements for these qualified HSA funding ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-fits under a qualified plan, you may be able todistributions. laneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-AGIexclude these benefits from your income. De- limit).pendent care benefits include:Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSA
   Qualified retirement planning services paidreceived qualified HSA distributions from a • Amounts your employer pays directly to for you by your employer may be excluded fromhealth FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual- either you or your care provider for the your income. For more information, see Retire-ified HSA funding distribution, you must be an care of your qualifying person while you ment Planning Services, later.eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe- work, and
riod beginning with the month in which the quali-
• The fair market value of care in a daycarefied distribution was made and ending on the Group-Term Life Insurancefacility provided or sponsored by your em-last day of the 12th month following that month.
ployer.If you fail to be an eligible individual during this Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of
period, other than because of death or disability, group-term life insurance coverage provided toThe amount you can exclude is limited to theyou must include the distribution in your income you by your employer (or former employer) is notlesser of:for the tax year in which you become ineligible. included in your income. However, you must
This income is also subject to an additional 10% • The total amount of dependent care bene- include in income the cost of employer-provided
tax. fits you received during the year, insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000
Publication 525 (2010) Page 5

Page 6 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay • Payments for coverage through a cafeteria Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of
toward the purchase of the insurance. plan, unless the payments are after-tax Group-Term Life Insurance for One
For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost contributions, or Month
excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later. • Payments for coverage not taxed to youIf your employer provided more than $50,000 Age Costbecause of the exceptions discussed laterof coverage, the amount included in your in- Under 25 ............ . $ .05under Entire cost excluded.come is reported as part of your wages in box 1 25 through 29 ........ .  .06
of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately in Worksheet 1. Figuring thebox 12 with code C. 30 through 34 ........ . .08Cost of Group-Term Life 35 through 39 ........ . .09Insurance To Include inGroup-term life insurance. This insurance is
Incometerm life insurance protection (insurance for a 40 through 44 ........ . .10Keep for Your Records
fixed period of time) that: 45 through 49 ........ . .15
• Provides a general death benefit,
50 through 54 ........ . .231. Enter the total amount of• Is provided to a group of employees, 55 through 59 ........ . .43your insurance coverage
from your employer(s) ... . 1.• Is provided under a policy carried by the
60 through 64 ........ . .66employer, and
2. Limit on exclusion for 65 through 69 ........ . 1.27• Provides an amount of insurance to each employer-provided
employee based on a formula that pre- group-term life insurance 70 and older ......... . 2.06vents individual selection. coverage ............ . 2. 50,000
Permanent benefits. If your group-term life 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. Example. You are 51 years old and work forinsurance policy includes permanent benefits, employers A and B. Both employers providesuch as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. group-term life insurance coverage for you formust include in your income, as wages, the cost Figure to the nearest tenth 4. the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withof the permanent benefits minus the amount you employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youpay for them. Your employer should be able to 5. Go to Table 1. Using your pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-tell you the amount to include in your income. age on the last day of the ployer B group plan. You figure the amount totax year, find your age include in your income as follows.Accidental death benefits. Insurance that group in the left column,provides accidental or other death benefits but and enter the cost from thedoes not provide general death benefits (travel column on the right for your Worksheet 1. Figuring theinsurance, for example) is not group-term life age group ........... . 5. Cost of Group-Term Lifeinsurance. Insurance To Include in6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .. . 6. IncomeÐIllustratedFormer employer. If your former employer
Keep for Your Records
provided more than $50,000 of group-term life 7. Enter the number of fullinsurance coverage during the year, the amount months of coverage at thisincluded in your income is reported as wages in cost ............... . 7. 1. Enter the total amount of yourbox 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately insurance coverage from yourin box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .. . 8. employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000amount of uncollected social security and Medi- 2. Limit on exclusion forcare taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 9. Enter the employer-providedM and N. You must pay these taxes with your premiums you group-term life insurance
income tax return. Include them in your total tax paid per month 9. coverage ............ . 2. 50,000
on line 60, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000
amount of the taxes on the dotted line next to 10. Enter the number 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
line 60. of months you Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0
paid the 5. Go to Table 1. Using yourTwo or more employers. Your exclusion for premiums ... . 10. age on the last day of the taxemployer-provided group-term life insurance year, find your age group incoverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . 11. the left column, and enter thecoverage, whether the insurance is provided by cost from the column on the
a single employer or multiple employers. If two 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. right for your age group .. . 5. .23
or more employers provide insurance coverage Include this amount in 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- your income as wages .. . 12. 7. Enter the number of fullported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be months of coverage at this
correct. You must figure how much to include in cost. ............... . 7. 12
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80
any amount reported with code C in box 12 of 9. Enter the premiums
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages you paid per month 9. 4.15
reported in box 1, and report the total on your 10. Enter the number of
return. months you paid
the premiums ... . 10. 12Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the following 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80worksheet to figure the amount to include in your 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.income. Include this amount in yourIf you pay any part of the cost of the insur- income as wages ...... . 12. 33.00ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for
dollar, the amount you otherwise would include The total amount to include in income for thein your income. However, you cannot reduce the cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.amount to include in your income by: Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-
• Payments for coverage in a different tax ance coverage, so the wages shown on your
year, Forms W-2 do not include any part of that $33.
Page 6 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 7 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must add it to the wages shown on your does not meet the three conditions given earlier, • Offers the same service for sale to cus-
Forms W-2 and include the total on your return. you still may not have to include the value of the tomers in the ordinary course of the line of
lodging in income. However, the lodging must business in which you work, andEntire cost excluded. You are not taxed on be qualified campus lodging, and you must paythe cost of group-term life insurance if any of the • Does not have a substantial additionalan adequate rent.following circumstances apply. cost (including any sales income given up)
Academic health center. This is an organi- to provide you with the service (regardless1. You are permanently and totally disabled zation that meets the following conditions. of what you paid for the service).and have ended your employment.
• Its principal purpose or function is to pro- Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- vide medical or hospital care or medical cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, oricy for the entire period the insurance is in education or research. train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv-force during the tax year.
• It receives payments for graduate medical ices.3. A charitable organization to which contri- education under the Social Security Act.
butions are deductible is the only benefi- Example. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functionsciary of the policy for the entire period the tendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinicalinsurance is in force during the tax year. and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using its(You are not entitled to a deduction for a take personal flights (if there is an unoccupiedown faculty.charitable contribution for naming a chari- seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if theretable organization as the beneficiary of is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. TheQualified campus lodging. Qualified cam-your policy.) value of the personal flight is not included in yourpus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and: income. However, the value of the hotel room isspouse, or one of your dependents by, or on
included in your income because you do notbehalf of, the institution or center for use as aa. You retired before January 2, 1984, and work in the hotel business.home. The lodging must be located on or near awere covered by the plan when you re- campus of the educational institution or aca-tired, or demic health center.
Retirement Planning Servicesb. You reached age 55 before January 2, Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay1984, and were employed by the em- for the year for qualified campus lodging is con- If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,ployer or its predecessor in 1983. sidered adequate if it is at least equal to the qualified retirement planning services provided
lesser of: to you (and your spouse) by your employer are
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire not included in your income. Qualified services• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,cost of group-term life insurance if either of the include retirement planning advice, informationorfollowing circumstances apply. about your employer's retirement plan, and in-
• The average of rentals paid by individuals formation about how the plan may fit into your• The insurance is provided by your em- (other than employees or students) for overall individual retirement income plan. Youployer through a qualified employees' comparable lodging held for rent by the cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified educational institution. accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-annuity plan.
vided by your employer. Also, see FinancialIf the amount you pay is less than the lesser of• You are a key employee and your em- Counseling Fees, earlier.these amounts, you must include the differenceployer's plan discriminates in favor of key in your income.employees.
The lodging must be appraised by an inde- Transportation
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beMeals and Lodging reviewed on an annual basis. If your employer provides you with a qualified
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedYou do not include in your income the value of
Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes- from your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedmeals and lodging provided to you and your
sor for State University, rents a home from the transportation fringe benefit is:family by your employer at no charge if the
university that is qualified campus lodging. Thefollowing conditions are met. • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-house is appraised at $200,000. The average
hicle (such as a van) between your home1. The meals are: rent paid for comparable university lodging by
and work place,persons other than employees or students isa. Furnished on the business premises of $14,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of • A transit pass,your employer, and $11,000. Carl does not include in his income any
• Qualified parking, orrental value because the rent he pays equals atb. Furnished for the convenience of your
least 5% of the appraised value of the houseemployer. • Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse-
(5% ×  $200,000 = $10,000). If Carl paid annual ment. 
rent of only $8,000, he would have to include2. The lodging is: Cash reimbursement by your employer for these$2,000 in his income ($10,000 − $8,000).
expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-a. Furnished on the business premises of
rangement is also excludable. However, cashyour employer,
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludableMoving Expense Reimbursementsb. Furnished for the convenience of your only if a voucher or similar item that can beemployer, and Generally, if your employer pays for your moving exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
expenses (either directly or indirectly) and thec. A condition of your employment. (You available for direct distribution to you.
expenses would have been deductible if youmust accept it in order to be able to
paid them yourself, the value is not included inproperly perform your duties.) Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter
your income. See Publication 521, for more in- vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe
formation. You also do not include in your income the benefits cannot be more than $230 a month.
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini- benefit cannot be more than $230 a month.No-Additional-Cost Servicesmal) Benefits, earlier. The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut-
ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by theFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of an The value of services you receive from your
number of qualified bicycle commuting monthseducational institution or an academic health employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price
center and you are provided with lodging that is not included in your income if your employer: that year.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 7

Page 8 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the benefits have a value that is more than Special valuation rules. You generally canWorking Condition Benefits
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitthese limits, the excess must be included in your
If your employer provides you with a product or only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-income. You are not entitled to these exclusions
service and the cost of it would have been allow- ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotif the reimbursements are made under a com- able as a business or depreciation deduction if use a different special rule to value that benefit.pensation reduction agreement. you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in You always can use the general valuation rule
your income. discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high- stances, even if your employer uses a special
Example. You work as an engineer andway vehicle that seats at least six adults (not rule.
your employer provides you with a subscriptionincluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehi- If you and your employer use a special valua-
to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofcle's mileage must reasonably be expected to tion rule, you must include in your income the
the subscription is not included in your incomebe: amount your employer determines under the
because the cost would have been allowable to special rule minus the sum of:• For transporting employees between their you as a business deduction if you had paid for
homes and work place, and the subscription yourself. 1. Any amount you repaid your employer,
plus• On trips during which employees occupy
at least half of the vehicle's adult seating 2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-Valuation of Fringe Benefitscapacity (not including the driver). come by law.
If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the The special valuation rules are the following.
amount included is generally its value deter-Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-
• The automobile lease rule.mined under the general valuation rule or undercard, voucher, or similar item entitling a person
the special valuation rules. For an exception,to ride mass transit (whether public or private) • The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.
see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter • The commuting rule.highway vehicle operated by a person in the General valuation rule. You must include in • The unsafe conditions commuting rule.business of transporting persons for compensa- your income the amount by which the fair markettion. • The employer-operated eating-facility rule.value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum
of:
For more information on these rules, see Pub-Qualified parking. This is parking provided to
1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene- lication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringean employee at or near the employer's place of fit, plus Benefits.business. It also includes parking provided on or
 For information on the non-commercial flightnear a location from which the employee com- 2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter from your income by law. tions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in- If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, tions.clude parking at or near the employee's home. no amount is included in your income.
Retirement PlanFair market value. The fair market value ofQualified bicycle commuting. This is reim- a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts and Contributionsbursement based on the number of qualified circumstances. It is the amount you would have
bicycle commuting months for the year. A quali- to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit. Your employer's contributions to a qualified re-
fied bicycle commuting month is any month you This is determined without regard to: tirement plan for you are not included in income
use the bicycle regularly for a substantial portion at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell• Your perceived value of the benefit, orof the travel between your home and place of you whether your retirement plan is qualified.)
employment and you do not receive any of the • The amount your employer paid for the However, the cost of life insurance coverage
other qualified transportation fringe benefits. benefit. included in the plan may have to be included.
See Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, underThe reimbursement can be for expenses you
Employer-provided vehicles. If your em- Fringe Benefits.incurred during the year for the purchase of a
ployer provides a car (or other highway motor If your employer pays into a nonqualifiedbicycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is plan for you, you generally must include thestorage.
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit. contributions in your income as wages for the
Under the general valuation rules, the value tax year in which the contributions are made.
of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount However, if your interest in the plan is not trans-Tuition Reduction
you would have to pay a third party to lease the ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
You can exclude a qualified tuition reduction same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa- ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the
from your income. This is the amount of a reduc- rable terms in the same geographic area where time of the contribution, you do not have to
tion in tuition: you use the vehicle. An example of a compara- include the value of your interest in your income
ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicle until it is transferable or is no longer subject to a• For education (below graduate level) fur- is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe- substantial risk of forfeiture.nished by an educational institution to an riod. The value cannot be determined by multi- For information on distributions fromemployee, former employee who retired or plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number of retirement plans, see Publication 575became disabled, or his or her spouse and miles driven unless you prove the vehicle could (or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S.dependent children.
TIP have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a• For education furnished to a graduate stu- Flights on employer-provided aircraft. federal employee or retiree).dent at an educational institution if the Under the general valuation rules, if your flight
graduate student is engaged in teaching on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
or research activities for that institution. marily personal and you control the use of the Elective Deferrals
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount it• Representing payment for teaching, re-
would cost to charter the flight from a third party. If you are covered by certain kinds of retirementsearch, or other services if you receive the
If there is more than one employee on the plans, you can choose to have part of youramount under the National Health Service flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be compensation contributed by your employer to aCorps Scholarship Program or the Armed divided among those employees. The division retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.Forces Health Professions Scholarship must be based on all the facts, including which The amount you set aside (called an electiveand Financial Assistance program. employee or employees control the use of the deferral) is treated as an employer contribution
For more information, see Publication 970. aircraft. to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other
Page 8 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 9 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than a designated Roth contribution (discussed • Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)
later), is not included in wages subject to income for personal services you performed, in-under section 457 plans, later.
tax at the time contributed. However, it is in- cluding, but not limited to, the following
cluded in wages subject to social security and items.Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans. IfMedicare taxes. you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you a. Commissions and tips.Elective deferrals include elective contribu- generally should not have deferred more thantions to the following retirement plans. b. Fringe benefits.$11,500 in 2010.  Amounts you defer under a
SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit c. Bonuses.1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
($16,500 for 2010) and may affect the amount401(k) plans).
you can defer under other elective deferral 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- plans. to:ees.
a. The section 457 plan.Limit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
participant in a tax-sheltered annuity plansion plans (SARSEP). b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-
(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for ments (section 401(k) plans) that are4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- 2010 generally is $16,500. However, if you have not included in your income.ees (SIMPLE plans). at least 15 years of service with a public school c. A salary reduction simplified employee5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). system, a hospital, a home health service pension (SARSEP).agency, a health and welfare service agency, a6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re- church, or a convention or association of d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)porting by employer, later.) churches (or associated organization), the limit plan).
7. Section 457 plans. on elective deferrals is increased by the least of e. A savings incentive match plan for em-the following amounts. ployees (SIMPLE plan).
Qualified automatic contribution arrange- 1. $3,000, f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-
2. $15,000, reduced by the sum of:tion arrangement, your employer can treat you
Instead of using the amounts listed earlier toas having elected to have a part of your compen-
determine your includible compensation, youra. The additional pre-tax elective deferralssation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. You
employer can use any of the following amounts.made in earlier years because of thisare to receive written notice of your rights and
rule, plusobligations under the qualified automatic contri- • Your wages as defined for income tax
bution arrangement. The notice must explain: withholding purposes.b. The aggregate amount of designated
Roth contributions permitted for prior• Your rights to elect not to have elective • Your wages as reported in box 1 of Formtax years because of this rule, orcontributions made, or to have contribu- W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
tions made at a different percentage, and
• Your wages that are subject to social se-3. $5,000 times the number of your years of
• How contributions made will be invested in curity withholding (including elective defer-service for the organization, minus the total
the absence of any investment decision by rals).elective deferrals made by your employeryou. on your behalf for earlier years.
Increased limit. During any, or all, of theIf you qualify for the 15-year rule, your elec-You must be given a reasonable period of last 3 years ending before you reach normal
tive deferrals under this limit can be as high astime after receipt of the notice and before the retirement age under the plan, your plan may
$19,500 for 2010.first elective contribution is made to make an provide that your limit is the lesser of:
election with respect to the contributions. For more information, see Publication 571.
1. Twice the annual limit ($33,000 for 2010),
Overall limit on deferrals. For 2010, you gen- orLimit for deferral under section 501(c)(18)
erally should not have deferred more than a total plans. If you are a participant in a section 2. The basic annual limit plus the amount ofof $16,500 of contributions to the plans listed in 501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25, the basic limit not used in prior years (only(1) through (3) above. The specific plan limits for 1959, funded only by employee contributions), allowed if not using age 50 or overthe plans listed in (4) through (7) above are you should have deferred no more than the catch-up contributions).discussed later. lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation.
Your employer or plan administrator should Catch-up contributions. You generallyapply the proper annual limit when figuring your Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans. can have additional elective deferrals made toplan contributions. However, you are responsi- If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a your governmental section 457 plan if:ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure deferred compensation plan for employees of • You reached age 50 by the end of thethat the deferrals are not more than the overall state or local governments or tax-exempt orga- year, andlimit. nizations), you should have deferred no more
than the lesser of your includible compensation • No other elective deferrals can be madeCatch-up contributions. You may be allowed or $16,500. However, if you are within 3 years of for you to the plan for the year because ofcatch-up contributions (additional elective defer- limits or restrictions.normal retirement age, you may be allowed anrals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of your increased limit if the plan allows it. See In-tax year. For more information about catch-up If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of yourcreased limit, later.contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of includible compensation or $16,500, plus
Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans $5,500. However, if you are within 3 years ofIncludible compensation. This is the pay
(403(b) Plans). retirement age and your plan provides the in-you received for the year from the employer who
For more information about additional elec- creased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may bemaintained the section 457 plan. It generally
tive deferrals to: higher.includes all the following payments. 
• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction 1. Wages and salaries. Designated Roth contributions. EmployersSimplified Employee Pension in Publica- with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans can2. Fees for professional services.tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi- create qualified Roth contribution programs soness. 3. The value of any employer-provided quali- that you may elect to have part or all of your
fied transportation fringe benefit (defined• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
under Transportation, earlier) that is notContributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3 ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth
included in your income.of Publication 590. contributions are treated as elective deferrals,
Publication 525 (2010) Page 9

Page 10 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
except that they are included in income. Your You should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu- you and then contributed by you to the plan. You
retirement plan must maintain separate ac- tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or must include the excess contributions in your
counts and recordkeeping for the designated Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. You
Roth contributions. tracts, etc., for the year in which the excess cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to
Qualified distributions from a Roth plan are deferral is distributed to you. Use the following report excess contribution amounts.
not included in income. Generally, a distribution rules to report a corrective distribution shown on If you receive a corrective distribution of ex-made before the end of the 5-tax-year period Form 1099-R for 2010. cess contributions (and allocable income), it isbeginning with the first tax year for which you included in your income in the year of the distri-• If the distribution was for a 2010 excessmade a designated Roth contribution to the plan bution. The allocable income is the amount ofdeferral, your Form 1099-R should haveis not a qualified distribution. gain or loss through the end of the plan year forthe code ª8º in box 7. Add the excess
Reporting by employer. Your employer gen- which the contribution was made that is alloca-deferral amount to your wages on your
erally should not include elective deferrals in ble to the excess contributions. You should re-2010 tax return.your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, your ceive a Form 1099-R for the year the excess• If the distribution was for a 2010 excessemployer should mark the Retirement plan contributions are distributed to you. Add the dis-deferral to a designated Roth account,checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount tribution to your wages for that year.your Form 1099-R should have code ªBº indeferred in box 12.
Even though a corrective distribution ofbox 7. Do not add this amount to yourSection 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. excess contributions is reported onwages on your 2010 return.Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 should Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIPnot have been reduced for contributions you • If the distribution was for a 2009 excess treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotmade to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan. deferral, your Form 1099-R should have be rolled over into another plan, and it is notThe amount you contributed should be identified the code ªPº in box 7. If you did not add subject to the additional tax on early distribu-with code ªHº in box 12. You may deduct the the excess deferral amount to your wages tions.amount deferred subject to the limits that apply. on your 2009 tax return, you must file an
Include your deduction in the total on Form amended return on Form 1040X,
1040, line 36. Enter the amount and Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re- Excess Annual Additionsª501(c)(18)(D)º on the dotted line next to line 36. turn. If you did not receive the distribution
by April 15, 2010, you also must add it to The amount contributed in 2010 to a definedDesignated Roth contributions.  These
your wages on your 2010 tax return. contribution plan is generally limited to thecontributions are elective deferrals but are in-
cluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. lesser of 100% of your compensation or• If the distribution was for a 2008 excessDesignated Roth contributions to a section $49,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-deferral, your Form 1099-R should have401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box tions that exceed these limits (excess annualthe code ªDº in box 7. If you did not add12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in box additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofthe excess deferral amount to your wages12. your elective deferrals or a return of your af-on your 2008 tax return, you must file an ter-tax contributions and earnings from theseExcess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed the amended return on Form 1040X. You also contributions.limit, you must notify your plan by the date re- must add it to your wages on your 2010
A corrective payment of excess annual addi-quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex- income tax return.
tions consisting of elective deferrals or earningscess amount will be distributed to you. If you • If the distribution was for the income from your after-tax contributions is fully taxableparticipate in more than one plan, you can have
earned on an excess deferral, your Formthe excess paid out of any of the plans that in the year paid. A corrective payment consisting
1099-R should have the code ª8º in box 7.permit these distributions. You must notify each of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.
Add the income amount to your wages onplan by the date required by that plan of the If you received a corrective payment of ex-your 2010 income tax return, regardless ofamount to be paid from that particular plan. The cess annual additions, you should receive awhen the excess deferral was made.plan then must pay you the amount of the ex- separate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay-cess, along with any income earned on that Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an ment with the code ªEº in box 7. Report the totalamount, by April 15 of the following year. excess deferral in the year the excess amount payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on lineYou must include the excess deferral in your (reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In- 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A.income for the year of the deferral unless you clude the loss as a negative amount on Form Report the taxable amount shown in box 2a ofhave an excess deferral of a designated Roth 1040, line 21 and identify it as ªLoss on Excess Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or linecontribution. File Form 1040 to add the excess Deferral Distribution.º 12b of Form 1040A.deferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do not
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex- Even though a corrective distribution ofEven though a corrective distribution ofcess deferral amounts. excess annual additions is reported onexcess deferrals is reported on Form Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIPExcess not distributed. If you do not take 1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as a
TIP treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotout the excess amount, you cannot include it in distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled be rolled over into another plan, and it is notthe cost of the contract even though you in- over into another plan, and it is not subject to the subject to the additional tax on early distribu-cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are additional tax on early distributions. tions.taxed twice on the excess deferral left in the
planÐonce when you contribute it, and again
when you receive it as a distribution. Stock OptionsExcess Contributions
Excess distributed to you. If you take out If you are a highly compensated employee, the If you receive an option to buy or sell stock orthe excess after the year of the deferral and you total of your elective deferrals and other contri- other property as payment for your services, youreceive the corrective distribution by April 15 of butions made for you for any year under a sec- may have income when you receive the optionthe following year, do not include it in income tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a (the grant), when you exercise the option (use itagain in the year you receive it. If you receive it percentage of pay, no more than 125% of the to buy or sell the stock or other property), orlater, you must include it in income in both the average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible when you sell or otherwise dispose of the optionyear of the deferral and the year you receive it.
non-highly compensated employees. or property acquired through exercise of theAny income on the excess deferral taken out is
option. The timing, type, and amount of income If the total contributed to the plan is moretaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. If
inclusion depend on whether you receive a non-than the amount allowed under the ADP test, theyou take out part of the excess deferral and the
statutory stock option or a statutory stock option.excess contributions must be either distributedincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion-
Your employer can tell you which kind of optionto you or recharacterized as after-tax employeeately between the excess deferral and the in-
you hold.come. contributions by treating them as distributed to
Page 10 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 11 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that had a readily determinable value at the time Broker and Barter Sale Transactions, reportingNonstatutory Stock Options
the option was granted, you do not have to the sales proceeds.
include any amount in income. Your basis in the property you acquire underGrant of option. If you are granted a nonstat-
the option is the amount you pay for it plus anyutory stock option, you may have income when Option without readily determinable value. amount you included in income upon grant oryou receive the option. The amount of income to When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option exercise of the option.include and the time to include it depend on that did not have a readily determinable value at Your holding period begins as of the date youwhether the fair market value of the option can the time the option was granted, the restricted acquired the option, if it had a readily determina-be readily determined. The fair market value of property rules apply to the property received. ble value, or as of the date you exercised oran option can be readily determined if it is ac- The amount to include in your income is the transferred the option, if it had no readily deter-tively traded on an established market. difference between the amount you pay for the minable value.The fair market value of an option that is not property and its fair market value when it be-
traded on an established market can be readily comes substantially vested. If it is not substan-
determined only if all of the following conditions tially vested at the time you exercise this Statutory Stock Optionsexist. nonstatutory stock option (so that you may have
to give the stock back), you do not have to There are two kinds of statutory stock options.• You can transfer the option.
include any amount in income. You include the
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and• You can exercise the option immediately difference in income when the option becomes
in full. substantially vested. For more information on • Options granted under employee stock
restricted property, see Restricted Property, purchase plans.• The option or the property subject to the
later.option is not subject to any condition or
For either kind of option, you must be anrestriction (other than a condition to se- Transfer in arm's-length transaction. If
employee of the company granting the option, orcure payment of the purchase price) that you transfer a nonstatutory stock option without
a related company, at all times during the periodhas a significant effect on the fair market a readily determinable value in an arm's-length
beginning on the date the option is granted andvalue of the option. transaction to an unrelated person, you must
ending 3 months before the date you exerciseinclude in your income the money or other prop-• The fair market value of the option privi- the option (for an incentive stock option, 1 yearerty you received for the transfer, as if you hadlege can be readily determined. before if you are disabled). Also, the option mustexercised the option.
be nontransferable except at death.The option privilege for an option to buy is the Transfer in non-arm's-length transaction.  If you do not meet the employment require-opportunity to benefit during the option's exer- If you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with- ments, or you receive a transferable option, yourcise period from any increase in the value of out a readily determinable value in a option is a nonstatutory stock option.property subject to the option without risking any non-arm's-length transaction (for example, acapital. For example, if during the exercise pe- Grant of option. If you receive a statutorygift), the option is not treated as exercised orriod the fair market value of stock subject to an stock option, do not include any amount in yourclosed at that time. You must include in youroption is greater than the option's exercise price, income when the option is granted.income, as compensation, any money or prop-a profit may be realized by exercising the option erty received. When the transferee exercisesand immediately selling the stock at its higher Exercise of option. If you exercise a statutorythe option, you must include in your income, asvalue. The option privilege for an option to sell is stock option, do not include any amount in in-compensation, the excess of the fair marketthe opportunity to benefit during the exercise come when you exercise the option.value of the stock acquired by the transfereeperiod from a decrease in the value of the prop- Alternative minimum tax (AMT). For theover the sum of the exercise price paid and anyerty subject to the option. AMT, you must treat stock acquired through theamount you included in income at the time you
exercise of an ISO as if no special treatmenttransferred the option. At the time of the exer-If you or a member of your family is an applied. This means that, when your rights in thecise, the transferee recognizes no income andofficer, director, or more-than-10% stock are transferable or no longer subject to ahas a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fairowner of an expatriated corporation,
CAUTION
! substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include asmarket value of the stock.you may owe an excise tax on the value of an adjustment in figuring alternative minimumAny transfer of this kind of option to a relatednonstatutory options and other stock-based taxable income the amount by which the fairperson is treated as a non-arm's-length transac-compensation from that corporation. For more market value of the stock exceeds the optiontion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the defi-information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve- price. Enter this adjustment on line 14 of Formnition of a related person.nue Code section 4985. 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals.Recourse note in satisfaction of the exer- Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac-Option with readily determinable value. If cise price of an option. If you are an em- quire by exercising the ISO by the amount of theyou receive a nonstatutory stock option that has ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your adjustment. However, no adjustment is requireda readily determinable fair market value at the employer in satisfaction of the exercise price of if you dispose of the stock in the same year youtime it is granted to you, the option is treated like an option to acquire your employer's stock, and exercise the option.other property received as compensation. See your employer and you subsequently agree to See Restricted Property, later, for more infor-Restricted Property, later, for rules on how much reduce the stated principal amount of the note, mation.income to include and when to include it. How- you generally recognize compensation incomeever, the rule described in that discussion for at the time and in the amount of the reduction. Your AMT basis in stock acquiredchoosing to include the value of property in your through an ISO is likely to differ fromTax form. If you receive compensation fromincome for the year of the transfer does not your regular tax basis. Therefore, keep
RECORDSemployer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itapply to a nonstatutory option. adequate records for both the AMT and regularis reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also is tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain orOption without readily determinable value. reported in box 12 using code ªV.º loss.If the fair market value of the option is not readily  If you are a nonemployee spouse and youdeterminable at the time it is granted to you exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-(even if it is determined later), you do not have Example. Your employer, M Company,ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-income until you exercise or transfer the option. granted you an incentive stock option on April 7,ported to you on Form 1099-MISC, 2008, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 aMiscellaneous Income, in box 3.Exercise or transfer of option. When you share, its fair market value at the time. Youexercise a nonstatutory stock option, the Sale of the stock. There are no special in- exercised the option on January 9, 2009, whenamount to include in your income depends on come rules for the sale of stock acquired through the stock was selling on the open market for $14whether the option had a readily determinable the exercise of a nonstatutory stock option. Re- a share. On January 26, 2010, when the stockvalue. port the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capi- was selling on the open market for $16 a share,
Option with readily determinable value. tal Gains and Losses, for the year of the sale. your rights to the stock first became transfera-
When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option You may receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds from ble. You include $700 ($1,600 value when your
Publication 525 (2010) Page 11

Page 12 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rights first became transferable minus $900 op- exercised the option on January 5, 2009, when Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have a
tion price) as an adjustment on Form 6251, line the stock was selling on the open market for $12 loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you do
14. a share. On January 26, 2010, you sold the not have any ordinary income.
stock for $15 a share. Although you held theIf you exercise an ISO during 2010, Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,stock for more than a year, less than 2 years hadyou should receive Form 3921, Exer- granted you an option under its employee stockpassed from the time you were granted the op-cise of an Incentive Stock Option
TIP tion. In 2010, you must report the difference purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of YUnder Section 422(b), or a statement, from the between the option price ($10) and the value of Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thecorporation for each transfer made during 2010. the stock when you exercised the option ($12) stock had a value of $22 a share. EighteenThe corporation must send or provide you with as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, months later, when the value of the stock wasthe form by January 31, 2011. Keep this infor- figured as follows: $23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14mation for your records. months after that you sold your stock for $30 a
Selling price ($15 ×  100 shares) .... . $ 1,500 share. In the year of sale, you must report asSale of the stock. You have taxable income Purchase price ($10 ×  100 shares) .. . −1,000 wages the difference between the option priceor a deductible loss when you sell the stock that Gain ...................... . $ 500 ($20) and the value at the time the option wasyou bought by exercising the option. Your in- Amount reported as wages granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 percome or loss is the difference between the [($12 ×  100 shares) − $1,000] ..... . − 200 share) is capital gain, figured as follows:amount you paid for the stock (the option price)
Amount reported as capital gain $ 300and the amount you receive when you sell it. Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $ 3,000You generally treat this amount as capital gain Purchase price (option price) or loss and report it on Schedule D (Form 1040) Employee stock purchase plan. If you sold ($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000for the year of the sale. stock acquired by exercising an option granted Gain ..................... . $ 1,000However, you may have ordinary income for under an employee stock purchase plan, you Amount reported as wagesthe year that you sell or otherwise dispose of the need to determine if you satisfied the holding [($22 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 200
stock in either of the following situations. period requirement. Amount reported as capital gain $ 800
• You do not satisfy the holding period re- Holding period requirement satisfied. If
quirement. you sold stock acquired by exercising an option Holding period requirement not satisfied.
granted under an employee stock purchase If you do not satisfy the holding period require-• You satisfy the conditions described under plan, and you satisfy the holding period require- ment, your ordinary income is the amount byOption granted at a discount, under Em- ment, determine your ordinary income as fol- which the stock's fair market value when youployee stock purchase plan, later. lows. exercised the option exceeded the option price.Report your ordinary income as wages on Form Your basis is equal to the option price at the This ordinary income is not limited to your gain1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. time you exercised your option and acquired the from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis in
stock. The timing and amount of pay period the stock by the amount of this ordinary income.Holding period requirement. You satisfy
deductions do not affect your basis. The difference between your increased basisthe holding period requirement if you do not sell
Your holding period for the property you ac- and the selling price of the stock is a capital gainthe stock until the end of the later of the 1-year
quire when you exercise an option begins on the or loss.period after the stock was transferred to you or
day after you exercise the option.the 2-year period after the option was granted.
Example.   The facts are the same as in theHowever, you are considered to satisfy the hold- Example. XYZ Company has an employee previous example, except that you sold theing period requirement if you sold the stock to stock purchase plan. The option price is the stock only 6 months after you exercised thecomply with conflict-of-interest requirements. lower of the stock price at the time the option is option. You did not satisfy the holding period
granted or at the time the option is exercised.Incentive stock options (ISOs). If you sell requirement, so you must report $300 as wagesThe value of the stock when the option wasstock acquired by exercising an ISO, you need and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows:granted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A's payto determine if you satisfied the holding period
every week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 ×  48)).requirement. Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $3,000
The value of the stock when the option is exer- Purchase price (option price) Holding period requirement satisfied. If cised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ stock ($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO and ($240 ÷  $20). A's holding period for all 12 shares Gain ..................... . $1,000satisfy the holding period requirement, your gain begins the day after the option is exercised, Amount reported as wagesor loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. even though the money used to purchase the [($23 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 300Report the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040). shares was deducted from A's pay on 48 sepa- Amount reported as capital gainThe basis of your stock is the amount you paid rate days. A's basis in each share is $20.  [$3,000 ± ($2,000 + $300)] $700for the stock.
Option granted at a discount. If, at theHolding period requirement not satisfied. time the option was granted, the option price per If you sold stock in 2010 that you ac-If you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO, share was less than 100% (but not less than quired by exercising an option granteddo not satisfy the holding period requirement, 85%) of the fair market value of the share, and at a discount under an employee stock
TIPand have a gain from the sale, the gain is ordi- you dispose of the share after meeting the hold- purchase plan, you should receive Form 3922,nary income up to the amount by which the ing period requirement, or you die while owning Transfer of Stock Acquired Through an Em-stock's fair market value when you exercised the the share, you must include in your income as ployee Stock Purchase Plan Under Sectionoption exceeded the option price. Any excess compensation, the lesser of: 423(c), from the corporation. The corporationgain is capital gain. If you have a loss from the must send or provide you with the form by Janu-• The excess of the fair market value of thesale, it is a capital loss and you do not have any ary 31, 2011. Keep this information for yourshare at the time the option was grantedordinary income. records.over the option price, orReport the ordinary income as wages on line
7, Form 1040. Report the capital gain or loss on • The excess of the fair market value of theSchedule D (Form 1040). In determining capital Restricted Propertyshare at the time of the disposition orgain or loss, your basis is the amount you paid death over the amount paid for the share Generally, if you receive property for your serv-when you exercised the option plus the amount under the option. ices, you must include its fair market value inreported as wages.
your income in the year you receive the prop-For this purpose, if the option price was not fixed
erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-Example. Your employer, X Corporation, or determinable at the time the option was
erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsgranted you an ISO on March 12, 2008, to buy granted, the option price is figured as if the
value, you do not include the value of the prop-100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a option had been exercised at the time it was
share, its fair market value at the time. You granted. erty in your income until it has been substantially
Page 12 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 13 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
vested. (You can choose to include the value of of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi- you have included them as wages. Do not in-
the property in your income in the year it is clude them in the total dividends received.nus any amount you paid for the property) in
transferred to you, as discussed later, rather your income for the year it is transferred. If you Stock you chose to include in your in-than the year it is substantially vested.) make this choice, the substantial vesting rules come. Dividends you receive on restrictedUntil the property becomes substantially do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia- stock you chose to include in your income in thevested, it is owned by the person who makes the tion in value is not included in your compensa- year transferred are treated the same as anytransfer to you, usually your employer. However, tion when the property becomes substantially other dividends. You should receive a Formany income from the property, or the right to use vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-the property, is included in your income as addi- clude the dividends in your wages on your re-you sell the property is the amount you paid for ittional compensation in the year you receive the turn. Report them as dividends.plus the amount you included in income as com-income or have the right to use the property.
pensation.When the property becomes substantially
Sale of property not substantially vested.vested, you must include its fair market value, If you make this choice, you cannot
These rules apply to the sale or other dispositionminus any amount you paid for it, in your income revoke it without the consent of the
of property that you did not choose to include infor that year. Your holding period for this prop- Internal Revenue Service. Consent will
CAUTION
!
your income in the year transferred and that iserty begins when the property becomes sub- be given only if you were under a mistake of fact
not substantially vested.stantially vested. as to the underlying transaction.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-If you forfeit the property after you have in-Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo- erty in an arm's-length transaction, include included its value in income, your loss is theration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a your income as compensation for the year ofamount you paid for the property minus anyshare. At the time of the sale the fair market sale the amount realized minus the amount youamount you realized on the forfeiture.value of the stock is $100 a share. Under the paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial You cannot make this choice for a non- erty in an arm's-length transaction for otherrisk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of statutory stock option. property that is not substantially vested, treat thelosing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not
CAUTION
! new property as if it were substituted for thesubstantially vested when it is transferred, so exchanged property.you do not include any amount in your income in
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year How to make the choice. You make the
tory stock option to a related person is not con-period, the fair market value of the stock is $200 choice by filing a written statement with the Inter-
sidered an arm's-length transaction. Seea share. You must include $19,000 in your in- nal Revenue Service Center where you file your Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of acome [100 shares ×  ($200 fair market value − return. You must file this statement no later than related person.$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor- 30 days after the date the property was trans-poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxable If you sell the property in a transaction that isferred. A copy of the statement must be attachedto you as additional compensation during the not at arm's length, include in your income asto your tax return for the year the property wasperiod the stock can be forfeited. compensation for the year of sale the total of anytransferred. You also must give a copy of this money you received and the fair market value ofstatement to the person for whom you per-Substantially vested. Property is substan- any substantially vested property you receivedformed the services and, if someone other thantially vested when: on the sale. In addition, you will have to reportyou received the property, to that person. income when the original property becomes• It is transferable, or You must sign the statement and indicate on substantially vested, as if you still held it. Report
• It is not subject to a substantial risk of it that you are making the choice under section as compensation its fair market value minus the
forfeiture. (You do not have a good 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state- total of the amount you paid for the property and
chance of losing it.) the amount included in your income from thement must contain all of the following informa-
earlier sale.tion.Transferable property. Property is trans-
• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge your Example. In 2007, you paid your employer
interest in the property to any person (other than cation number. $50 for a share of stock that had a fair marketthe transferor), and if the person receiving your value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until• A description of each property for whichinterest in the property is not required to give up 2010. In 2009, you sold the stock to your spouseyou are making the choice.the property, or its value, if the substantial risk of for $10 in a transaction not at arm's length. Youforfeiture occurs. • The date or dates on which the property had compensation of $10 from this transaction.
was transferred and the tax year for which In 2010, when the stock had a fair market valueSubstantial risk of forfeiture. A substan-
you are making the choice. of $120, it became substantially vested. Fortial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the
2010, you must report additional compensationproperty transferred depend on performing (or • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-
not performing) substantial services, or on a of $60, figured as follows:erty.condition related to the transfer, and the possi-
• The fair market value at the time of trans- Fair market value of stock at timebility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
of substantial vesting ....... . $120fer (ignoring restrictions except those thatnot satisfied.
Minus: Amount paid for stock .. . $50will never lapse) of each property for
Minus: Compensation previouslyExample. The Spin Corporation transfers to which you are making the choice. included in income from sale toyou as compensation for services 100 shares of • Any amount that you paid for the property. spouse ................. . 10 −60its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the Additional income $60terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock to • A statement that you have provided copies
the corporation at $100 a share if you leave your to the appropriate persons.
job for any reason within 3 years from the date of
Inherited property not substantially vested.transfer. You must perform substantial services Dividends received on restricted stock. If you inherit property not substantially vested atover a period of time and you must resell the
Dividends you receive on restricted stock arestock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard- the time of the decedent's death, any income
treated as compensation and not as dividendless of its value) if you do not perform the serv- you receive from the property is considered in-
income. Your employer should include theseices, so your rights to the stock are subject to a come in respect of a decedent and is taxed
payments on your Form W-2. If they also aresubstantial risk of forfeiture. according to the rules for restricted property
reported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and received for services. For information about in-
Distributions, you should list them on Schedule come in respect of a decedent, see PublicationChoosing to include in income for year of
559.B (Form 1040A or 1040) with a statement thattransfer. You can choose to include the value
Publication 525 (2010) Page 13

Page 14 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
order that you turn over to the order are not U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who
included in your income. works in the United States for a foreign govern-Special Rules for 
ment, an international organization, a foreign
Example. You are a member of a church embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustCertain Employees
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You include your salary in your income.
renounce any claims to your earnings and turnThis part of the publication deals with special Social security and Medicare taxes. Youover to the order any salaries or wages yourules for people in certain types of employment: are exempt from social security and Medicareearn. You are a registered nurse, so your ordermembers of the clergy, members of religious employee taxes if you are employed in theassigns you to work in a hospital that is anorders, people working for foreign employers, United States by an international organization orassociated institution of the church. However,military personnel, and volunteers. a foreign government. However, you must payyou remain under the general direction and con- self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-trol of the order. You are considered to be anClergy ices performed in the United States, evenagent of the order and any wages you earn at though you are not self-employed. This rule alsothe hospital that you turn over to your order areIf you are a member of the clergy, you must applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingnot included in your income.include in your income offerings and fees you wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, ernment.Services performed outside the order. Ifmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the you are directed to work outside the order, your Employees of international organizations oroffering is made to the religious institution, it is services are not an exercise of duties required foreign governments. Your compensationnot taxable to you. by the order unless they meet both of the follow- for official services to an international organiza-If you are a member of a religious organiza- ing requirements. tion is exempt from federal income tax if you aretion and you give your outside earnings to the
not a citizen of the United States or you are a• They are the kind of services that are ordi-organization, you still must include the earnings
citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you arenarily the duties of members of the order.in your income. However, you may be entitled to
a citizen of the United States).a charitable contribution deduction for the • They are part of the duties that you must Your compensation for official services to aamount paid to the organization. See Publica- exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious foreign government is exempt from federal in-tion 526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see order as its agent. come tax if all of the following are true.Members of Religious Orders, later.
If you are an employee of a third party, the • You are not a citizen of the United StatesPension. A pension or retirement pay for a services you perform for the third party will not or you are a citizen of the Philippinesmember of the clergy usually is treated as any be considered directed or required of you by the (whether or not you are a citizen of theother pension or annuity. It must be reported on order. Amounts you receive for these services United States).lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a are included in your income, even if you haveand 12b of Form 1040A. • Your work is like the work done by em-taken a vow of poverty.
ployees of the United States in foreign
countries.Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of aHousing religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. • The foreign government gives an equalHe renounces all claims to his earnings andSpecial rules for housing apply to members of exemption to employees of the Unitedturns over his earnings to the order.the clergy. Under these rules, you do not include States in its country.Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructedin your income the rental value of a home (in- by the superiors of the order to get a job with acluding utilities) or a designated housing allow- Waiver of alien status. If you are an alienprivate tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-ance provided to you as part of your pay. who works for a foreign government or interna-ployee of the school, and, at his request, theHowever, the exclusion cannot be more than the tional organization and you file a waiver underschool made the salary payments directly to thereasonable pay for your service. If you pay for section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-order.the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des- ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salaryBecause Mark is an employee of the school,ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. you receive after the date you file the waiver ishe is performing services for the school ratherThe home or allowance must be provided as not exempt under this rule. However, it may bethan as an agent of the order. The wages Markcompensation for your services as an ordained, exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-earns working for the school are included in hislicensed, or commissioned minister. However, cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for moreincome.you must include the rental value of the home or information about treaties.
the housing allowance as earnings from Nonwage income. This exemption appliesExample 2. Gene Dennis is a member of aself-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040), only to employees' wages, salaries, and fees.religious order who, as a condition of member-Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to the Pensions and other income do not qualify for thisship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.self-employment tax. For more information, see exemption.All claims to his earnings are renounced. GenePublication 517, Social Security and Other Infor- received permission from the order to establishmation for Members of the Clergy and Religious Employment abroad. For information on thea private practice as a psychologist and coun-Workers. tax treatment of income earned abroad, seesels members of religious orders as well as Publication 54.nonmembers. Although the order reviews
Members of Religious Orders Gene's budget annually, Gene controls not only
Militarythe details of his practice but also the means byIf you are a member of a religious order who has which his work as a psychologist is accom-taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings Payments you receive as a member of a militaryplished.that you renounce and turn over to the order service generally are taxed as wages except forGene's private practice as a psychologistdepends on whether your services are per- retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.does not make him an agent of the religiousformed for the order. Allowances generally are not taxed. For moreorder. The psychological services provided by information on the tax treatment of military al-Gene are not the type of services that are pro-Services performed for the order. If you are lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,vided by the order. The income Gene earns as aperforming the services as an agent of the order Armed Forces' Tax Guide.psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.in the exercise of duties required by the order,
Gene must include in his income the earningsdo not include in your income the amounts Differential wage payments. Any payments
from his private practice.turned over to the order. made to you by an employer during the time you
If your order directs you to perform services are performing service in the uniformed services
for another agency of the supervising church or are treated as compensation. These wages areForeign Employer
an associated institution, you are considered to subject to income tax withholding and are re-
be performing the services as an agent of the Special rules apply if you work for a foreign ported on Form W-2. See the discussion under
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an employer. Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Page 14 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 15 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement not include in your income the following benefitsVolunteers
pay is based on age or length of service, it is you receive from a state or local government.
taxable and must be included in your income as The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a • Rebates or reductions of property or in-a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or volunteer is covered in the following discus- come taxes you receive because of serv-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not sions. ices you performed as a volunteerinclude in your income the amount of any reduc- firefighter or emergency medical re-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivetion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a sponder.as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadersurvivor annuity for your spouse or children
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,under the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec- • Payments you receive because of serv-and clothing are exempt from tax.tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan. ices you performed as a volunteer
For a more detailed discussion of survivor firefighter or emergency medical re-Taxable allowances. The following al-
annuities, see Publication 575. sponder, up to $30 for each month youlowances must be included in your income and
provided services.reported as wages.Disability. If you are retired on disability,
see Military and Government Disability Pen- The excluded income reduces any related tax or• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. contribution deduction.children while you are a volunteer leader
training in the United States.Qualified reservist distribution (QRD). If
• Living allowances designated by the Di-you received a QRD of all or part of the balance
rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-in your health flexible spending account be-
Business and pensation. These are allowances forcause you are a reservist and you have been
personal items such as domestic help,ordered or called to active duty for a period of Investment Incomelaundry and clothing maintenance, enter-180 days or more, the QRD is treated as wages
tainment and recreation, transportation,and is reportable on Form W-2. This section provides information on the treat-and other miscellaneous expenses. ment of income from certain rents and royalties,Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in- • Leave allowances. and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,
rations.regulation, or administrative practice adminis- • Readjustment allowances or termination
tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs payments. These are considered received Income from sales at auctions, includ-
(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or by you when credited to your account. ing online auctions, may be business
their families are not taxable. income. For more information, see
CAUTION
!
Publication 334.• Education, training, and subsistence al- Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
lowances. volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment
allowance during his period of service, to be paid Rents From Personal• Disability compensation and pension pay- to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofments for disabilities paid either to veter- Propertyduty. Although the allowance is not available toans or their families. him until the end of his service, Gary must in- If you rent out personal property, such as equip-• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is ment or vehicles, how you report your incomeliving. credited to his account. and expenses is generally determined by:
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-lost their sight or the use of their limbs. you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include ness, and
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi- • Whether or not the rental activity is con-income as wages.dends paid either to veterans or their ben- ducted for profit.eficiaries, including the proceeds of a National Senior Service Corps programs. Generally, if your primary purpose is income orveteran's endowment policy paid before Do not include in your income amounts you profit and you are involved in the rental activitydeath. receive for supportive services or reimburse- with continuity and regularity, your rental activityments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-• Interest on insurance dividends left on de- is a business. See Publication 535, Businesslowing programs.posit with the VA. Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for
• Retired Senior Volunteer Program• Benefits under a dependent-care assis- both business and not-for-profit activities.
(RSVP).tance program.
Reporting business income and expenses.• Foster Grandparent Program.• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a If you are in the business of renting personalmember of the Armed Forces who died • Senior Companion Program. property, report your income and expenses onafter September 10, 2001. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The
form instructions have information on how to• Payments made under the compensated Service Corps of Retired Executives
complete them.work therapy program. (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-
ive services or reimbursements for• Any bonus payment by a state or political Reporting nonbusiness income. If you areout-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notsubdivision because of service in a com- not in the business of renting personal property,include these amounts in gross income.bat zone. report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.
Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include in List the type and amount of the income on theNote. If, in a previous year, you received a your income any reimbursements you receive dotted line next to line 21.bonus payment by a state or political subdivision for transportation, meals, and other expensesbecause of service in a combat zone that you you have in training for, or actually providing, Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If youincluded in your income, you can file a claim for volunteer federal income tax counseling for the rent personal property for profit, include yourrefund of the taxes on that income. Use Form elderly (TCE). rental expenses in the total amount you enter on1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax You can deduct as a charitable contribution Form 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount andReturn, to file the claim. File a separate form for your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36.each tax year involved. Generally, you must file taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- If you do not rent personal property for profit,your claim within 3 years after the date you filed tance (VITA) program. your deductions are limited and you cannot re-your original return or within 2 years after the
port a loss to offset other income. See Activitydate you paid the tax, whichever is later. See the Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi-
not for profit under Other Income in the discus-Instructions for Form 1040X for information on cal responders. If you are a volunteer
sion of Miscellaneous Income, later.filing that form. firefighter or emergency medical responder, do
Publication 525 (2010) Page 15

Page 16 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credits of a partnership are passed through to your share of these items on your return. Gener-Royalties
ally, the items passed through to you will in-the partners based on each partner's distributive
crease or decrease the basis of your Sshare of these items. For more information, seeRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,
corporation stock as appropriate.Publication 541.and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary
income. S corporation return. An S corporation mustPartner's distributive share. Your distribu-  You generally report royalties in Part I of file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxtive share of partnership income, gains, losses,Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income Return for an S Corporation. This shows thedeductions, or credits generally is based on theand Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, results of the corporation's operations for its taxpartnership agreement. You must report yourgas, or mineral interest or are in business as a year and the items of income, losses, deduc-distributive share of these items on your returnself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report tions, or credits that affect the shareholders'whether or not they actually are distributed toyour income and expenses on Schedule C or individual income tax returns.you. However, your distributive share of theSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba- Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You should
sis of your partnership interest at the end of theCopyrights and patents. Royalties from receive from the S corporation in which you are
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, partnership year in which the losses took place. a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form
and similar property, or from patents on inven- 1120S), Shareholder's Share of Income, Deduc-Partnership agreement. The partnershiptions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use tions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-agreement usually covers the distribution ofyour work over a specified period of time. Royal- come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the Sprofits, losses, and other items. However, if theties generally are based on the number of units corporation for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1agreement does not state how a specific item ofsold, such as the number of books, tickets to a for your records. Do not attach it to your Formgain or loss will be shared, or the allocationperformance, or machines sold. 1040.stated in the agreement does not have substan-
tial economic effect, your distributive share is Shareholder's return. Your distributive shareOil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from figured according to your interest in the partner- of the items of income, losses, deductions, oroil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount
ship. credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-you receive when natural resources are ex-
arately on your Form 1040. The character oftracted from your property. The royalties are Partnership return. Although a partnership these items generally is the same as if you hadbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and generally pays no tax, it must file an information realized or incurred them personally.are paid to you by a person or company who return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipleases the property from you. Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)Income. This shows the result of the partner- will tell you where to report each item ofDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco- ship's operations for its tax year and the items income on your individual return.
TIPnomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas that must be passed through to the partners.
wells, you can recover your investment through Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). You should re- Distributions. Generally, S corporation dis-the depletion allowance. For information on this ceive from each partnership in which you are a tributions are a nontaxable return of your basissubject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535. member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), in the corporation stock. However, in certain
Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, cases, part of the distributions may be taxable
stances, you can treat amounts you receive etc., showing your share of income, deductions, as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- credits, and tax preference items of the partner- capital gain, or as both. The corporation's distri-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for your butions may be in the form of cash or property.
than as royalty income. For information about records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040. More information.   For more information, seegain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
the Instructions for Form 1120S.see Publication 544. Partner's return. You generally must report
partnership items on your individual return theSale of property interest. If you sell your same way as they are reported on the partner-complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, ship return. That is, if the partnership had athe amount you receive is considered payment Sickness and capital gain, you report your share on Schedulefor the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-income. Under certain circumstances, the sale Injury Benefitsship ordinary income on Schedule E (Formis subject to capital gain or loss treatment on 1040).Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information Generally, you must report as income anyon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) amount you receive for personal injury or sick-of Publication 544. will tell you where to report each item of ness through an accident or health plan that is
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, income on your individual return. paid for by your employer. If both you and your
TIP
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for employer pay for the plan, only the amount you
the life of the property, you have made a lease or receive that is due to your employer's paymentsQualified joint venture. If you and youra sublease, and any cash you receive for the is reported as income. However, certain pay-spouse each materially participate as the onlyassignment of other interests in the property is ments may not be taxable to you. For informa-members of a jointly owned and operated busi-ordinary income subject to a depletion allow- tion on nontaxable payments, see Military andness, and you file a joint return for the tax year,ance. Government Disability Pensions and Otheryou can make a joint election to be treated as a
Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus-Part of future production sold. If you own qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.
sion.mineral property but sell part of the future pro- To make this election, you must divide all items
duction, you generally treat the money you re- of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at- Do not report as income any amounts
ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a tributable to the business between you and your paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your spouse in accordance with your respective inter- penses you incurred after the plan was
TIP
income or take depletion based on it. ests in the venture. Each of you must file a established.
separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (FormWhen production begins, you include all the
1040).proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that an accident or health plan, do not include any
amount to arrive at your taxable income from the amounts you receive from the plan for personalS Corporation Income
property. injury or sickness as income on your tax return.
In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-
its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- penses you deducted in an earlier year, you mayPartnership Income
tions, and credits of the corporation are passed have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
through to the shareholders based on eachA partnership generally is not a taxable entity. ment in your income. See Recoveries under
shareholder's pro rata share. You must reportThe income, gains, losses, deductions, and Miscellaneous Income, later.
Page 16 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 17 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered 2. You were a member of a listed govern- Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxes
ment service or its reserve component, or paid on your pension for 2007, 2008, and 2009.by an accident or health insurance plan through
were under a binding written commitment However, under the special limitation period,a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-
to become a member, on September 24, you can also file a claim for 2006 as long as youance premiums was not included in your in-
1975. file the claim by August 8, 2011. You cannot filecome, you are not considered to have paid the
a claim for 2004 and 2005 because those taxpremiums and you must include any benefits 3. You receive the disability payments for a years began more than 5 years before the deter-you receive in your income. If the amount of the combat-related injury. This is a personal mination.premiums was included in your income, you are injury or sickness that:considered to have paid the premiums and any
Terrorist attack or military action. Do notbenefits you receive are not taxable. a. Results directly from armed conflict, include in your income disability payments you
b. Takes place while you are engaged in receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-Disability Pensions extra-hazardous service, rorist or military action.
A terrorist action is one that is directedIf you retired on disability, you must include in c. Takes place under conditions simulat- against the United States or any of its alliesincome any disability pension you receive under ing war, including training exercises (including a multinational force in which thea plan that is paid for by your employer. You such as maneuvers, or United States is participating). A military actionmust report your taxable disability payments as d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war. is one that involves the armed forces of thewages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A
United States and is a result of actual oruntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- 4. You would be entitled to receive disability threatened violence or aggression against themum retirement age generally is the age at compensation from the Department of Vet- United States or any of its allies, but does notwhich you can first receive a pension or annuity erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica- include training exercises.if you are not disabled. tion for it. Your exclusion under this
You may be entitled to a tax credit if condition is equal to the amount you would Long-Term Careyou were permanently and totally dis- be entitled to receive from the VA.
Insurance Contractsabled when you retired. For informa-
TIP
tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for Pension based on years of service. If you Long-term care insurance contracts generallythe Elderly or the Disabled. receive a disability pension based on years of are treated as accident and health insuranceBeginning on the day after you reach mini- service, you generally must include it in your contracts. Amounts you receive from themmum retirement age, payments you receive are income. However, if the pension qualifies for the (other than policyholder dividends or premiumtaxable as a pension or annuity. Report the exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- refunds) generally are excludable from incomepayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or cussed earlier), do not include in income the part as amounts received for personal injury or sick-on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more of your pension that you would have received if ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madeinformation on pensions and annuities, see Pub- the pension had been based on a percentage of on a per diem or other periodic basis under alication 575. disability. You must include the rest of your pen- long-term care insurance contract, you must file
sion in your income. Form 8853 with your return.Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you A long-term care insurance contract is anRetroactive VA determination. If you retirereceive payments from a retirement or insurance contract that only provides coveragefrom the armed services based on years of serv-profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- for qualified long-term care services. The con-ice and are later given a retroactive serv-bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a tract must:ice-connected disability rating by the VA, yourdisability pension. The payments must be re-
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- • Be guaranteed renewable,ported as a pension or annuity.
cluded from income up to the amount of VA • Not provide for a cash surrender value ordisability benefits you would have been entitledAccrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- other money that can be paid, assigned,to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxbility, any lump-sum payment you receive for pledged, or borrowed,paid on the excludable amount (subject to theaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. The
statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-payment is not a disability payment. Include it in • Provide that refunds, other than refunds
turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearyour income in the tax year you receive it. on the death of the insured or complete
during the retroactive period. surrender or cancellation of the contract,
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever- and dividends under the contract may be
Military and Government ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- used only to reduce future premiums or
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severanceDisability Pensions increase future benefits, and
benefit from your income. However, you must • Generally not pay or reimburse expensesCertain military and government disability pen- include in your income any lump-sum readjust- incurred for services or items that wouldsions are not taxable. ment or other nondisability severance payment be reimbursed under Medicare, exceptyou received on release from active duty, even if where Medicare is a secondary payer orService-connected disability. You may be you are later given a retroactive disability rating the contract makes per diem or other peri-able to exclude from income amounts you re- by the VA. odic payments without regard to ex-ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance
Special statute of limitations. Generally, penses.for personal injury or sickness resulting from
under the statute of limitations a claim for creditactive service in one of the following govern-
or refund must be filed within 3 years from thement services. Qualified long-term care services. Qualifiedtime a return was filed. However, if you receive a long-term care services are:• The armed forces of any country. retroactive service-connected disability rating
determination, the statute of limitations is ex- • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
tended by a 1-year period beginning on the date peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-Administration.
of the determination. This 1-year extended pe- tative services, and maintenance and
• The Public Health Service. riod applies to claims for credit or refund filed personal care services, and
after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any• The Foreign Service. • Required by a chronically ill individual andtax year that began more than 5 years before the provided pursuant to a plan of care pre-date of the determination.Conditions for exclusion. Do not include scribed by a licensed health care practi-the disability payments in your income if any of tioner.Example. You retired in 2004 and receive athe following conditions apply.
pension based on your years of service. On
1. You were entitled to receive a disability August 6, 2010, you receive a determination of Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in-
payment before September 25, 1975. service-connected disability retroactive to 2004. dividual is one who has been certified by a
Publication 525 (2010) Page 17

Page 18 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
licensed health care practitioner within the previ- your survivors' benefit that is a continuation of The premium assistance is not included in
ous 12 months as one of the following. your gross income. However, if your modifiedthe workers' compensation is exempt from tax.
adjusted gross income (AGI) is more than• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly) butOther Sicknessunable to perform at least two activities of not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if marrieddaily living without substantial assistance and Injury Benefits filing jointly), your income tax for the tax year isdue to a loss of functional capacity. Activi- increased by a percentage of the premium as-In addition to disability pensions and annuities,ties of daily living are eating, toileting, sistance. Your modified AGI is your AGI on Formyou may receive other payments for sickness ortransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- 1040, line 38 or Form 1040NR, line 37 plus anyinjury.nence. foreign earned income exclusion, foreign hous-
• An individual who requires substantial su- ing exclusion, foreign housing deduction, andRailroad sick pay. Payments you receive aspervision to be protected from threats to exclusion of income for bona fide residents ofsick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-health and safety due to severe cognitive American Samoa and Puerto Rico. The percent-surance Act are taxable and you must includeimpairment. age that increases your tax is determined bythem in your income. However, do not include dividing the excess modified AGI (amount overthem in your income if they are for an on-the-job $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly)) byLimit on exclusion. The exclusion for pay- injury. $20,000 ($40,000 if married filing jointly). If yourments made on a per diem  or other periodic modified AGI is more than $145,000 ($290,000basis under a long-term care insurance contract Black lung benefit payments. These pay- if married filing jointly), your income tax for theis subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total ments are similar to workers' compensation and tax year is increased by the premium assis-of these payments and any accelerated death generally are not taxable. tance. Include the increase in your income taxbenefits made on a per diem or other periodic on Form 1040, line 60 or Form 1040NR, line 59.basis under a life insurance contract because COBRA premium assistance. The Consoli- On the dotted line next to that line, enter thethe insured is chronically ill. (For more informa- dated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of amount of the tax and identify it as ªCOBRA.ºtion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In- 1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were cov- You may elect to permanently waive the rightsurance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous ered under a group health plan and you would to the premium assistance. You will not receiveIncome, later.) lose coverage because of a qualifying event, the premium assistance and you will not have toUnder this limit, the excludable amount for you should be allowed an opportunity to elect include the assistance in your income tax if yourany period is figured by subtracting any reim- COBRA continuation health coverage under the modified AGI is more than $125,000 ($250,000bursement received (through insurance or oth- plan. If there was no available election, your if married filing jointly). To make this election,erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care employer or the plan was subject to an excise give a signed and dated notification (include aservices during the period from the larger of the tax. You can be required to pay the full premium reference to ªpermanent waiverº) to the personfollowing amounts. for the COBRA continuation coverage. to whom premiums are payable.
If you are an assistance eligible individual,• The cost of qualified long-term care serv- For more information see Notice 2009-27
you pay 35% of the premium otherwise payableices during the period. available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-16_irb/ar09.
for this coverage and are treated as having paid html.• The dollar amount for the period ($290 per the full premium. You are an assistance eligibleday for any period in 2010). Federal Employees' Compensation Actindividual if:
(FECA). Payments received under this Act forSee Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions • You are a qualified beneficiary as the re- personal injury or sickness, including paymentsfor more information. sult of an involuntary termination that oc- to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.
curred during the period beginning on However, you are taxed on amounts you receiveWorkers' Compensation September 1, 2008, and ending on May under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45
31, 2010, or you had a reduction of hours days while a claim is being decided. Report thisAmounts you receive as workers' compensation during that period, which was followed by income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orfor an occupational sickness or injury are fully a termination of your employment that oc- on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sickexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers' curred after March 1, 2010, and before leave while a claim is being processed is taxablecompensation act or a statute in the nature of a June 1, 2010, and must be included in your income as wages.workers' compensation act. The exemption also
• You are eligible for COBRA continuationapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how- If part of the payments you receive
health coverage related to the qualifyingever, does not apply to retirement plan benefits under FECA reduces your social se-
event occurring during the period begin-you receive based on your age, length of serv- curity or equivalent railroad retirement
CAUTION
!
ning on September 1, 2008, andice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you benefits received, that part is considered social
retired because of an occupational sickness or security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-• You elect the coverage.injury. fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
taxability of these benefits, see  Other IncomeA qualified beneficiary is generally any individ-If part of your workers' compensation under Miscellaneous Income, later.ual who is covered under a group health plan onreduces your social security or
the day before the involuntary termination. This You can deduct the amount you spend to buyequivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
!
includes the covered employee, the employee's back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligiblereceived, that part is considered social security
spouse, and the employee's dependent. for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and
a miscellaneous deduction subject to themay be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability The premium assistance (the 65% reduction
2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ifof these benefits, see Other Income under Mis- of the premium) applies to the first period of
you buy back sick leave in the same year youcellaneous Income, later. coverage beginning after February 16, 2009.
used it, the amount reduces your taxable sickThe reduction applies until the earliest of:
leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.Return to work. If you return to work after • The first date the assistance eligible indi-qualifying for workers' compensation, salary vidual becomes eligible for other group Qualified Indian health care benefit. Forpayments you receive for performing light duties health plan coverage or Medicare cover- benefits and coverage provided after March 23,are taxable as wages. age, 2010, the value of any qualified Indian health
Disability pension. If your disability pension care benefit is not taxable. These benefits in-• The date that is 15 months after the firstis paid under a statute that provides benefits clude any health service or benefits provided byday of the first month for which the re-only to employees with service-connected disa- the Indian Health Service, amounts to reimburseduced premium applies to the individual,bilities, part of it may be workers' compensation. medical care expenses provided by an IndianorThat part is exempt from tax. The rest of your tribe, coverage under accident or health insur-
• The date the individual ceases to be eligi-pension, based on years of service, is taxable as ance, and any other medical care provided by an
ble for COBRA continuation coverage.pension or annuity income. If you die, the part of Indian tribe.
Page 18 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 19 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other compensation. Many other amounts regular income tax withholding. However,Bartering
you receive as compensation for sickness or backup withholding will apply in certain circum-
injury are not taxable. These include the follow- stances to ensure that income tax is collected onBartering is an exchange of property or services.
ing amounts. this income.You must include in your income, at the time
Under backup withholding, the barter ex-received, the fair market value of property or• Compensatory damages you receive for change must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofservices you receive in bartering. If you ex-physical injury or physical sickness, the income if:change services with another person and youwhether paid in a lump sum or in periodic both have agreed ahead of time on the value ofpayments. See Court awards and dam- • You do not give the barter exchange yourthe services, that value will be accepted as fairages under Other Income, later. taxpayer identification number (generally amarket value unless the value can be shown to social security number or an employer• Benefits you receive under an accident or be otherwise. identification number), orhealth insurance policy on which either  Generally, you report this income on Sched-
you paid the premiums or your employer • The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However,
paid the premiums but you had to include you gave it an incorrect identification num-if the barter involves an exchange of something
them in your income. ber. other than services, such as in Example 4 be-
low, you may have to use another form or sched-• Disability benefits you receive for loss of If you join a barter exchange, you must certifyule instead.income or earning capacity as a result of under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- identification number is correct and that you areExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-icy. not subject to backup withholding. If you do notney who performs legal services for a client, a make this certification, backup withholding may• Compensation you receive for permanent small corporation. The corporation gives you begin immediately. The barter exchange willloss or loss of use of a part or function of shares of its stock as payment for your services. give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayeryour body, or for your permanent disfig- You must include the fair market value of the Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-urement. This compensation must be shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- ilar form, for you to make this certification. Thebased only on the injury and not on the ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive barter exchange will withhold tax only up to theperiod of your absence from work. These them. amount of any cash paid to you or deposited inbenefits are not taxable even if your em- your account and any scrip or credit issued toExample 2. You are a self-employed ac-ployer pays for the accident and health you (and converted to cash).countant. You and a house painter are membersplan that provides these benefits.
of a barter club. Members get in touch with each If tax is withheld from your barter in-other directly and bargain for the value of theReimbursement for medical care. A reim- come, the barter exchange will reportservices to be performed. In return for account-bursement for medical care generally is not tax- the amount of tax withheld on Form
TIPing services you provided, the house painterable. However, it may reduce your medical 1099-B, or similar statement.painted your home. You must report as yourexpense deduction. If you receive reimburse- income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formment for an expense you deducted in an earlier 1040) the fair market value of the house painting Canceled Debtsyear, see Recoveries, later. services you received. The house painter mustIf you receive an ªadvance reimbursementº Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled orinclude in income the fair market value of theor ªloanº for future medical expenses from your forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youaccounting services you provided.employer without regard to whether you suffered must include the canceled amount in your in-
a personal injury or sickness or incurred medical come. You have no income from the canceledExample 3. You are self-employed and aexpenses, that amount is included in your in- debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtmember of a barter club. The club uses creditcome, whether or not you incur uninsured medi- includes any indebtedness for which you areunits as a means of exchange. It adds creditcal expenses during the year. liable or which attaches to property you hold.units to your account for goods or services you
Reimbursements received under your em- If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report theprovide to members, which you can use to
ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is apurchase goods or services offered by other
plan was established are included in income. business debt, report the amount on Schedule Cmembers of the barter club. The club subtracts
Amounts you receive under a reimburse- or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedulecredit units from your account when you receive
ment plan that provides for the payment of un- F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, ifgoods or services from other members. You
used reimbursement amounts in cash or other the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).must include in your income the value of the
benefits are included in your income. However, You may be able to elect to recognize acredit units that are added to your account, even
a qualified HSA distribution from a health flexible canceled business debt in income over athough you may not actually receive goods or
spending account or health reimbursement ac- 5-tax-year period if the income is realized in aservices from other members until a later tax
count can be made to a health savings account. reacquisition in 2009 or 2010. For information onyear.
For details, see Publication 969. this election, see Revenue Procedure 2009-37
available at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-36_IRB/ar01. Reimbursements received under your em- Example 4. You own a small apartment
html.ployer's plan of the amount paid for nonprescrip- building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of
tion medicines and drugs (such as allergy an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art
Form 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentmedicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are she created. You must report as rental income
agency, financial institution, or credit unionnot included in income. However, reimburse- on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orments of the amount paid for dietary supple- of the artwork, and the artist must report as
more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-ments (such as vitamins) that are merely income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isbeneficial to your general health are included in 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.
shown in box 2.income. Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you Interest included in canceled debt. If anyexchanged property or services through a barter interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofexchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from Broker canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestand Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not youMiscellaneous Income statement from the barter exchange should be must include the interest portion of the canceledsent to you by February 15, 2011. It should showThis section discusses various types of income. debt in your income depends on whether thethe value of cash, property, services, credits, orYou may have taxable income from certain interest would be deductible if you paid it. Seescrip you received from exchanges during 2010.transactions even if no money changes hands. Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.For example, you may have taxable income if If the interest would not be deductible (such
you lend money at a below-market interest rate Backup withholding. The income you re- as interest on a personal loan), include in your
or have a debt you owe canceled. ceive from bartering generally is not subject to income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If
Publication 525 (2010) Page 19

Page 20 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the interest would be deductible (such as on a You do not have income if your student loan increased availability of health services in un-
business loan), include in your income the net derserved or health professional shortage areasis canceled after you agreed to this provision
amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown are not taxable.and then performed the services required. To
in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box qualify, the loan must have been made by: The provision relating to the ªother3). state loan repayment or loan forgive-1. The Federal Government, a state or local ness programº was added to this exclu-Discounted mortgage loan. If your financial
TIP government, or an instrumentality, agency, sion for amounts received in tax years beginninginstitution offers a discount for the early payment or subdivision thereof, after December 31, 2008. If you included theseof your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation amounts in income in 2009, you should file ancount is canceled debt. You must include the
amended tax return to exclude this income. Seethat has assumed control of a state,canceled amount in your income.
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Incomecounty, or municipal hospital, and whose
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi- Tax Return, and its instructions for details onemployees are considered public employ-tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage filing.ees under state law, or(recourse debt), and you are relieved of the
3. An educational institution:mortgage when you dispose of the property, you Deductible debt. You do not have income
may realize gain or loss up to the fair market from the cancellation of a debt if your payment ofa. Under an agreement with an entity de-value of the property. To the extent the mort- the debt would be deductible. This exceptionscribed in (1) or (2) that provided thegage discharge exceeds the fair market value of applies only if you use the cash method of ac-funds to the institution to make the loan,the property, it is income from discharge of in- counting. For more information, see chapter 5 ofordebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion Publication 334.
under Excluded debt, later. Report any income b. As part of a program of the institution
from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness Price reduced after purchase. Generally, ifdesigned to encourage students todebt that does not qualify for exclusion as other the seller reduces the amount of debt you oweserve in occupations or areas with un-income on Form 1040, line 21. for property you purchased, you do not havemet needs and under which the serv- income from the reduction. The reduction of theices provided are for or under theYou may be able to exclude part of the debt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentmortgage relief on your principal resi- direction of a governmental unit or a and reduces your basis in the property.dence. See Excluded debt, later. tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-
TIP
tion (defined later). Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled If you are not personally liable for a mort-
debt in your gross income in the following situa-gage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved A loan to refinance a qualified student loan tions.of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-
also will qualify if it was made by an educationalerty (such as through foreclosure or reposses- • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy caseinstitution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-sion), that relief is included in the amount you under Title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub-zation under its program designed as describedrealize. You may have a taxable gain if the lication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. in (3)(b) earlier.amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basis
• The debt is canceled when you are insol-in the property. Report any gain on nonbusiness An educational institution is an organization
vent. However, you cannot exclude anyproperty as a capital gain. with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu- amount of canceled debt that is more thanSee Publication 4681 for more information. larly enrolled body of students in attendance at the amount by which you are insolvent.the place where the educational activities areStockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in See Publication 908.carried on.a corporation and the corporation cancels or • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3constructive distribution that is generally divi- poration, community chest, fund, or foundation of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. dend income to you. For more information, see organized and operated exclusively for one or
Publication 542, Corporations. more of the following purposes. • The debt is qualified real property busi-
If you are a stockholder in a corporation and ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication• Charitable.you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- 334.
tion, you generally do not realize income. This is • Educational. • The cancellation is intended as a gift.because the canceled debt is considered as a • Fostering national or international amateurcontribution to the capital of the corporation • The debt is qualified principal residencesports competition (but only if none of theequal to the amount of debt principal that you indebtedness, discussed next.organization's activities involve providingcanceled.
athletic facilities or equipment). Qualified principal residence indebted-Repayment of canceled debt. If you included ness (QPRI). This is a mortgage secured by• Literary.a canceled amount in your income and later pay your principal residence that you took out to buy,the debt, you may be able to file a claim for • Preventing cruelty to children or animals. build, or substantially improve your principal res-refund for the year the amount was included in idence. QPRI cannot be more than the cost of• Religious.income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if your principal residence plus improvements.the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still • Scientific. You must reduce the basis of your principalopen. The statute of limitations generally does residence by the amount excluded from gross• Testing for public safety.not end until 3 years after the due date of your income. To claim the exclusion, you must fileoriginal return. Form 982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due toException. You do have income if your stu-
Discharge of Indebtedness (and Section 1082dent loan was made by an educational institu-
Basis Adjustment), with your tax return.tion and is canceled because of services youExceptions performed for the institution or other organiza- Principal residence. Your principal resi-
tion that provided the funds.There are several exceptions to the inclusion of dence is the home where you ordinarily live most
canceled debt in income. These are explained of the time. You can have only one principalEducation loan repayment assistance.next. residence at any one time.Education loan repayments made to you by the
National Health Service Corps Loan RepaymentStudent loans. Certain student loans contain Amount eligible for exclusion. The maxi-
Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program), aa provision that all or part of the debt incurred to mum amount you can treat as QPRI is $2 million
state education loan repayment program eligibleattend the qualified educational institution will be ($1 million if married filing separately). You can-
for funds under the Public Health Service Act, orcanceled if you work for a certain period of time not exclude debt canceled because of services
any other state loan repayment or loan forgive-in certain professions for any of a broad class of performed for the lender or on account of any
employers. ness program that is intended to provide for the other factor not directly related to a decline in the
Page 20 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 21 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of your residence or to your financial con- Installments for life. If, as the beneficiary For information on when the proceeds
are excluded from income, see Accel-dition. under an insurance contract, you are entitled to
erated Death Benefits, later.receive the proceeds in installments for the rest
TIPLimitation. If only part of a loan is QPRI, the of your life without a refund or period-certainexclusion applies only to the extent the canceled guarantee, you figure the excluded part of each Split-dollar life insurance. Generally, aamount is more than the amount of the loan installment by dividing the amount held by the split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-immediately before the cancellation that is not insurance company by your life expectancy. If rangement between an owner and a non-ownerQPRI. there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the of a life insurance contract under which either
amount held by the insurance company for this party to the arrangement pays all or part of theExample. Your principal residence is se- purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the premiums, and one of the parties paying thecured by a debt of $1 million, of which $800,000 guarantee. premiums is entitled to recover all or part ofis QPRI. Your residence is sold for $700,000
those premiums from the proceeds of the con-and $300,000 of debt is canceled. Only Surviving spouse. If your spouse died tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimes$100,000 of the canceled debt may be excluded before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.from income (the $300,000 that was discharged ceeds paid to you because of the death of your
minus the $200,000 of nonqualified debt). spouse are received in installments, you can 1. Under the economic benefit regime, the
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in- owner of the life insurance contract is
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youHost or Hostess treated as providing current life insurance
can continue to take the exclusion. protection and other taxable economic
If you host a party or event at which sales are benefits to the non-owner of the contract.
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving Employer-owned life insurance contract. If 2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofthe event is a payment for helping a direct seller you are the policyholder of an employer-owned the life insurance contract is treated asmake sales. You must report this item as income life insurance contract, you must include in in- loaning premium payments to the owner ofat its fair market value. come any life insurance proceeds received that the contract.Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub- are more than the premiums and any other
ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject Only one of these regimes applies to any one
expenses. These expenses are deductible as to this rule if you have a trade or business, you policy. For more information, see sections
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to own a life insurance contract on the life of your 1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), employee, and you (or a related person) are a
but only up to the amount of income you receive beneficiary under the contract.
for giving the party. Endowment Contract ProceedsHowever, you may exclude the full amount of
For more information about the 50% limit for the life insurance proceeds if the following apply. An endowment contract is a policy under whichmeal and entertainment expenses, see 50% you are paid a specified amount of money on a1. Before the policy is issued, you provideLimit in Publication 463. certain date unless you die before that date, inwritten notice about the insurance to the
which case, the money is paid to your desig-employee and the employee provides writ-Life Insurance Proceeds nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inten consent to be insured.
a lump-sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifLife insurance proceeds paid to you because of 2. Either: the proceeds are more than the cost of thethe death of the insured person are not taxable policy. To determine your cost, subtract anya. The employee was your employeeunless the policy was turned over to you for a amount that you previously received under thewithin the 12-month period beforeprice. This is true even if the proceeds were paid contract and excluded from your income fromdeath, or, at the time the contract wasunder an accident or health insurance policy or the total premiums (or other consideration) paidissued, was a director or highly com-an endowment contract. However, interest in- for the contract. Include the part of the lump-sumpensated employee, orcome received as a result of life insurance pro- payment that is more than your cost in yourceeds may be taxable. b. The amount is paid to the family or des- income.
ignated beneficiary of the employee. Endowment proceeds that you choose toProceeds not received in installments. If receive in installments instead of a lump-sumdeath benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or payment at the maturity of the policy are taxedother than at regular intervals, include in your Interest option on insurance. If an insurance as an annuity. This is explained in Publicationincome only the benefits that are more than the company pays you interest only on proceeds 575. For this treatment to apply, you mustamount payable to you at the time of the insured from life insurance left on deposit, the interest choose to receive the proceeds in installmentsperson's death. If the benefit payable at death is you are paid is taxable. before receiving any part of the lump sum. Thisnot specified, you include in your income the election must be made within 60 days after theIf your spouse died before October 23, 1986,benefit payments that are more than the present lump-sum payment first becomes payable toand you chose to receive only the interest fromvalue of the payments at the time of death. you.your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interest
exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply.Proceeds received in installments. If you re-
If you later decide to receive the proceeds fromceive life insurance proceeds in installments, Accelerated Death Benefitsthe policy in installments, you can take the inter-you can exclude part of each installment from
est exclusion from the time you begin to receiveyour income. Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-the installments.To determine the excluded part, divide the efits under a life insurance contract or viatical
amount held by the insurance company (gener- settlement before the insured's death are ex-Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-ally the total lump sum payable at the death of cluded from income if the insured is terminally order a life insurance policy for cash, you mustthe insured person) by the number of install- chronically ill.include in income any proceeds that are morements to be paid. Include anything over this
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-excluded part in your income as interest.
general, your cost (or investment in the contract) ment of any part of the death benefit under a life
is the total of premiums that you paid for the lifeExample. The face amount of the policy is insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re- vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that wereceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. who regularly engages in the business of buying
not included in your income.The excluded part of each installment is $625 or taking assignment of life insurance contracts
($75,000 ÷  120), or $7,500 for an entire year. You should receive a Form 1099-R showing on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-
The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-
$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
you. 1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Revenue Code.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 21

Page 22 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exclusion for terminal illness. Accelerated 1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the work- the rules for Itemized Deduction Recoveries,
death benefits are fully excludable if the insured sheet in the 2010 Form 1040 instructions for line discussed later.
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who 10 to figure the amount (if any) to include in your If you claimed them as part of your standard
has been certified by a physician as having an income. See Itemized Deduction Recoveries, deduction, any recovery of the net disaster loss
illness or physical condition that can reasonably later, for when you must use Worksheet 2 on is included in income. For information on net
be expected to result in death within 24 months page 25 of this publication. disaster losses, see Disaster Area Losses  in
from the date of the certification. Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, andIf you could choose to deduct for a tax year
Thefts.either:Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured
Motor vehicle tax. You may have been able• State and local income taxes, oris a chronically ill individual who is not terminally
to deduct as part of your itemized deductions orill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis • State and local general sales taxes, then your standard deduction, state or local sales orof costs incurred for qualified long-term care
excise taxes for certain new motor vehicles pur-the maximum refund that you may have to in-services are fully excludable. Accelerated death
chased after February 16, 2009, and before Jan-clude in income is limited to the excess of the taxbenefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic
uary 1, 2010. If you claimed them as part of youryou chose to deduct for that year over the taxbasis are excludable up to a limit. This limit
itemized deductions, they are subject to theyou did not choose to deduct for that year.applies to the total of the accelerated death
rules for Itemized Deduction Recoveries , dis-benefits and any periodic payments received Example 1. For 2009 you can choose an cussed later.from long-term care insurance contracts. For $11,000 state income tax deduction or a  If you claimed them as part of your standardinformation on the limit and the definitions of $10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You deduction and receive a refund in 2010 for motorchronically ill individual, qualified long-term care choose to deduct the state income tax. In 2010 vehicle taxes you deducted in 2009, they areservices, and long-term care insurance con- you receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. subject to the rules for Non-Itemized Deductiontracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con- The maximum refund that you may have to in- Recoveries discussed later.tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits, clude in income is $1,000, since you could haveearlier. deducted $10,000 in state general sales tax. Mortgage interest refund. If you received a
refund or credit in 2010 of mortgage interest paidException. The exclusion does not apply to Example 2. For 2009 you can choose an in an earlier year, the amount should be shownany amount paid to a person (other than the $11,500 state general sales tax deduction in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interestinsured) who has an insurable interest in the life based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountof the insured because the insured: income tax deduction. You choose to deduct the from the interest you paid in 2010. You maygeneral sales tax deduction. In 2010 you return• Is a director, officer, or employee of the have to include it in your income under the rulesan item you had purchased and receive a $500person, or explained in the following discussions.sales tax refund. In 2010 you also receive a
• Has a financial interest in the person's $1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum Interest on recovery. Interest on any of thebusiness. refund that you may have to include in income is amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
$500, since it is less than the excess of the tax est income in the year received. For example,
deducted ($11,500) over the tax you did notForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- report any interest you received on state or local
choose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = $9,700).ated death benefits made on a per diem or other income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a or
Since you did not choose to deduct the stateperiodic basis, you must file Form 8853 with Form 1040NR, line 9a.
income tax, you do not include the state incomeyour return. You do not have to file Form 8853 to Recovery and expense in same year. If thetax refund in income.exclude accelerated death benefits paid on the refund or other recovery and the expense occurbasis of actual expenses incurred. in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-Real property tax. For 2008 and 2009, you
duction or credit and is not reported as income.could claim your real property tax as part of yourRecoveries itemized deductions or your standard deduction. Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receiveIf you claimed them as part of your itemizedA recovery is a return of an amount you de- a refund or other recovery that is for amountsdeductions, they are subject to the rules forducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustItemized Deduction Recoveries,  discussedmost common recoveries are refunds, reim- allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recoveredlater.bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc- amount between the years in which you paid it.If you claimed them as part of your standardtions. You also may have recoveries of This allocation is necessary to determine thededuction, the deduction was limited to thenon-itemized deductions (such as payments on amount of recovery from any earlier years and tolesser of:previously deducted bad debts) and recoveries determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
of items for which you previously claimed a tax deduction for this item for the current year.• The amount allowable as a deduction if
credit. you itemized your deductions, or
Example. You paid 2009 estimated stateTax benefit rule. You must include a recovery • $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly). income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.in your income in the year you receive it up to the You made your fourth payment in January 2010.amount by which the deduction or credit you If you claimed $500 ($1,000 if married filing You had no state income tax withheld duringtook for the recovered amount reduced your tax jointly) as part of your standard deduction and 2009. In 2010, you received a $400 tax refundin the earlier year. For this purpose, any in- you receive a real property tax refund in 2010, based on your 2009 state income tax return. Youcrease to an amount carried over to the current you would include in income only that part of the claimed itemized deductions each year onyear that resulted from the deduction or credit is refund that reduced your real property tax below Schedule A (Form 1040).considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly). You must allocate the $400 refund betweenlier year. 2009 and 2010, the years in which you paid theExample. You are single and claim the
tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75%standard deduction for 2009. You paid real prop-Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-
($3,000 ÷  $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2009,erty taxes of $800 in 2009. As part of youreral income taxes are not included in your in-
so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is forstandard deduction, you claimed $500 for yourcome because they are never allowed as a
amounts you paid in 2009 and is a recoveryreal property taxes. In 2010, you receive a $400deduction from income.
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,refund of real property tax. The maximum refund
State tax refund. If you received a state or you will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, forthat you may have to include in income is $100.
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 2010, and attach a copy of your computation
2010, you generally must include it in income if Net disaster loss. For 2008 and 2009, you showing why that amount is less than the
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The could claim a net disaster loss as part of your amount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- itemized deductions or your standard deduction. ceived from the state.
ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2011. If you claimed the loss as part of your itemized The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form deductions, the recovery of the loss is subject to your January 2010 estimated tax payment.
Page 22 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 23 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When you figure your deduction for state and 4. You had taxable income on your 2009 earlier year to determine if the recovery must be
local income taxes paid during 2010, you will Form 1040, line 43, but no tax on your included in your income. If inclusion of the recov-
reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your Form 1040, line 44, because of the 0% tax ery does not change your total tax, you do not
deduction for state and local income taxes paid rate on net capital gain and qualified divi- include the recovery in income. However, if your
during 2010 will include the January net amount dends in certain situations. See Capital total tax increases by any amount, you must
of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated gains, later. include the recovery in your income up to the
state income taxes paid in 2010 for 2010, and amount of the deduction that reduced your tax in5. Your 2009 state and local income tax re-any state income tax withheld during 2010. the earlier year.fund is more than your 2009 state and lo-
cal income tax deduction minus theJoint state or local income tax return. If you Total recovery included in income. If youamount you could have deducted as yourfiled a joint state or local income tax return in an recover any itemized deduction that you claimed2009 state and local general sales taxes.earlier year and you are not filing a joint Form in an earlier year, you generally must include the1040 with the same person for 2010, any refund 6. You made your last payment of 2009 esti- full amount of the recovery in your income in theof a deduction claimed on that state or local mated state or local income tax in 2010. year you receive it. This rule applies if, for theincome tax return must be allocated to the per-
earlier year, all of the following statements are7. You owed alternative minimum tax inson that paid the expense. If both persons paid a
true.2009.portion of the expense, allocate the refund
based on your individual portion. For example, if 8. You could not use the full amount of cred- 1. Your itemized deductions exceeded theyou paid 25% of the expense, then you would its you were entitled to in 2009 because standard deduction by at least the amountuse 25% of the refund to figure if you must the total credits were more than the of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-include any portion of the refund in your income. amount shown on your 2009 Form 1040, tions did not exceed the standard deduc-
line 46.Nevada, Washington, and California do- tion by at least the amount of the recovery,
mestic partners. A registered domestic part- see Standard deduction limit, later.)9. You could be claimed as a dependent byner in Nevada, Washington, or California (or a someone else in 2009. 2. You had taxable income. (If you had noperson in California who is married to a person taxable income, see Negative taxable in-10. You had to use the itemized deductionsof the same sex) generally must report half the
come, later.)worksheet in the 2009 Instructions forcombined community income earned by the in-
Schedule A (Form 1040) because yourdividual and his or her domestic partner (or 3. Your deduction for the item recovered
2009 adjusted gross income was oversame-sex spouse). If the expense was paid out equals or exceeds the amount recovered.
$166,800 ($83,400 if married filing sepa-of community income, then half of the refund (If your deduction was less than therately) and both of the following apply.would be used by each person to figure if any amount recovered, see Recovery limited to
amount is included in that person's income. See deduction, later.)a. You could not deduct all of the amountPublication 555. on the 2009 Itemized Deductions Work- 4. Your itemized deductions were not subject
Deductions not itemized. If you did not item- sheet, line 1. to the limit on itemized deductions. (If your
ize deductions for the year for which you re- deductions were limited, see Itemized de-b. The amount on line 8 of that 2009 work-ceived the recovery of an expense that was ductions limited, later.)sheet would be more than the amountdeductible only if you itemized, do not include on line 4 of that worksheet if the amount 5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you hadany of the recovery amount in your income. on line 4 were reduced by 80% of the unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-
refund you received in 2010. its, later.)Example. You claimed the standard deduc-
tion on your 2009 federal income tax return. In 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-11. You received a refund because of a2010 you received a refund of your 2009 state mum tax. (If you were subject to alternativejointly-filed state or local income tax return,income tax. Do not report any of the refund as minimum tax, see Subject to alternativebut you are not filing a joint 2010 Formincome because you did not itemize deductions minimum tax, later.)1040 with the same person.for 2009.
If any of the earlier statements is not true,
If you also recovered an amount de- see Total recovery not included in income, later.ducted as a non-itemized deduction,Itemized Deduction Recoveries State tax refund. In addition to the previousfigure the amount of that recovery to
CAUTION
!
six items, you must include in your income theinclude in your income and add it to your ad-The following discussion explains how to deter-
full amount of a refund of state or local incomejusted gross income before applying the rulesmine the amount to include in your income from
tax or general sales tax if the excess of the taxexplained here. See Non-Itemized Deductiona recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier
you deducted over the tax you did not deduct isRecoveries, later.year as an itemized deduction. However, you
more than the refund of the tax deducted.generally do not need to use this discussion if
Nonresident aliens. If you are a nonresident If the refund is more than the excess, seeyou file Form 1040 and the recovery is for state
alien and file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you Total recovery not included in income, later.or local income taxes paid in 2009. Instead, use
cannot claim the standard deduction. If you re-the worksheet in the 2010 Form 1040 instruc- Where to report. Enter your state or localcover an itemized deduction that you claimed intions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, andan earlier year, you generally must include theinclude in your income. the total of all other recoveries as other incomefull amount of the recovery in your income in theYou cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Formyear you receive it. However, if you had noand must use this discussion if you are a nonres- 1040A or Form 1040EZ.taxable income in that earlier year (see Negativeident alien (discussed later) or any of the follow- If you file Form 1040NR, enter your state ortaxable income , later), you should completeing statements are true. local income tax refund on line 11 and the totalWorksheet 2 to determine the amount you must
of all other recoveries on line 21. If you file Form1. You received a refund in 2010 that is for a include in income. If any other statement under
1040NR-EZ, enter your state or local income taxtax year other than 2009. Total recovery included in income  is not true,
refund on line 4.see the discussion referenced in the statement2. You received a refund other than an in-
to determine the amount to include in income.come tax refund, such as a general sales Example. For 2009, you filed a joint returntax or real property tax refund, in 2010 of on Form 1040. Your taxable income wasCapital gains. If you determined your tax inan amount deducted or credit claimed in $60,000 and you were not entitled to any taxthe earlier year by using the Schedule D Taxan earlier year. credits. Your standard deduction was $11,400,Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Capi-
and you had itemized deductions of $13,000. In3. The amount on your 2009 Form 1040, line tal Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
2010, you received the following recoveries for42 was more than the amount on your fund in 2010 of a deduction claimed in that year,
amounts deducted on your 2009 return:2009 Form 1040, line 41. you will have to recompute your tax for the
Publication 525 (2010) Page 23

Page 24 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Medical expenses ............. . $200 year, include in your income this year the lesser your 2009 expenses. The only amount of the
State and local income tax refund ... . 400 of: $500 reimbursement that must be included in
Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325 your income for 2010 is $200 Ðthe amount ac-• Your recoveries, orTotal recoveries ............... . $925 tually deducted.
• The amount by which your itemized de-None of the recoveries were more than the Itemized deductions limited. You were sub-ductions exceeded the standard deduc-deductions taken for 2009. The difference be- ject to the limit on itemized deductions in thetion.tween the state and local income tax you de- earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)
ducted and your local general sales tax was was more than a base amount. This amountStandard deduction for earlier years. Tomore than $400. was:determine if amounts recovered in 2010 must beYour total recoveries are less than the included in your income, you must know the • For 2009, $166,800 ($83,400 if marriedamount by which your itemized deductions ex- standard deduction for your filing status for the filing separately),ceeded the standard deduction ($13,000 − year the deduction was claimed. If you filed$11,400 = $1,600), so you must include your • For 2008, $159,950 ($79,975 if marriedForm 1040, the standard deduction tables fortotal recoveries in your income for 2010. Report filing separately), and2009, 2008, and 2007 are shown in Tables 2, 3,the state and local income tax refund of $400 on and 4. If you need the standard deduction • For 2007, $156,400 ($78,200 if marriedForm 1040, line 10, and the balance of your amounts for years before 2007, see the copy of filing separately).recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. your return for that year. If you filed Form If the limit applied, your itemized deductions1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you could not claim theTotal recovery not included in income. If were reduced by the smaller of the followingstandard deduction.    one or more of the six statements listed in the amounts.
preceding discussion is not true, you may be Example. You filed a joint return on Form • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-able to exclude at least part of the recovery from 1040 for 2009 with taxable income of $45,000. ceeded the base amount.your income. See the discussion referenced in Your itemized deductions were $12,050. Thethe statement. You may be able to use Work- • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-standard deduction that you could have claimedsheet 2 on page 25 to determine the part of your tions other than medical and dental ex-was $11,400. In 2010, you recovered $2,100 ofrecovery to include in your income. You also can penses, investment interest expense,your 2009 itemized deductions. None of the re-use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a state nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,coveries were more than the actual deductionstax refund (discussed earlier) to include in in- and gambling losses.for 2009. Include $650 of the recoveries in yourcome. 2010 income. This is the smaller of your recov- In 2007, your itemized deductions were reduced
eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your item-Allocating the included part. If you are not by only 2/3 of the smaller amount. In 2008 and
ized deductions were more than the standardrequired to include all of your recoveries in your 2009, your itemized deductions were reduced
deduction ($12,050 − $11,400 = $650).income, and you have both a state income tax by only 1/3 of the smaller amount.
refund and other itemized deduction recoveries, If you could claim an additional stan- If the amount you recovered was deducted inyou must allocate the taxable recoveries be- dard deduction for certain taxes or a a year in which your itemized deductions weretween the state income tax refund you report on net disaster loss, increase your stan- limited, you must include it in income up to the
TIPForm 1040, line 10 (Form 1040NR, line 11), and dard deduction for that year. difference between the amount of itemized de-the amount you report as other income on Form ductions actually allowed that year and the1040, line 21 (Form 1040NR, line 21). If you do Negative taxable income. If your taxable in- amount you would have been allowed (thenot use Worksheet 2, make the allocation as come for the prior year (Worksheet 2, line 10) greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-follows. was a negative amount, the recovery you must dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-include in income is reduced by that amount. tions using only the net amount of the recovery1. Divide your state income tax refund by the You have a negative taxable income for 2009 if item.total of all your itemized deduction recov- your: To determine the part of the recovery youeries.
must include in income, follow the two steps• Form 1040, line 42 was more than line 41,2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries below.• Form 1040NR, line 39 was more than lineby the percentage in (1). This is the
38, oramount you report as a state income tax 1. Figure the greater of:
refund. • Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than a. The standard deduction for the earlierline 12.3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the year, oramount of taxable recoveries. This is the
b. The amount of itemized deductions youamount you report as other income. Example. The facts are the same as in the would have been allowed for the earlierprevious example except line 42 was $200 more year (after taking into account the limitthan line 41 on your 2009 Form 1040 giving youExample. In 2010 you recovered $2,500 of on itemized deductions) if you had fig-a negative taxable income of $200. You mustyour 2009 itemized deductions claimed on ured them using only the net amount ofinclude $450 in your 2010 income, rather thanSchedule A (Form 1040), but the recoveries you the recovery item. The net amount is$650.must include in your 2010 income are only the amount you actually paid reduced$1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 was by the recovery amount.Recovery limited to deduction. You do notdue to your state income tax refund. Your state include in your income any amount of your re- Note. If you were required to itemize yourincome tax was more than your state general covery that is more than the amount you de- deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)sales tax by $600. The amount you report as a ducted in the earlier year. The amount you and not step 1(a).state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is $300 include in your income is limited to the smaller[($500 ÷  $2,500) ×  $1,500]. The balance of the 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from theof:taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported as other amount of itemized deductions actually al-• The amount deducted, orincome on Form 1040, line 21. lowed in the earlier year after applying the
limit on itemized deductions.• The amount recovered.Standard deduction limit. You generally are
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-
not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized Example. During 2009, you paid $1,700 for ery to include in your income for the year you
deductions that are more than your standard medical expenses. From this amount you sub- receive the recovery. If your taxable income for
deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un- tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted the earlier year was a negative amount, reduce
less you are required to itemize your deduc- gross income. Your actual medical expense de- your recovery by the negative amount.
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year duction was $200. In 2010, you received a $500 If you had unused tax credits in the earlier
return were not more than your income for that reimbursement from your medical insurance for year, see Unused tax credits, later.
Page 24 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 25 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions Keep for Your Records
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your
2010 tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income
tax refund from 2009 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2008, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use
information from your tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the
deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits
and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that
was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 ...................................... . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ........................................................... . 3.
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2009, 
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 29
Form 1040NR, Schedule A, line 17
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 11 ................................... . 4.
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) ..................... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ................................... . 6.
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (If you filed Form 1040, the standard
deduction amounts for 2009, 2008, and 2007 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and
4. If you filed Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, enter -0-.) .............. . 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable ...................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 .............................................. . 9.
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (2009 Form 1040, line 43; 2009 Form
1040NR, line 40; 2009 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14) ................. . 10.
11. Amount to include in income for 2010:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero).4 .................................................. . 11.
If line 11 equals line 3Ð
Enter the amount from line 1 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11; Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
Enter the amount from line 2 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero Ð
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11;
 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage ........................................... . A.
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11 .................. . B.
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21 .................. . C.
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable
income. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses
(NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 25

Page 26 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2009 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1945, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1945, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1945  M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1945  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,700
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 11,400
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,350
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1945, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $950Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1945, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,700January 2, 1945 M Blind M • Married filing jointly Ð$11,400Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$8,350spouse's exemption January 2, 1945  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1945, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1945, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $  7,100
2 8,500 $1,400 ($1,100 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 12,500 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,600
deduction for 2009.dependent child 3 14,700
4 15,800 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,800
2 7,900 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 9,000 include in your income.
4 10,100
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,750 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 11,150
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2009 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by your real property tax (limited to $500 ($1,000 if
married filing jointly)), state or local sales or excise tax paid on the purchase of a motor vehicle in 2009 after February 16, and net
disaster loss that you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Page 26 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 27 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2008 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1944, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1944, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1944 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1944 M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,450
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,900
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 8,000
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1944, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $900Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1944, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,450January 2, 1944  M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,900Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$8,000spouse's exemption January 2, 1944  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
IF your AND the number on THEN your January 1, 1944, and not blind, stop here. This
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
is . . . line 7b.
b.If born before January 2, 1944, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,800
2 8,150 $1,350 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,950 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 13,000
deduction for 2008.dependent child 3 14,050
4 15,100 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,500
2 7,550 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,600 include in your income.
4 9,650
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,350 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,700
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
For 2008 you can increase your standard deduction, figured using these tables, by your real property tax (limited to $500 ($1,000 if
married filing jointly)) and net disaster loss that you could claim as part of your standard deduction.
TIP
Publication 525 (2010) Page 27

Page 28 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2007 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1943, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1943, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1943 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1943  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,350
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,700
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,850
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1943, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1943, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,350January 2, 1943 M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,700Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,850spouse's exemption January 2, 1943 M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked _____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1943, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1943, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,650
2 7,950 $1,300 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,750 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,800
deduction for 2007.dependent child 3 13,850
4 14,900 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,400
2 7,450 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,500 include in your income.
4 9,550
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,150 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
AGI for 2009 .............. . $1,166,800For more information on this computation, in 2009, she derived a tax benefit of $4,333
State income taxes paid in 2009 . . $40,000see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in ($30,000 − $25,667). Therefore, only $4,333 of
3% reduction (amount on Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2. the $5,000 refund is included in her income for2009 Itemized Deduction 2010.Worksheet, line 8) Example. Eileen Martin is single. She had  [($1,166,800 − $166,800) ×  3%] . . $30,000an AGI of $1,166,800 and itemized her deduc- Unused tax credits. If you recover an item80% reduction (amount on 
tions on Schedule A (Form 1040) for 2009. She deducted in an earlier year in which you had2009 Itemized Deduction 
was not subject to alternative minimum tax and Worksheet, line 4) unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear-
was not entitled to any credit against income ($40,000 ×  80%) ........... . $32,000 lier year's tax to determine if you must include
Lesser of 3% reduction or tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000 the recovery in your income. To do this, add the80% reduction ...... . $30,000of state income taxes. Her state general sales amount of the recovery to your earlier year'sReduction limit (1/3) .......... . $10,000tax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only taxable income and refigure the tax and the2009 deduction (amount on $30,000 of her state income taxes in 2009 credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-2009 Itemized Deduction because her otherwise allowable deductions of computed tax, after application of the credits, isWorksheet, line 12)$40,000 were reduced by $10,000. In 2010, more than the actual tax in the earlier year,($40,000 − $10,000) ........ . $30,000
she received a $5,000 refund of her state in- include the recovery in your income up to theRefund received in 2010 of 2009 
come taxes for 2009. state income tax ........... . $ 5,000 amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in
The following shows how Eileen figured the Net amount of 2009 state income the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase
tax ($40,000 − $5,000) ....... . $35,000$10,000 reduction and other amounts from the to a credit carried over to the current year that
Itemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2009 resulted from deducting the recovered amountIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amountSchedule A (Form 1040) instructions. These in the earlier year is considered to have re-of state income tax to figure her itemized de-amounts are needed to figure the part of the duced your tax in the earlier year. If the recov-ductions for 2009, the deduction allowed would$5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her ery is for an itemized deduction claimed in ahave been $25,667 which is her otherwise al-income for 2010. year in which the deductions were limited, seelowable deduction of $35,000 reduced by
Itemized deductions limited, earlier.$9,333. This is her 80% reduction ($35,000 ×
If your tax, after application of the credits,80% = $28,000) subject to the reduction limit
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit($28,000 ×  1/3 = $9,333). By deducting $30,000
Page 28 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 29 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery Unused tax credits. If you recover an item Salary or wages. Salary or wages re-
in your income. deducted in an earlier year in which you had ceived after the death of the employee are
unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear- usually ordinary income to you.
Example. In 2009, Jean Black filed as lier year's tax to determine if you must include Qualified employee retirement plans.head of household and itemized her deduc- the recovery in your income. To do this, add the Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Her taxable amount of the recovery to your earlier year's ployee retirement plans are subject to specialincome was $5,260 and her tax was $528. She taxable income and refigure the tax and the tax treatment. For information on these distri-claimed a child care credit of $1,200. The credit credits on the recomputed amount. If the re- butions, see Publication 575 (or Publicationreduced her tax to zero and she had an unused computed tax, after application of the credits, is 721, if you are the survivor of a federal em-tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 2010, more than the actual tax in the earlier year, ployee or retiree).Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized deduc- include the recovery in your income up to the
Public safety officer killed in the line oftions. She reduces her 2009 itemized deduc- amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in
duty. If you are a survivor of a public safetytions by $1,000 and recomputes that year's tax the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase
officer who was killed in the line of duty, youon taxable income of $6,260. However, the to a credit carried over to the current year that
may be able to exclude from income certainchild care credit exceeds the recomputed tax of resulted from deducting the recovered amount
amounts you receive. For this purpose, the$628. Jean's tax liability for 2009 is not in the earlier year is considered to have re-
term public safety officer includes law enforce-changed by reducing her deductions by the duced your tax in the earlier year.
ment officers, firefighters, chaplains, and res-recovery. She did not have a tax benefit from If your tax, after application of the credits,
cue squad and ambulance crew members. Forthe recovered deduction and does not include does not change, you did not have a tax benefit
more information, see Publication 559.any of the recovery in her income for 2010. from the deduction. Do not include the recovery
in your income.Subject to alternative minimum tax. If you Unemployment Benefitswere subject to the alternative minimum tax in Capital gains. If you determined your tax inthe year of the deduction, you will have to The tax treatment of unemployment benefitsthe earlier year by using the Schedule D Taxrecompute your tax for the earlier year to deter- you receive depends on the type of programWorksheet, or the Qualified Dividends andmine if the recovery must be included in your paying the benefits.Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive aincome. This will require a recomputation of refund in 2010 of a deduction claimed in that Unemployment compensation. You mustyour regular tax, as shown in the preceding year, you will have to recompute your tax for include in income all unemployment compen-example, and a recomputation of your alterna- the earlier year to determine if the recovery sation you receive. You should receive a Formtive minimum tax. If inclusion of the recovery must be included in your income. If inclusion of 1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy-does not change your total tax, you do not the recovery does not change your total tax, ment compensation paid to you. Generally, youinclude the recovery in your income. However, you do not include the recovery in income. enter unemployment compensation on line 19if your total tax increases by any amount, you However, if your total tax increases by any of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3received a tax benefit from the deduction and amount, you must include the recovery in your of Form 1040EZ.you must include the recovery in your income income up to the amount of the deduction thatup to the amount of the deduction that reduced Types of unemployment compensation.reduced your tax in the earlier year.your tax in the earlier year. Unemployment compensation generally in-
cludes any amount received under an unem-
ployment compensation law of the UnitedAmounts Recovered for CreditsNon-Itemized Deduction States or of a state. It includes the following
Recoveries If you received a recovery in 2010 for an item benefits.
for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier • Benefits paid by a state or the District ofThis section discusses recovery of deductions year, you must increase your 2010 tax by the Columbia from the Federal Unemploy-other than itemized deductions. amount of the recovery, up to the amount by ment Trust Fund.which the credit reduced your tax in the earlierTotal recovery included in income. If you
year. You had a recovery if there was a down- • State unemployment insurance benefits.recover an amount that you deducted in an
ward price adjustment or similar adjustment onearlier year in figuring your adjusted gross in- • Railroad unemployment compensationthe item for which you claimed a credit.come, you generally must include the full benefits.This rule does not apply to the investmentamount of the recovery in your income in the
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of • Disability payments from a governmentyear received.
these credits are covered by other provisions of program paid as a substitute for unem-
Total recovery not included in income. If the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax ployment compensation. (Amounts re-
any part of the deduction you took for the re- Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture ceived as workers' compensation for
covered amount did not reduce your tax, you of Investment Credit, for details. injuries or illness are not unemployment
may be able to exclude at least part of the compensation. See Workers' Compensa-
recovery from your income. You must include tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits,Survivor Benefitsthe recovery in your income only up to the earlier.) 
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax Generally, payments made by or for an em- • Trade readjustment allowances under thein the year of the deduction. (See Tax benefit ployer because of an employee's death must Trade Act of 1974.rule, earlier.) be included in income. The following discus-
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-sions explain the tax treatment of certain pay-Negative taxable income. If your taxable in- aster Relief and Emergency Assistancements made to survivors. For additionalcome for the prior year was a negative amount, Act of 1974.information, see Publication 559.the recovery you must include in income is
reduced by that amount. You have a negative Lump-sum payments. Lump-sum pay- Governmental program. If you contributetaxable income for 2009 if your: ments you receive from a decedent's employer to a governmental unemployment compensa-
as the surviving spouse or beneficiary may be tion program and your contributions are not• Form 1040, line 42 was more than line
accrued salary payments; distributions from deductible, amounts you receive under the pro-41,
employee profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or gram are not included as unemployment com-• Form 1040NR, line 39 was more than stock bonus plans; or other items that should pensation until you recover your contributions.line 38, or be treated separately for tax purposes. The tax If you deducted all of your contributions to the
• Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than treatment of these lump-sum payments de- program, the entire amount you receive under
line 12. pends on the type of payment. the program is included in your income.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 29

Page 30 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repayment of unemployment compensa- on Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contrib- Disaster relief grants. Do not include
tion. If you repaid in 2010 unemployment ute to a special union fund and your payments post-disaster grants received under the Disas-
compensation you received in 2010, subtract to the fund are not deductible, the unemploy- ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in
the amount you repaid from the total amount ment benefits you receive from the fund are your income if the grant payments are made to
you received and enter the difference on line 19 includible in your income only to the extent they help you meet necessary expenses or serious
of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 are more than your contributions. needs for medical, dental, housing, personal
of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your property, transportation, or funeral expenses.
entry, enter ªRepaidº and the amount you re- Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you Do not deduct casualty losses or medical ex-
paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa- receive from your employer during periods of penses that are specifically reimbursed by
tion in 2010 that you included in your income in unemployment, under a union agreement that these disaster relief grants. If you have de-
an earlier year, you can deduct the amount guarantees you full pay during the year, are ducted a casualty loss for the loss of your
repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of personal residence and you later receive a
you itemize deductions. If the amount is more Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form disaster relief grant for the loss of the same
than $3,000, see Repayments, later. 1040EZ. residence, you may have to include part or all
of the grant in your taxable income. See Recov-Tax withholding. You can choose to have
State employees. Payments similar to a eries, earlier. Unemployment assistance pay-federal income tax withheld from your unem-
state's unemployment compensation may be ments under the Act are taxableployment compensation. To make this choice,
made by the state to its employees who are not unemployment compensation. See Unemploy-complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding
covered by the state's unemployment compen- ment compensation under UnemploymentRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax
sation law. Although the payments are fully Benefits, earlier.will be withheld at 10% of your payment.
taxable, do not report them as unemployment
If you do not choose to have tax with- compensation. Report these payments on Disaster relief payments. You can excludeheld from your unemployment com- Form 1040, line 21. from income any amount you receive that is apensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
! qualified disaster relief payment. A qualifiedestimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax, Welfare and Other disaster relief payment is an amount paid toeither through withholding or estimated tax, or you: Public Assistance Benefitsa combination of both, you may have to pay a
penalty. For more information, see Publication 1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-Do not include in your income governmental505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax. essary personal, family, living, or funeralbenefit payments from a public welfare fund
expenses that result from a qualified dis-based upon need, such as payments due toSupplemental unemployment benefits. aster;blindness. Payments from a state fund for theBenefits received from an employer-financed victims of crime should not be included in the 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-fund (to which the employees did not contrib- victims' incomes if they are in the nature of essary expenses incurred for the repair orute) are not unemployment compensation. welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- rehabilitation of your home or repair orThey are taxable as wages and are subject to penses that are reimbursed by such a fund.withholding for income tax. They may be sub- replacement of its contents to the extent itYou must include in your income any welfareject to social security and Medicare taxes. For is due to a qualified disaster;payments that are compensation for servicesmore information, see Supplemental Unem- 3. By a person engaged in the furnishing oror that are obtained fraudulently.ployment Benefits in Publication 15-A, section sale of transportation as a common car-5, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. Re- rier because of the death or personalWork-training program. Payments you re-port these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 or physical injuries incurred as a result of aceive from a state welfare agency for takingForm 1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. part in a work-training program are not included qualified disaster; or
Repayment of benefits. You may have to in your income, as long as the payments (ex- 4. By a federal, state, or local government,repay some of your supplemental unemploy- clusive of extra allowances for transportation or or agency or instrumentality in connectionment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment other costs) do not total more than the public with a qualified disaster in order to pro-allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you welfare benefits you would have received oth- mote the general welfare.repay supplemental unemployment benefits in erwise. If the payments are more than the wel-
the same year you receive them, reduce the fare benefits you would have received, the You can exclude this amount only to the extent
total benefits by the amount you repay. If you entire amount must be included in your income any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-
repay the benefits in a later year, you must as wages. ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not ap-
include the full amount of the benefits in your ply if you were a participant or conspirator in aAlternative trade adjustment assistanceincome for the year you received them. terrorist action or his or her representative.(ATAA) payments. Payments you receiveDeduct the repayment in the later year as A qualified disaster is:from a state agency under the Demonstrationan adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis- • A disaster which results from a terrorist(You cannot use Form 1040A or Form tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in- or military action;1040EZ.) Include the repayment on Form cluded in your income. The state must send1040, line 36, and enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and • A federally declared disaster; oryou Form 1099-G to advise you of the amountthe amount on the dotted line next to line 36. If you should include in income. The amount • A disaster which results from an accidentthe amount you repay in a later year is more should be reported on Form 1040, line 21 or involving a common carrier, or from anythan $3,000, you may be able to take a credit Form 1040NR, line 21. other event, which is determined to beagainst your tax for the later year instead of
catastrophic by the Secretary of the Trea-deducting the amount repaid. For information Persons with disabilities. If you have a dis-on this, see Repayments, later. sury or his or her delegate.ability, you must include in income compensa-
tion you receive for services you performPrivate unemployment fund. Unemploy- For amounts paid under item (4), a disasterunless the compensation is otherwise ex-ment benefit payments from a private (nonun- is qualified if it is determined by an applicablecluded. However, you do not include in incomeion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are federal, state, or local authority to warrant as-the value of goods, services, and cash that youtaxable only if the amounts you receive are sistance from the federal, state, or local gov-receive, not in return for your services, but formore than your total payments into the fund. ernment, agency, or instrumentality.your training and rehabilitation because youReport the taxable amount on Form 1040, line
Disaster mitigation payments. You alsohave a disability. Excludable amounts include21.
can exclude from income any amount you re-payments for transportation and attendant
ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you care, such as interpreter services for the deaf,
ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments,as an unemployed member of a union from reader services for the blind, and services to
qualified disaster mitigation payments are alsoregular union dues are included in your income help mentally retarded persons do their work.
Page 30 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 31 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
most commonly paid to you in the period imme- to reduce their cost of winter energy use are not are diverted to his or her personal use. To be
diately following damage to property as a result taxable. exempt from tax, the contributions must be
of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga- spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund
tion payments are grants you use to mitigate for use in future campaigns. However, interestOther Income
(reduce the severity of) potential damage from earned on bank deposits, dividends received
future natural disasters. They are paid to you on contributed securities, and net gains real-The following brief discussions are arranged in
through state and local governments based on ized on sales of contributed securities are tax-alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-
the provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disas- able and must be reported on Form 1120-POL,cussed in greater detail in another publication
ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or the U.S. Income Tax Return for Certain Politicalinclude a reference to that publication.
National Flood Insurance Act. Organizations. Excess campaign funds trans-Activity not for profit. You must include onYou cannot increase the basis or adjusted ferred to an office account must be included inyour return income from an activity from whichbasis of your property for improvements made the officeholder's income on Form 1040, lineyou do not expect to make a profit. An examplewith nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. 21, in the year transferred.of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you
Home Affordable Modification Program operate mostly for recreation and pleasure. Canceled sales contract. If you sell prop-
(HAMP). If you benefit from Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. De- erty (such as land or a residence) under a
Pay-for-Performance Success Payments ductions for expenses related to the activity are contract, but the contract is canceled and you
under HAMP, the payments are not taxable. limited. They cannot total more than the in- return the buyer's money in the same tax year
come you report and can be taken only if you as the original sale, you have no income fromMortgage assistance payments. Payments
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form the sale. If the contract is canceled and youmade under section 235 of the National Hous-
1040). See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 return the buyer's money in a later tax year, youing Act for mortgage assistance are not in-
of Publication 535 for information on whether must include your gain in your income for thecluded in the homeowner's income. Interest
an activity is considered carried on for a profit. year of the sale. When you return the moneypaid for the homeowner under the mortgage
and take back the property in the later year, youassistance program cannot be deducted. Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you treat the transaction as a purchase that givesreceived a payment from Alaska's mineral in-Replacement housing payments. Replace- you a new basis in the property equal to thecome fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend),ment housing payments made under the Uni- funds you return to the buyer.report it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, lineform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Special rules apply to the reacquisition of13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder- real property where a secured indebtednessThe state of Alaska sends each recipient aally Assisted Programs are not includible in (mortgage) to the original seller is involved. Fordocument that shows the amount of the pay-gross income, but are includible in the basis of further information, see Repossession in Publi-ment with the check. The amount also is re-the newly acquired property. cation 537, Installment Sales.ported to the IRS.
Relocation payments and home rehabilita- Car pools. Do not include in your incomeAlimony. Include in your income on Formtion grants. A relocation payment under sec- amounts you receive from the passengers for1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community driving a car in a car pool to and from work.ceive. Amounts you receive for child supportDevelopment Act made by a local jurisdiction to These amounts are considered reimbursementare not income to you. For complete informa-a displaced individual moving from a for your expenses. However, this rule does nottion, see Publication 504, Divorced or Sepa-flood-damaged residence to another residence apply if you have developed car pool arrange-rated Individuals.is not includible in gross income. Home rehabil- ments into a profit-making business of trans-itation grants received by low-income home- Below-market loans. A below-market loan porting workers for hire.owners in a defined area under the same act is a loan on which no interest is charged or on
are also not includible in gross income. Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receivewhich the interest is charged at a rate below the
from a dealer or manufacturer of an item youapplicable federal rate. If you make a be-Indian financing grants. Nonreimbursable
buy is not income, but you must reduce yourlow-market gift or demand loan, you must in-grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act
basis by the amount of the rebate.clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate)of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-
as interest income on your return. These loansdian-owned economic enterprises on or near
Example. You buy a new car for $24,000are considered a transaction in which you, thereservations are not includible in gross income.
cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check fromlender, are treated as having made:Medicare. Medicare benefits received under the manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income to• A loan to the borrower in exchange for atitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This isnote that requires the payment of interestincludible in the gross income of the individuals the basis on which you figure gain or loss if youat the applicable federal rate, andfor whom they are paid. This includes basic sell the car and depreciation if you use it for
(part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the business.• An additional payment to the borrower,Aged)) and supplementary (part B (Supple- which the borrower transfers back to you Casualty insurance and other reimburse-mentary Medical Insurance Benefits for the as interest. ments. You generally should not report theseAged)).
Depending on the transaction, the additional reimbursements on your return unless you areOld-age, survivors, and disability insurance payment to the borrower is treated as a: figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under See Publication 547.• Gift,section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act
are not includible in the gross income of the Charitable gift annuities. If you are the ben-• Dividend,individuals to whom they are paid. This applies eficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must
• Contribution to capital,to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance include the yearly annuity or fixed percentage
benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, payment in your income.• Payment of compensation, orwidowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, The payer will report the types of income
• Another type of payment.as well as the lump-sum death payment. you received on Form 1099-R. Report the
gross distribution from box 1 on Form 1040,The borrower may have to report this paymentNutrition Program for the Elderly. Food
line 16a, or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and theas income, depending on its classification.benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
part taxed as ordinary income (box 2a minusgram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you For more information on below-market box 3) on Form 1040, line 16b, or on Formprepare and serve free meals for the program, loans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550. 1040A, line 12b. Report the portion taxed asinclude in your income as wages the cash pay
capital gain (box 3) on Schedule D, line 8.Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it inyou receive, even if you are also eligible for
your income.food benefits. Child support payments. You should not
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. Campaign contributions. These contribu- report these payments on your return. See
Payments made by a state to qualified people tions are not income to a candidate unless they Publication 504 for more information.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 31

Page 32 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Court awards and damages. To determine • The deduction you are claiming cannot to you. However, there is never a double tax.
if settlement amounts you receive by compro- be more than the amount of the judgment Estates and trusts file their returns on Form
mise or judgment must be included in your or settlement you are including in income 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and
income, you must consider the item that the for the tax year. Trusts, and your share of the income is re-
settlement replaces. The character of the in- ported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),• The judgment or settlement to which yourcome as ordinary income or capital gain de- Beneficiary's Share of Income, Deductions,attorney fees and court costs apply mustpends on the nature of the underlying claim. Credits, etc.occur after October 22, 2004.Include the following as ordinary income. Current income required to be distrib-
uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate orPre-existing agreement. If you receive1. Interest on any award.
trust that must distribute all of its current in-damages under a written binding agreement,
2. Compensation for lost wages or lost prof- come, you must report your share of the distrib-court decree, or mediation award that was in
its in most cases. utable net income, whether or not you actuallyeffect (or issued on or before) September 13,
received it.1995, do not include in income any of those3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does
damages received on account of personal inju-not matter if they relate to a physical in- Current income not required to be distrib-ries or sickness.jury or physical sickness. uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or
trust and the fiduciary has the choice ofCredit card insurance. Generally, if you re-4. Amounts received in settlement of pen- whether to distribute all or part of the currentceive benefits under a credit card disability orsion rights (if you did not contribute to the income, you must report:unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areplan). taxable to you. These plans make the minimum • All income that is required to be distrib-5. Damages for: monthly payment on your credit card account if uted to you, whether or not it is actually
you cannot make the payment due to injury, distributed, plusa. Patent or copyright infringement, illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on
• All other amounts actually paid orForm 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youb. Breach of contract, or credited to you,received during the year that is more than the
c. Interference with business operations. amount of the premiums you paid during the up to the amount of your share of distributable
year. net income.
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis- Down payment assistance. If you purchase How to report. Treat each item of incometress received to satisfy a claim under a home and receive assistance from a non- the same way that the estate or trust wouldTitle VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. profit corporation to make the down payment, treat it. For example, if a trust's dividend in-
that assistance is not included in your income.7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- come is distributed to you, you report the distri-
If the corporation qualifies as a tax-exemptgent fees) where the underlying recovery bution as dividend income on your return. The
charitable organization, the assistance isis included in gross income. same rule applies to distributions of tax-exempt
treated as a gift and is included in your basis of interest and capital gains. Do not include in your income compensa- the house. If the corporation does not qualify, The fiduciary of the estate or trust must telltory damages for personal physical injury or the assistance is treated as a rebate or reduc- you the type of items making up your share ofphysical sickness (whether received in a lump tion of the purchase price and is not included in the estate or trust income and any credits yousum or installments). your basis. are allowed on your individual income tax re-
turn.Emotional distress. Emotional distress it- Economic recovery payment. If you re-self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, ceived an economic recovery payment, such Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gen-but damages you receive for emotional distress as the payments of $250 made to certain recipi- erally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.due to a physical injury or sickness are treated ents of social security, SSI, railroad retirement, Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantoras received for the physical injury or sickness. or certain veterans' benefits, it is not taxable for trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-Do not include them in your income. federal income tax purposes, but it reduces any ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overIf the emotional distress is due to a personal making work pay credit. the trust. (The grantor is the one who trans-injury that is not due to a physical injury or
ferred property to the trust.) This rule applies ifEmployment agency fees. If you get a jobsickness (for example, unlawful discrimination
the property (or income from the property) putthrough an employment agency, and the fee isor injury to reputation), you must include the
into the trust will or may revert (be returned) topaid by your employer, the fee is not includibledamages in your income, except for any dam-
the grantor or the grantor's spouse.in your income if you are not liable for it. How-ages you receive for medical care due to that
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theever, if you pay it and your employer reim-emotional distress. Emotional distress includes
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atburses you for it, it is includible in your income.physical symptoms that result from emotional
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of thedistress, such as headaches, insomnia, and Energy conservation subsidies. You can value of the transferred property.stomach disorders. exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-Deduction for costs involved in unlawful Expenses paid by another. If your personal
ties for the purchase or installation of an energydiscrimination suits. You may be able to expenses are paid for by another person, such
conservation measure for a dwelling unit.deduct attorney fees and court costs paid to as a corporation, the payment may be taxable
recover a judgment or settlement for a claim of to you depending upon your relationship withEnergy conservation measure. This in-unlawful discrimination under various provi- that person and the nature of the payment. Butcludes installations or modifications that aresions of federal, state, and local law listed in if the payment makes up for a loss caused byprimarily designed to reduce consumption ofInternal Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim that person, and only restores you to the posi-electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-against the United States government, or a tion you were in before the loss, the payment isagement of energy demand.claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social not includible in your income.
Dwelling unit. This includes a house,Security Act. You can claim this deduction as
apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat,an adjustment to income on Form 1040, line Exxon Valdez settlement income. Include
or similar property. If a building or structure36. The following rules apply. in your income on Form 1040, line 21, or Form
contains both dwelling and other units, any 1040NR, line 21, any qualified settlement in-• The attorney fees and court costs may be subsidy must be properly allocated. come you receive as a qualified taxpayer. Seepaid by you or on your behalf in connec- Statement, later. Qualified settlement incometion with the claim for unlawful discrimi- Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, is any interest and punitive damage awardsnation, the claim against the United unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal that are:States government, or the claim under income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate
section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Se- or trust, you may be taxed on your share of its • Otherwise includible in taxable income,
curity Act. income distributed or required to be distributed and
Page 32 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 33 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Received in connection with the civil ac- • An executor, administrator, or personal than 5 individuals age 19 or older and certain
representative of an estate, difficulty-of-care payments.tion In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV
A qualified foster individual is a person who:(HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska). • A manager of a trade or business you
operated before declaring Chapter 11 1. Is living in a foster family home, andYou are a qualified taxpayer if you were a bankruptcy,plaintiff in the civil action mentioned earlier or 2. Was placed there by:
• A notary public, oryou were a beneficiary of the estate of your
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-spouse or a close relative who was such a • An election precinct official. ical subdivisions, orplaintiff and from whom you acquired the right
to receive qualified settlement income. b. A qualified foster care placementIf you are not an employee and theThe income can be received as a lump sum agency.fees for your services from the sameor as periodic payments. You will receive a
payor total $600 or more for the year,Form 1099-MISC showing the gross amount of
TIP
Difficulty-of-care payments. These areyou may receive a Form 1099-MISC.the settlement income paid to you in the tax
additional payments that are designated by theyear. Corporate director. Corporate director payer as compensation for providing the addi-
Contributions to eligible retirement plan. fees are self-employment income. Report tional care that is required for physically, men-
If you are a qualified taxpayer, you can contrib- these payments on Schedule C or Schedule tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified
ute all or part of your qualified settlement in- C-EZ (Form 1040). foster individuals. A state must determine that
come, up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement the additional compensation is needed, and thePersonal representatives. All personalplan, including an IRA. Contributions to eligible care for which the payments are made must berepresentatives must include in their gross in-retirement plans, other than a Roth IRA or a provided in your home.come fees paid to them from an estate. If youdesignated Roth contribution, reduce the quali- You must include in your income diffi-are not in the trade or business of being anfied settlement income that you must include in culty-of-care payments received for more than:executor (for instance, you are the executor ofincome. See Statement, later. For more infor- a friend's or relative's estate), report these fees • 10 qualified foster individuals under agemation on these contributions, see Publica- on Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or 19, ortions 560, 575, and 590. business of being an executor, report these
• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 orfees as self-employment income on ScheduleLegal expenses. You may be able to de-
older.C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee isduct attorney fees and court costs paid in con-
not includible in income if it is waived.nection with the civil action. Depending on the Maintaining space in home. If you arefacts and circumstances, these expenses are Manager of trade or business for bank- paid to maintain space in your home for emer-either claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040) or ruptcy estate. Include in your income all gency foster care, you must include the pay-Form 1040NR (Schedule A), or deducted in payments received from your bankruptcy es- ment in your income.figuring the income you report on Form 1040, tate for managing or operating a trade or busi-line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21. If the quali- Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-ness that you operated before you filed for
fied settlement income was received in con- ceive payments that you must include in yourbankruptcy. Report this income on Form 1040,
nection with your trade or business (other than income, you are in business as a foster-careline 21.
as an employee), you can reduce the taxable provider and you are self-employed. Report the
Notary public. Report payments for theseamount of qualified settlement income by these payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZexpenses. In all other situations, you can only (Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business
(Form 1040). These payments are not subjectclaim these expenses as a miscellaneous item- Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare
to self-employment tax. (See the separate in-ized deduction subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- Providers), to help you determine the amount
structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) forgross-income limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct for the use of your home.
details.)line 23, or Form 1040NR (Schedule A), line 11.
Found property. If you find and keep prop-For example, an employee or the surviving Election precinct official. You should re- erty that does not belong to you that has beenspouse or beneficiary of a deceased plaintiff ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv- lost or abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxablewould claim the expenses as a miscellaneous ices performed as an election official or to you at its fair market value in the first year it isitemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. See election worker. Report these payments on line your undisputed possession.Statement, next. 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of
Form 1040EZ. Free tour. If you received a free tour from aStatement. If you report on Form 1040,
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21, qualified Food program payments to daycare provid-
you must include its value in your income. Re-settlement income that is less than the gross ers. If you operate a daycare service and
port the fair market value of the tour on Formamount shown on the Form 1099-MISC, you receive payments under the Child and Adult
1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade ormust attach a statement to your tax return. The Care Food Program administered by the De-
business of organizing tours. You cannot de-statement must identify and show the gross partment of Agriculture that are not for your
duct your expenses in serving as the voluntaryamount of the qualified settlement income, the services, the payments generally are not in-
leader of the group at the group's request. Ifreductions for the amount contributed to an cluded in your income. However, you must
you organize tours as a trade or business,eligible retirement plan or allowable as legal include in your income any part of the pay-
report the tour's value on Schedule C or Sched-expenses not reported as a miscellaneous ments you do not use to provide food to individ-
ule C-EZ (Form 1040).itemized deduction, and the net amount. uals eligible for help under the program.
Gambling winnings. You must include yourIncome averaging. For purposes of the Foreign currency transactions. If you have
gambling winnings in your income on Forma gain on a personal foreign currency transac-income averaging rules that apply to an individ-
1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions ontion because of changes in exchange rates,ual engaged in a farming or fishing business,
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-you do not have to include that gain in yourqualified settlement income is treated as attrib-
bling losses you had during the year, but onlyincome unless it is more than $200. If the gainutable to a fishing business for the tax year in
up to the amount of your winnings.is more than $200, report it as a capital gain.which it is received. See Schedule J (Form
1040) and its instructions for more information. Foster care providers. Payments you re- Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lot-
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a teries and raffles are gambling winnings. InFees for services. Include all fees for your qualified foster care placement agency for pro- addition to cash winnings, you must include inservices in your income. Examples of these viding care to qualified foster individuals in your your income the fair market value of bonds,fees are amounts you receive for services you home generally are not included in your in- cars, houses, and other noncash prizes. How-perform as: come. However, you must include in your in- ever, the difference between the fair market
• A corporate director, come payments received for the care of more value and the cost of an oil and gas lease
Publication 525 (2010) Page 33

Page 34 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
obtained from the government through a lottery Payments for emotional distress that is not adjusted gross income (AGI) or modified AGI in
is not includible in income. attributable to personal physical injuries or applying any Internal Revenue Code provision
physical sickness are taxable. that takes into account excludable income.Installment payments. Generally, if you
win a state lottery prize payable in installments, More information. For the most recent Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you
you must include in your gross income the guidance, go to IRS.gov and enter Gulf Oil Spill exclude from your income the amount of inter-
annual payments and any amounts you receive in the search box. est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is
designated as interest on the unpaid install- frozen if, at the end of the calendar year, youHistoric preservation grants. Do not in-ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a cannot withdraw any part of the deposit be-clude in your income any payment you receivelump sum, you must report the amount you cause:under the National Historic Preservation Act toreceive from the sale as ordinary income (Form preserve a historically significant property. • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.
solvent, orHobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notForm W-2G. You may have received a deductible from other income. A hobby is an • The state where the institution is locatedForm W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, activity from which you do not expect to make a has placed limits on withdrawals becauseshowing the amount of your gambling winnings profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier, under other financial institutions in the state areand any tax taken out of them. Include the Other Income. bankrupt or insolvent.amount from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21.
If you collect stamps, coins, or otherInclude the amount shown in box 2 on Form Excludable amount. The amount of inter-items as a hobby for recreation and1040, line 61, as federal income tax withheld. est you exclude from income for the year is thepleasure, and you sell any of the
CAUTION
!Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property interest that was credited on the frozen deposititems, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is for that tax year minus the sum of:However, if you sell items from your collectionnot included in your income. However, if prop- at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss. 1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-erty you receive this way later produces in-
posit during that year, andcome such as interest, dividends, or rents, that Holocaust victims restitution. Restitution
income is taxable to you. If property is given to payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 2. The amount that could have been with-a trust and the income from it is paid, credited, the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest drawn at the end of that tax year (notor distributed to you, that income is also taxable earned on the payments are not taxable. Ex- reduced by any penalty for prematureto you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the cludable interest is earned by escrow accounts withdrawals of a time deposit).income from the property, that income is tax- or settlement funds established for holding
The excluded part of the interest is included inable to you. funds prior to the settlement. You also do not
your income in the tax year it becomes with-include the restitution payments and interestInherited pension or IRA. If you inherited drawable.the funds earned prior to disbursement in anya pension or an individual retirement arrange- computations in which you ordinarily would addment (IRA), you may have to include part of the Interest on qualified savings bonds. Youexcludable income to your adjusted gross in-inherited amount in your income. See Survi- may be able to exclude from income the inter-come, such as the computation to determinevors and Beneficiaries in Publication 575, if you est from qualified U.S. savings bonds you re-the taxable part of social security benefits. If theinherited a pension. See What If You Inherit an deem if you pay qualified higher educationalpayments are made in property, your basis inIRA? in Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA. expenses in the same year. Qualified higherthe property is its fair market value when you educational expenses are those you pay forExpected inheritance. If you sell an inter- receive it. tuition and required fees at an eligible educa-est in an expected inheritance from a living Excludable restitution payments are pay- tional institution for you, your spouse, or yourperson, include the entire amount you receive ments or distributions made by any country or dependent. A qualified U.S. savings bond is ain gross income on Form 1040, line 21. any other entity because of persecution of an series EE bond issued after 1989 or a series Iindividual on the basis of race, religion, physi-Bequest for services. If you receive cash bond. The bond must have been issued to youcal or mental disability, or sexual orientation byor other property as a bequest for services you when you were 24 years of age or older. ForNazi Germany, any other Axis regime, or anyperformed while the decedent was alive, the more information on this exclusion, see Educa-other Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country,value is taxable compensation. tion Savings Bond Program in chapter 1 ofwhether the payments are made under a law or Publication 550.Gulf oil spill. If you received payments for as a result of a legal action. They include com-
lost wages or income, property damage, or pensation or reparation for property losses re- Interest on state and local government obli-
physical injury due to the gulf oil spill, the pay- sulting from Nazi persecution, including gations. This interest is usually exempt from
ment may be taxable. proceeds under insurance policies issued federal tax. However, you must show the
before and during World War II by European amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-Lost wages or income. Payments you re- insurance companies. eral income tax return. For more information,ceived for lost wages, lost business income, or see State or Local Government Obligations inlost profits are taxable. Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi- chapter 1 of Publication 550.ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs,Property damage. Payments you re- must be included in your income on Form 1040, Job interview expenses. If a prospectiveceived for property damage are not taxable if line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ employer asks you to appear for an interviewthe payments are not more than your adjusted (Form 1040) if from your self-employment ac- and either pays you an allowance or reim-basis in the property. If the payments are more tivity. burses you for your transportation and otherthan your adjusted basis, you will realize a
travel expenses, the amount you receive gen-gain. If the damage was due to an involuntary Indian fishing rights. If you are a member of
erally is not taxable. You include in income onlyconversion, you may defer the tax on the gain if a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights
the amount you receive that is more than youryou purchase qualified replacement property. secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of
actual expenses.See Publication 544. Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not include
If the payments (including insurance pro- in your income amounts you receive from activ- Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must beceeds) you received, or expect to receive, are ities related to those fishing rights. The income included in your income on Form 1040, line 21.less than your adjusted basis, you may be able is not subject to income tax, self-employment If you must give the pay to your employerto claim a casualty deduction. See Publication tax, or employment taxes. because your employer continues to pay your547. Indian money account litigation settlement. salary while you serve on the jury, you can
Physical injury. Payments you received Amounts received by an individual Indian as a deduct the amount turned over to your em-
for personal physical injuries or physical sick- lump sum or periodic payment pursuant to the ployer as an adjustment to income. Enter the
ness are not taxable. This includes payments Class Action Settlement Agreement dated De- amount you repay your employer on Form
for emotional distress that is attributable to per- cember 7, 2009, are not included in gross in- 1040, line 36. Enter ªJury Payº and the amount
sonal physical injuries or physical sickness. come. This amount will not be used to figure on the dotted line next to line 36.
Page 34 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 35 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, generally must include the value of the prize in Railroad retirement annuities. The follow-
side commissions, push money, or similar pay- ing types of payments are treated as pension oryour income. However, you do not include this
ments you receive in your income on Form annuity income and are taxable under the rulesprize in your income if you meet all of the
1040, line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule explained in Publication 575.following requirements.
C-EZ (Form 1040) if from your • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are1. You were selected without any action onself-employment activity. more than the social security equivalentyour part to enter the contest or proceed-
benefit.ing.Example. You sell cars and help arrange
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers • Tier 2 benefits.2. You are not required to perform substan-pay back part of their commissions to you for tial future services as a condition for re- • Vested dual benefits.referring customers to them. You must include ceiving the prize or award.the kickbacks in your income.
3. The prize or award is transferred by the Rewards. If you receive a reward for provid-
Manufacturer incentive payments. You payer directly to a governmental unit or ing information, include it in your income.
must include as other income on Form 1040, tax-exempt charitable organization as
line 21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form Sale of home. You may be able to excludedesignated by you. The following condi-
1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay- from income all or part of any gain from the saletions apply to the transfer.
ments from a manufacturer that you receive as or exchange of your main home. See Publica-
a. You cannot use the prize or awarda salesperson. This is true whether you receive tion 523.
before it is transferred.the payment directly from the manufacturer or
Sale of personal items. If you sold an itemthrough your employer. b. You should provide the designation you owned for personal use, such as a car,
before the prize or award is presented refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orExample. You sell cars for an automobile to prevent a disqualifying use. The silverware, your gain is taxable as a capitaldealership and receive incentive payments designation should contain: gain. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).from the automobile manufacturer every time
You cannot deduct a loss.you sell a particular model of car. You report i. The purpose of the designation by However, if you sold an item you held forthe incentive payments on Form 1040, line 21. making a reference to section investment, such as gold or silver bullion,74(b)(3) of the Internal RevenueMedical savings accounts (Archer MSAs coins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a capitalCode,and Medicare Advantage MSAs). You gen- gain and any loss is deductible as a capital
erally do not include in income amounts you loss.ii. A description of the prize or award,
withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare Example. You sold a painting on an onlineiii. The name and address of the or-Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for auction website for $100. You bought the paint-ganization to receive the prize orqualified medical expenses. Generally, quali- ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Reportaward,fied medical expenses are those you can de- your $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule Dduct on Schedule A (Form 1040). For more iv. Your name, address, and taxpayer (Form 1040).information about Archer MSAs or Medicare identification number, and
Advantage MSAs, see Publication 969. Scholarships and fellowships. A candidatev. Your signature and the date
for a degree can exclude amounts received asMoving expense reimbursements. You signed. a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedgenerally should not report these benefits on
scholarship or fellowship is any amount youyour return. See Publication 521 for more infor- c. In the case of an unexpected presen-
receive that is for:mation. tation, you must return the prize or
award before using it (or spending, de- • Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anPrizes and awards. If you win a prize in a positing, investing it, etc., in the case educational institution, orlucky number drawing, television or radio quiz of money) and then prepare the state-program, beauty contest, or other event, you • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-ment as described in (b).must include it in your income. For example, if quired for courses at the educational in-
d. After the transfer, you should receiveyou win a $50 prize in a photography contest, stitution.
from the payer a written response stat-you must report this income on Form 1040, line Amounts used for room and board do not qual-ing when and to whom the designated21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not ify for the exclusion. See Publication 970 foramounts were transferred.include its value in your income. more information on qualified scholarships andPrizes and awards in goods or services fellowship grants.These rules do not apply to scholarship ormust be included in your income at their fair
fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fel- Payment for services. Generally, youmarket value.
lowships, later. must include in income the part of any scholar-Employee awards or bonuses. Cash ship or fellowship that represents payment forawards or bonuses given to you by your em- past, present, or future teaching, research, orQualified tuition program (QTP). A quali-ployer for good work or suggestions generally other services. This applies even if all candi-fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-must be included in your income as wages. dates for a degree must perform the services togram) is a program set up to allow you to eitherHowever, certain noncash employee achieve- receive the degree.prepay or contribute to an account establishedment awards can be excluded from income. Do not include in income the part of anyfor paying a student's qualified higher educa-See Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous scholarship or fellowship representing pay-tion expenses at an eligible educational institu-Compensation, earlier. ment for teaching, research, or other services iftion. A program can be established and
Prize points. If you are a salesperson and you receive the amount under the Nationalmaintained by a state, an agency or instrumen-
receive prize points redeemable for merchan- Health Service Corps Scholarship Program ortality of a state, or an eligible educational insti-
dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu- the Armed Forces Health Professions Scholar-tution.
facturer to employees of dealers, you must ship and Financial Assistance program.The part of a distribution representing the
include their fair market value in your income. For information about the rules that apply toamount paid or contributed to a QTP is not
The prize points are taxable in the year they are a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided toincluded in income. This is a return of the in-
paid or made available to you, rather than in the employees and their families by an educationalvestment in the program.
year you redeem them for merchandise. institution, see Publication 970.The beneficiary generally does not include
in income any earnings distributed from a QTPPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
if the total distribution is less than or equal towere awarded a prize in recognition of accom- partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
adjusted qualified higher education expenses.plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, your income. These allowances are not consid-
See Publication 970 for more information.artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
Publication 525 (2010) Page 35

Page 36 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a con- • You received a lump-sum benefit pay- international union, do not include in your in-
come amounts you receive from the interna-test are not scholarships or fellowships if you ment during the year that is for one or
tional union to reimburse you for expenses ofdo not have to use the prizes for educational more earlier years.
traveling away from home to attend the con-purposes. You must include these amounts in • You exclude employer-provided adoption vention. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-your income on Form 1040, line 21, whether or benefits or interest from qualified U.S. penses, even if you are reimbursed in a laternot you use the amounts for educational pur- savings bonds. year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, youposes.
must include that reimbursement in your in-• You take the foreign earned income ex-
come.clusion, the foreign housing exclusion orSmallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eli-
deduction, the exclusion of income fromgible individual who receives benefits under the
American Samoa, or the exclusion of in- Utility rebates. If you are a customer of anSmallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act
come from Puerto Rico by bona fide re- electric utility company and you participate inof 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a
the utility's energy conservation program, yousidents of Puerto Rico.covered countermeasure, you can exclude the
may receive on your monthly electric bill either:payment from your income (to the extent it is
Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.not allowed as a medical and dental expense • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-You must use the special worksheets in appen-deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligi- tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), ordix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxableble individuals include health care workers,
• A nonrefundable credit against thebenefits and your IRA deduction if all of theemergency personnel, and first responders in a
purchase price of the electricity.following conditions apply.smallpox emergency, who have received a
smallpox vaccination. The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-• You receive social security or equivalent
able credit is not included in your income.railroad retirement benefits.
Social security and equivalent railroad re-
• You have taxable compensation.tirement benefits. Social security or Whistleblower's award. If you receive a
equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax- whistleblower's award from the Internal Reve-• You contribute to your IRA.
able, must be included in the income of the nue Service, you must include it in your in-• You or your spouse is covered by a re-person who has the legal right to receive the come. Any deduction allowed for attorney feestirement plan at work. and court costs paid by you, or on your behalf,benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-
in connection with the award are deducted asable, and the amount that is taxable, depends How to report. If any of your benefits are an adjustment to income, but cannot be moreon the amount of the benefits and your other taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or than the amount included in income for the taxincome. Form 1040A to report the taxable part. You year.Social security benefits include any monthly cannot use Form 1040EZ. Report your net ben-benefit under Title II of the Social Security Act efits (the amount in box 5 of your Formsand any part of a tier I railroad retirement bene- SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) on line 20a of Formfit treated as a social security benefit. Social 1040 or line 14a of Form 1040A. Report the Repaymentssecurity benefits do not include any supple- taxable part (from the last line of the worksheet)mental security income (SSI) payments. on line 20b of Form 1040 or on line 14b of Form If you had to repay an amount that you included1040A.Form SSA-1099. If you received social se- in your income in an earlier year, you may be
curity benefits during the year, you will receive able to deduct the amount repaid from your
Stolen property. If you steal property, youForm SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State- income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
must report its fair market value in your incomement. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with the amount you repaid is more than $3,000,
in the year you steal it unless in the same year,your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a you may be able to take a credit against your
you return it to its rightful owner.worksheet you can use to figure whether any of tax for the year in which you repaid it. Gener-
your benefits are taxable. ally, you can claim a deduction or credit only if
Transporting school children. Do not in- the repayment qualifies as an expense or lossFor an explanation of the information found
clude in your income a school board mileage incurred in your trade or business or in aon your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915.
allowance for taking children to and from for-profit transaction.Form RRB-1099. If you received school if you are not in the business of taking
equivalent railroad retirement or special guar- children to school. You cannot deduct ex- Type of deduction. The type of deductionanty benefits during the year, you will receive penses for providing this transportation. you are allowed in the year of repayment de-Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad pends on the type of income you included in theRetirement Board. Union benefits and dues. Amounts de- earlier year. You generally deduct the repay-For an explanation of the information found ducted from your pay for union dues, assess- ment on the same form or schedule on whichon your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915. ments, contributions, or other payments to a you previously reported it as income. For ex-
If you received other railroad retirement union cannot be excluded from your income. ample, if you reported it as self-employment
benefits, see Railroad retirement annuities, income, deduct it as a business expense onYou may be able to deduct some of these
earlier. Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) orpayments as a miscellaneous deduction sub-
Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as aject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related toJoint return. If you are married and file a capital gain, deduct it as a capital loss onyour job and if you itemize deductions onjoint return, you and your spouse must com- Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it asSchedule A (Form 1040). For more informa-bine your incomes and your social security and wages, unemployment compensation, or othertion, get Publication 529, Miscellaneous De-equivalent railroad retirement benefits when nonbusiness income, deduct it as a miscellane-ductions.figuring whether any of your combined benefits ous itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formare taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits 1040).any benefits, you must add your spouse's in- paid to you by a union as strike or lockout If you repaid social security or equivalentcome to yours when figuring if any of your benefits, including both cash and the fair mar- railroad retirement benefits, see Publicationbenefits are taxable. ket value of other property, usually are included 915.in your income as compensation. You can ex-Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in clude these benefits from your income onlythe Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction pack- Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amountwhen the facts clearly show that the unionage to determine the amount of your benefits to you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromintended them as gifts to you.include in your income. Publication 915 also your income in the year you repaid it. If you
has worksheets you can use. However, you Reimbursed union convention expenses. must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized
must use the worksheets in Publication 915 if If you are a delegate of your local union chapter deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),
and you attend the annual convention of theany of the following situations apply. line 23.
Page 36 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 37 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you • Deductions for bad debts; your local advocate, whose number is in
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct your phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer• Deductions for theft losses due to crimi-the repayment (as explained earlier under Advocate ServiceÐYour Voice at thenal fraud or embezzlement in a transac-Type of deduction). However, you can choose IRS, and on our website at www.irs.gov/tion entered into for profit;instead to take a tax credit for the year of advocate. You can also call our toll-free
repayment if you included the income under a • Deductions from sales to customers, line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
claim of right. This means that at the time you such as returns and allowances, and sim- 1-800-829-4059.
included the income, it appeared that you had ilar items; or • You can learn about your rights and re-an unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for this • Deductions for legal and other expenses sponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting ourchoice, figure your tax under both methods and
of contesting the repayment. online tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.compare the results. Use the method (deduc-
gov. You can get updates on hot tax top-tion or credit) that results in less tax.
ics by visiting our YouTube channel atYear of deduction (or credit). If you use theMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2010 claim- www.youtube.com/tasnta and ourcash method, you can take the deduction (oring a deduction for the repaid amount. If you Facebook page at www.facebook.com/credit, if applicable) for the tax year in whichmust deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized
YourVoiceAtIRS, or by following ouryou actually make the repayment. If you usededuction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040),
tweets at www.twitter.com/YourVoiceA-any other accounting method, you can deductline 28.
tIRS.the repayment or claim a credit for it only for theMethod 2. Figure your tax for 2010 claim- tax year in which it is a proper deduction undering a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).your accounting method. For example, if yousteps. The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic programuse an accrual method, you are entitled to the
serves individuals who have a problem with thededuction or credit in the tax year in which the1. Figure your tax for 2010 without deduct- IRS and whose income is below a certain level.obligation for the repayment accrues.ing the repaid amount.
LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year LITCs can provide representation before the
without including in income the amount IRS or in court on audits, tax collection dis-
you repaid in 2010. putes, and other issues for free or a small fee. IfHow To Get Tax Help
an individual's native language is not English,3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown
some clinics can provide multilingual informa-on your return for the earlier year. This is You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
the credit. tion about taxpayer rights and responsibilities.order free publications and forms, ask tax
For more information, see Publication 4134,questions, and get information from the IRS in4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publica-several ways. By selecting the method that is2010 figured without the deduction (step
tion is available at IRS.gov, by callingbest for you, you will have quick and easy1).
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or ataccess to tax help.If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the your local IRS office.
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. Theclaim the credit figured in (3) above on Form Free tax services. Publication 910, IRSTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-1040, line 72, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in the Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide topendent organization within the IRS. We helpcolumn to the right of line 72. IRS services and resources. Learn about freetaxpayers who are experiencing economic
tax information from the IRS, including publica-harm, such as not being able to provide neces-Example. For 2009 you filed a return and tions, services, and education and assistancesities like housing, transportation, or food; tax-reported your income on the cash method. In
payers who are seeking help in resolving tax programs. The publication also has an index of2010 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2009
problems with the IRS; and those who believe over 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax informa-income under a claim of right. Your filing status
that an IRS system or procedure is not working tion) you can listen to on the telephone. Thein 2010 and 2009 is single. Your income and
as it should. Here are seven things every tax- majority of the information and services listedtax for both years are as follows:
payer should know about TAS: in this publication are available to you free of2009 charge. If there is a fee associated with a re-• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your With Income  Without Income source or service, it is listed in the publication.Taxable voice at the IRS.
Accessible versions of IRS published prod-Income $15,000 $10,000 • Our service is free, confidential, and tai- ucts are available on request in a variety ofTax $ 1,836 $ 1,086 lored to meet your needs. alternative formats for people with disabilities.
• You may be eligible for our help if you2010
Free help with your return. Free help inhave tried to resolve your tax problemWithout Deduction With Deduction
preparing your return is available nationwidethrough normal IRS channels and haveTaxable
from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer In-gotten nowhere, or you believe an IRSIncome $49,950 $44,950
come Tax Assistance (VITA) program is de-procedure just isn't working as it should.Tax $ 8,675 $ 7,425 signed to help low-income taxpayers and the• We help taxpayers whose problems are Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) programYour tax under method 1 is $7,425. Your tax causing financial difficulty or significant is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 andunder method 2 is $7,925, figured as follows: cost, including the cost of professional older with their tax returns. Many VITA sitesrepresentation. This includes businesses offer free electronic filing and all volunteers willTax previously determined for 2009 $1,836 as well as individuals.Less: Tax as refigured ........ . − 1,086 let you know about credits and deductions you
• Our employees know the IRS and how toDecrease in 2009 tax $ 750 may be entitled to claim. To find the nearest
navigate it. If you qualify for our help, VITA or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040.
Regular tax liability for 2010 ..... . $8,675 we'll assign your case to an advocate As part of the TCE program, AARP offersLess: Decrease in 2009 tax ..... . − 750 who will listen to your problem, help you the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find theRefigured tax for 2010 $7,925 understand what needs to be done to re- nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, call
solve it, and stay with you every step of 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website atYou pay less tax using method 1, so you should the way until your problem is resolved. www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.take a deduction for the repayment in 2010.
For more information on these programs,• We have at least one local taxpayer ad-
go to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in thevocate in every state, the District of Co-Repayment rules do not apply. This dis-
lumbia, and Puerto Rico. You can call upper right-hand corner.cussion does not apply to:
Publication 525 (2010) Page 37

Page 38 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS United States Government, Internal Rev- applies to your individual tax return, or
website at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 enue Service. you are more comfortable talking with
days a week to: someone in person, visit your local Tax-
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access payer Assistance Center where you can• E-file your return. Find out about com- to TTY/TDD equipment, call spread out your records and talk with anmercial tax preparation and e-file serv- 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-ices available free to eligible taxpayers. to order forms and publications. pointment is necessaryÐjust walk in. If
• Check the status of your 2010 refund. Go • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to you prefer, you can call your local Center
to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re- listen to pre-recorded messages covering and leave a message requesting an ap-fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS various tax topics. pointment to resolve a tax account issue.acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- A representative will call you back within• Refund information. To check the statusturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a pa- 2 business days to schedule an in-personof your 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954per return. If you filed Form 8379 with appointment at your convenience. If youor 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund in-your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if have an ongoing, complex tax accountformation 24 hours a day, 7 days ayou filed electronically). Have your 2010 problem or a special need, such as aweek). Wait at least 72 hours after thetax return available so you can provide disability, an appointment can be re-IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filedyour social security number, your filing quested. All other issues will be handledreturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing astatus, and the exact whole dollar without an appointment. To find the num-paper return. If you filed Form 8379 withamount of your refund.
ber of your local office, go to www.irs.your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if
• Download forms, including talking tax gov/localcontacts or look in the phoneyou filed electronically). Have your 2010
forms, instructions, and publications. book under United States Government,tax return available so you can provide
Internal Revenue Service.your social security number, your filing• Order IRS products online.
status, and the exact whole dollar• Research your tax questions online. amount of your refund. If you check the Mail. You can send your order for
status of your refund and are not given• Search publications online by topic or forms, instructions, and publications
the date it will be issued, please wait untilkeyword. to the address below. You should re-
the next week before checking back. ceive a response within 10 days after your• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, request is received.• Other refund information. To check theregulations, or other official guidance.
status of a prior-year refund or amended• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) Internal Revenue Servicereturn refund, call 1-800-829-1040.published in the last few years. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613• Figure your withholding allowances using Evaluating the quality of our telephone
the withholding calculator online at www. services. To ensure IRS representatives give DVD for tax products. You can orderirs.gov/individuals. accurate, courteous, and professional an- Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productsswers, we use several methods to evaluate the• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by DVD, and obtain:
quality of our telephone services. One methodusing our Alternative Minimum Tax • Current-year forms, instructions, andis for a second IRS representative to listen in(AMT) Assistant. publications.on or record random telephone calls. Another
• Sign up to receive local and national tax is to ask some callers to complete a short • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-news by email. survey at the end of the call. cations.
• Get information on starting and operating Walk-in. Many products and services • Tax Map: an electronic research tool anda small business. are available on a walk-in basis. finding aid.
• Tax law frequently asked questions.
• Products. You can walk in to many postPhone. Many services are available • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pickby phone. sponse system.up certain forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro- • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- cery stores, copy centers, city and county U.S. Code.tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM government offices, credit unions, and of-
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most(1-800-829-3676) to order current-year fice supply stores have a collection offorms, instructions, and publications, and tax forms.products available to print from a CD orprior-year forms and instructions. You photocopy from reproducible proofs. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.should receive your order within 10 days. Also, some IRS offices and libraries have • Toll-free and email technical support.the Internal Revenue Code, regulations,• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. • Two releases during the year.
tive Bulletins available for research pur- ± The first release will ship the beginning• Solving problems. You can get poses. of January 2011.face-to-face help solving tax problems ± The final release will ship the begin-• Services. You can walk in to your localevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As- ning of March 2011.Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
ness day for personal, face-to-face taxplain IRS letters, request adjustments to Purchase the DVD from National Technicalhelp. An employee can explain IRS let-your account, or help you set up a pay- Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ters, request adjustments to your tax ac-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callcount, or help you set up a payment plan.sistance Center for an appointment. To
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30If you need to resolve a tax problem,find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-
(plus a $6 handling fee).contacts or look in the phone book under have questions about how the tax law
Page 38 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 39 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Retirement pay ............ . 15 Child and Adult Care Food De minimis benefits ....... . 5, 7
Program: Death benefits  (See also Life83(b) election ............... . 13 Veterans benefits ......... . 15
Payments to daycare insurance) ................ . 21401(k) plans ................. . 9 Assistance  (See Tax help)
providers ............... . 33 Accelerated ............... . 21Excess contributions ....... . 10 Astronauts .................. . 2
Child support payments .... . 31 Debts:403(b) plans ................. . 9 Athletic facilities,
Childcare providers ...... . 3, 33 Canceled ................. . 19Limit for .................... . 9 employer-provided ........ . 5
Chronic illness ............. . 17 Excluded debt ............. . 20457 plans .................... . 9 Automobile  (See Vehicle, Accelerated death benefits paid Nonrecourse debts ........ . 20Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 employer-provided) to ...................... . 22 Recourse ................. . 20501(c)(18)(D) plans .......... . 9 Awards  (See Damages from Citizens outside U.S.: Stockholder's ............. . 20Contributions .............. . 10 lawsuits) Exclusion of foreign Deduction:501(c)(3) organizations ..... . 20 income .................. . 2 Costs of discrimination529 program ............... . 35 Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title suits .................... . 32B1231 property sale ......... . 16 VII: Deferred compensation:Babysitting .................. . 3 Back pay and damages for Nonqualified plans ........ . 2, 3Back pay, award for ......... . 3 emotional distressA Dependent care benefits .... . 5Backup withholding: under ................... . 32Academic health centers: Depletion allowance ........ . 16Barter exchange Clergy ...................... . 14Meals and lodging when Differential wagetransactions ............ . 19 Coal ........................ . 16teaching and research payments ................. . 3Bankruptcy: COBRA .................... . 18organization ............. . 7 Armed forces ............. . 14Canceled debt not deemed to Colleges and universities:Accelerated death Directors' fees ............. . 33be income .............. . 20 Faculty lodging ............. . 7benefits .................. . 21 Disability:Barter income .............. . 19 Scholarships andAccident insurance .......... . 4 Military ................... . 15fellowships .............. . 35Below-market loans ........ . 31Accidental death benefits ... . 6 Pensions ................. . 17Comments on publication ... . 2Bequest for services ....... . 34Accrual method taxpayers .. . 2 Workers'
Commissions:Bicycle ...................... . 7 compensation ......... . 18Accrued leave payment:
Advance ................... . 3Fringe benefit .............. . 8At time of retirement or Person with ............... . 30
Commuter highwayBlack lung benefitresignation ............... . 4 Unemployment compensation,
vehicles ................... . 7Disability retirement ....... . 17 payments ................ . 18 paid as substitute for .... . 29
Compensation:Activity not for profit ....... . 31 Bonuses ................. . 3, 35 Disaster relief:
Employee .................. . 3 Disaster mitigationAdoption: Breach of contract: Miscellaneous .............. . 3 payments ............... . 30Employer assistance ....... . 5 Damages as income ....... . 32 Unemployment ............ . 29 Disaster Relief and EmergencyAdvance commissions ...... . 3 Bribes ...................... . 31 Workers' .................. . 18 Assistance Act:Aircraft ...................... . 8 Business expenses: Compensatory damages .. . 19, Grants .................. . 30Airlines: Reimbursements ........... . 3 32 UnemploymentNo-additional-cost Business income ........ . 15-16 Constructive receipt of benefits .............. . 29services ................. . 7 income .................... . 2 Mitigation payments ........ . 2Valuation of flights on Copyrights: Payments ................. . 30employer-provided C Infringement damages ..... . 32 Discounts:aircraft ................... . 8 Cafeteria plans ............. . 17 Royalties ................. . 16 Employee discounts ........ . 5Alaska Permanent Fund Campaign contributions .... . 31 Corporate directors ........ . 33 Employee stock purchasedividend ................. . 31 Campus lodging ............. . 7 Cost-of-living allowances ... . 3 plans ................... . 12Alien status, waiver of ...... . 14 Cancellation of debt ........ . 19 Court awards  (See also Mortgage loan for earlyAliens: Cancellation of sales Damages from lawsuits) ... . 32 payment ................ . 20Nonresident ............... . 23 contracts ................. . 31 Credit card Insurance ...... . 32 Dividends:Alimony .................... . 31 Capital gains: Credits: Restricted stock ........... . 13Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Recoveries, refiguring ofRecoveries ........... . 23, 29 Divorced taxpayers:Recoveries, refiguring of ... . 29 unused credits ...... . 28, 29Capital gains or losses: Stock options exercised incidentStock options ............. . 11
Currency transactions, to divorce ............... . 11Employee stock option plansAnnuities: foreign ................... . 33 Domestic partners .......... . 23(ESOPs) ................ . 12Charitable gift ............. . 31
Down paymentRailroad retirement ........ . 35 Incentive stock options
assistance ............... . 32Tax-sheltered .............. . 9 (ISOs) .................. . 12 D
Archer MSAs ............. . 4, 35 Damages from lawsuits .... . 32Sale of personal
Back pay awards ........... . 3Armed forces ............... . 14 property ................ . 35 EBreach of contract ......... . 32Combat zone bonus ....... . 15 Car  (See Vehicle, Economic recovery payment:CompensatoryDisability .................. . 15 employer-provided) Government retiree credit:damages ........... . 19, 32Disability pensions ........ . 17 Car pools .................. . 31 Making work payEmotional distress under TitleHealth professions Cash or deferred arrangements credit ................. . 32VII, Civil Rights Act ofscholarship .............. . 8 (CODAs) .................. . 9 Educational assistance:1964 ................... . 32Military action as cause of Cash rebates ............... . 31 Employer-provided ......... . 5Punitive damages ......... . 32disability injuries ........ . 17 Casualty insurance: Scholarships andQualified reservist Daycare providers  (See also
Reimbursements from ..... . 31 fellowships .............. . 35distribution .............. . 15 Childcare providers) ........ . 3
Catch-up contributions ...... . 9 Educational institutions:Rehabilitative program Food program payments
Charitable gift annuities .... . 31payments ............... . 15 Faculty lodging ............. . 7to ...................... . 33
Publication 525 (2010) Page 39

Page 40 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Elderly persons: Farming: Form 1040, Schedule D: Form 8853:
Qualified farm debt, cancellationNutrition Program for the Stock options ............. . 12 Accelerated death
of ...................... . 20Elderly .................. . 31 Stock options reported benefits ................. . 22
Tax Counseling for the on ...................... . 11 Archer MSAs and long-termFederal employees:
Elderly .................. . 15 care insuranceAccrued leave payment ..... . 4 Form 1040, Schedule E:
contracts ................ . 4Compensation Act (FECA)Election precinct Partner's return ........... . 16
payments ............... . 18officials .................. . 33 Royalties ................. . 16 Form 8919:
Cost-of-living allowances ... . 3 Uncollected social security andElective deferrals ............ . 8 Form 1040A:
Disability pensions ........ . 17 Medicare tax on wages ... . 3Catch-up contributions ...... . 9 Recoveries ............... . 23
Thrift Savings Plan for ...... . 9Excess annual additions ... . 10 Unemployment Form RRB-1099:
Federal income tax:Excess contributions ....... . 10 compensation ........... . 29 Railroad retirement board
Refunds .................. . 22Excess deferrals .......... . 10 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 payments ............... . 36
Increased limit for last 3 years Fees for services ........... . 33 Form 1040EZ: Form SSA-1099:
prior to retirement age .... . 9 Financial counseling fees ... . 5 Recoveries ............... . 23 Social security benefit
Limit on .................... . 9 Fellowships ................ . 35 Unemployment statement ............... . 36
Reporting by employer ..... . 10 compensation ........... . 29FICA withholding: Form W-2:
Emotional distress Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3Foreign employers, U.S. 501(c)(18)(D)
damages ................. . 32 citizens working for in Form 1041: contributions ............ . 10
Employee achievement U.S. .................... . 14 Estates and trusts ......... . 32 Accrued leave payment at time
awards .................... . 3 Paid by employer ........... . 4 of retirement orForm 1041, Schedule K-1:
Employee awards or resignation ............... . 4Fiduciaries: Beneficiary's share of income,
bonuses ................. . 35 Fees for services .......... . 33 Back pay awards ........... . 3deductions, credits,
etc. ..................... . 32 Bonuses or awards ......... . 3Employee Financial counseling fees  (See
compensation .......... . 3-13 Elective deferrals, reporting byalso Retirement planning Form 1065:
Fringe benefits ........... . 4-8 employer ............... . 10services) ................... . 5 Partnership return ......... . 16
Restricted property ..... . 12-13 Failure to receive fromFitness programs: Form 1065, Schedule K-1:
Retirement plan employer ................ . 3Employer-provided ......... . 5 Partner's share of
contributions ............. . 8 Fringe benefits reportedincome ................. . 16Flights:
Stock options .......... . 10-12 on ....................... . 4Employer-provided Form 1098:
Stock options fromEmployee discounts ........ . 5 aircraft ................... . 8 Mortgage interest
employers .............. . 11No-additional-costEmployee stock purchase statement ............... . 22
Wage and tax statement .... . 3services ................. . 7plans ................. . 11, 12 Form 1099-B:
Form W-2G:Food benefits:Employer, foreign .......... . 14 Barter exchange
Gambling winnings ........ . 34Daycare providers, food transactions ............ . 19Employer-owned life
program payments to .... . 33 Form W-4V:insurance ................ . 21 Form 1099-C:
Nutrition Program for the Unemployment compensation,Cancellation of debt ....... . 19Employer-provided:
Elderly .................. . 31 voluntary withholdingEducational assistance ..... . 5 Form 1099-DIV:
Foreign: request ................. . 30Vehicles ................... . 8 Restricted stock
Currency transactions ..... . 33 Form W-9:dividends ............... . 13Employment:
Employment .............. . 14 Request for taxpayerAbroad ................... . 14 Form 1099-G:Governments, employees identification number .... . 19Agency fees .............. . 32 State tax refunds .......... . 22of ...................... . 14 Foster care ................. . 33Contracts: UnemploymentIncome .................... . 2Severance pay for Foster Grandparentcompensation ........... . 29Service ................... . 17cancellation of ......... . 4 Program ................. . 15Form 1099-MISC:Form 1040:Endowment proceeds ...... . 21 Found property ............ . 33Services totaling $600 orExcess contributions to elective more ................... . 33Energy: Free tax services ........... . 37deferrals ................ . 10 Stock options exercised incidentAssistance ................ . 31 Fringe benefits ............ . 4-8Recoveries ............... . 23 to divorce ............... . 11Conservation: Accident and healthUnemploymentSubsidies ............... . 32 Form 1099-R: insurance ................ . 4compensation ........... . 29Utility rebates ........... . 36 Charitable gift annuities .... . 31 Adoption, employerWages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 Excess annual additions ... . 10Estate income .............. . 32 assistance ............... . 5Form 1040 or 1040A, Schedule Excess deferral Athletic facilities ............ . 5Estimated tax: B: amounts ................ . 10 Commuter highwayUnemployment Restricted stock Surrender of life insurance vehicles ................. . 7compensation ........... . 30 dividends ............... . 13 policy for cash .......... . 21 De minimis benefits ...... . 5, 7Excess: Form 1040, Schedule A: Form 1120-POL: Dependent care benefits .... . 5Annual additions .......... . 10 Outplacement services, Political organizations ..... . 31 Educational assistance ..... . 5Contributions .............. . 10 deduction for ............. . 4 Form 1120S: Employee discounts ........ . 5Deferrals .................. . 10 Repayment of commissions S corporation return ....... . 16 Faculty lodging ............. . 7Expected inheritance ....... . 34 paid in advance .......... . 3
Form 1120S, Schedule K-1: Financial counseling fees ... . 5Expenses paid by Form 1040, Schedule C: Shareholder's share of income, Holiday gifts ................ . 5another .................. . 32 Bartering .................. . 19 credits, deductions, Meals and lodging .......... . 7Exxon Valdez settlement ... . 32 Childcare providers to etc. ..................... . 16 Moving expenses (See MovingEligible retirement plan .... . 33 use ...................... . 3
Form 2441: expenses)Income averaging ......... . 33 Personal property rental,
Child and dependent care No-additional-costLegal expenses ........... . 33 reporting income from ... . 15
expenses ................ . 5 services ................. . 7Reporting Royalties ................. . 16
Form 4255: Parking .................... . 7requirement-statement........................ . 33 Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
Recapture of investment Retirement planning (SeeBartering .................. . 19
credit ................... . 29 Retirement planning services)Childcare providers to
F Form 6251: Transit pass .............. . 7, 8use ...................... . 3
Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Alternative minimum tax ... . 11 Tuition reduction ........... . 8Personal property rental,
Valuation of ................ . 8Fair market value (FMV) ..... . 8 Form 8839:reporting income from ... . 15
Stock options ............. . 11 Royalties ................. . 16 Adoption assistance ........ . 5 Vehicle .................... . 8
Page 40 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 41 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fringe benefits (Cont.) Prepaid .................... . 2 Leave  (See Accrued leave National Oceanic and
Working condition S corporation ............. . 16 payment) Atmospheric
benefits .................. . 8 Administration ........... . 17Indian fishing rights ........ . 34 Length-of-service awards ... . 3
Frozen deposits: National Senior ServiceIndian money account ...... . 34 Life insurance:
Corps .................... . 15Interest on ................ . 34 Employer-owned .......... . 21Individual retirement
No-additional-costProceeds ................. . 21arrangements (IRAs):
services ................... . 7Surrender of policy forDeduction ................. . 36
G cash .................... . 21Inherited IRA .............. . 34 Nobel prize ................. . 35
Gambling winnings and Loans  (See alsoInheritance ................. . 34 No-fault car insurance:
losses .................... . 33 Mortgage) ................ . 20IRA ....................... . 34 Disability benefits under ... . 19
Gas: Property not substantially Below-market ............. . 31 Nonrecourse debt .......... . 20Royalties from ............ . 16 vested .................. . 13 Student ................... . 20 Nonstatutory stockGifts ....................... . 34 Injury benefits ........... . 16-19 Lockout benefits ........... . 36 options .................. . 11
Holiday gifts from Insurance: Lodging: Nontaxable income .......... . 2employer ................ . 5 Credit card ................ . 32 Campus lodging ............ . 7 Notary fees ................. . 33Government employees  (See Health ..................... . 4 Clergy .................... . 14 Notes received forFederal employees; State Life (See Life insurance) Employer-paid or services ................... . 4employees) Long-term care (See Long-term reimbursed .............. . 7 Not-for-profit activities ..... . 31Grantor trusts .............. . 32 care insurance) Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Nutrition Program for theGroup-term life insurance: Interest: Replacement housing Elderly ................... . 31Canceled debt including ... . 19Worksheets ................ . 6 payments ............... . 31
Frozen deposits ........... . 34Gulf oil spill .............. . 1, 34 Long-term care
Mortgage refunds ......... . 22 insurance .............. . 4, 17 OOption on insurance ....... . 21 Lotteries and raffles ........ . 33 Oil:H Recovery amounts ........ . 22 Lump-sum distributions: Royalties from ............ . 16Savings bond ............. . 34HAMP: Survivor benefits .......... . 29 Old-age, survivors, andState and local governmentHome affordable modification disability insurance benefitsobligations .............. . 34program: (OASDI) .................. . 31Interference with businessPay-for-performance success M Options, stock ......... . 10, 12operations:payments ............. . 31 Manufacturer incentive Outplacement services ...... . 4Damages as income ....... . 32Health: payments ................ . 35 Overseas work .............. . 2International organizations,Flexible spending Meals:
employees of ............ . 14arrangement ............. . 4 Employer-paid or
Interview expenses ......... . 34Insurance .................. . 4 reimbursed .............. . 7 PReimbursement Investment counseling fees Nutrition Program for the Parking fees:arrangement ............. . 5 (See also Retirement planning Elderly .................. . 31 Employer-paid orSavings account ......... . 2, 5 services) ................... . 5 Medical: reimbursed ............ . 7, 8Help  (See Tax help) Investment income ..... . 15, 16 Care reimbursements ...... . 19 Partner and partnershipHighly compensated IRA: Responders, emergency ... . 15 income ................... . 16employees: Roth IRA ................... . 1 Savings accounts ......... . 35 Patents:Excess contributions to elective IRAs  (See Individual retirement Medicare: Infringement damages ..... . 32deferrals ................ . 10 arrangements (IRAs)) Advantage MSAs .......... . 35 Royalties ................. . 16Historic preservation Benefits .................. . 31Iron ore .................... . 16 Peace Corps ............... . 15grants .................... . 34 Tax paid by employer ....... . 4Itemized deductions: Pensions:Hobby losses .............. . 34 Limited ................... . 24 Medicare tax  (See Social Clergy .................... . 14Holding period Recoveries ........... . 22, 23 security and Medicare taxes) Disability pensions ........ . 17requirement .............. . 12 Military  (See Armed forces) Inherited pensions ......... . 34Holiday gifts ................ . 5 Minerals: Military ................... . 15JHolocaust victims Royalties from ............ . 16 Personal property:Job interview expenses .... . 34restitution ................ . 34 Miscellaneous: Rental income andJoint returns:Home, sale of .............. . 35 Compensation ............. . 3 expense ................ . 15Social security benefits or Income ................... . 19Host or hostess ............ . 21 Sale of .................... . 35railroad retirement Missing children, photographsHotels: payments ............... . 36 Personal representatives  (Seeof ......................... . 2No-additional-cost Fiduciaries)Joint state/local tax return:services ................. . 7 More information  (See Tax help)Recoveries ............... . 23 Prepaid income ............. . 2Housing  (See Lodging) Mortgage:Jury duty pay .............. . 34 Price reduced afterAssistance payment ....... . 31 purchase ................. . 20Discounted loan ........... . 20 Prizes and awards ........ . 3, 35I Interest refund ............ . 22K Achievement awards ....... . 3Illegal activities ............ . 34 Qualified principal residenceKickbacks .................. . 35 Employee awards orIncentive stock options indebtedness ........... . 20
bonuses ................ . 35(ISOs) ................ . 11, 12 Relief ..................... . 20
Length-of-service awards ... . 3Income: Motor vehicle,L Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarAssigned .................. . 2 employer-provided ........ . 8Labor unions: prizes .................. . 35Business and Moving expenses:Convention expenses, Safety achievement ........ . 3investment .......... . 15, 16 reimbursed ............. . 36 Reimbursements ........ . 3, 35 Scholarship prizes ......... . 36Constructive receipt of ...... . 2 Dues ..................... . 36 MSAs (Medical savings Profit-sharing plan ......... . 17Estate and trust ........... . 32 Strike and lockout accounts) ................ . 35
Public assistanceForeign employers ........ . 14 benefits ................. . 36
benefits .................. . 30Unemployment benefits paidIllegal ..................... . 34
from .................... . 30 N Public Health Service ....... . 17Miscellaneous ............. . 19
Other ..................... . 31 Last day of tax year, income National Health Service Corps Public safety officers killed in
Partnership ............... . 16 received on ............... . 2 Scholarship Program ..... . 8 line of duty ............... . 29
Publication 525 (2010) Page 41

Page 42 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Public transportation passes, Retirement plans  (See also Stock options .......... . 10, 12 Fringe benefits ............. . 7
employer-provided ...... . 7, 8 Pensions) ................. . 15 Reimbursements ........... . 3Stock options, nonstatutory:
Automatic contribution School children, transportingPublications  (See Tax help) Exercise or transfer ........ . 11
arrangements ............ . 9 of ...................... . 36Grant ..................... . 11Pulitzer prize ............... . 35
Contributions ........ . 8, 10, 12 Sale ...................... . 11 Trusts:Punitive damages .......... . 32 Elective deferrals (See Elective Grantor trusts ............. . 32Stock options, statutory:
deferrals) Income ................... . 32Exercise .................. . 11Q Rewards ................... . 35 Grant ..................... . 11 TTY/TDD information ....... . 37Qualified Joint Venture ...... . 2 Roth contributions .......... . 9 Sale ...................... . 12 Tuition program, qualifiedQualified tuition program Royalties ................... . 16 Stockholder debts .......... . 20 (QTP) .................... . 35(QTP) .................... . 35 Stolen property ............ . 36 Tuition reduction ............ . 8
Strike benefits .............. . 36SR Student loans:S corporations ............. . 16 URaffles ..................... . 33 Cancellation of debt ....... . 20Safety achievement UnemploymentRailroad: Substantial risk ofawards .................... . 3 compensation .......... . 1, 29Retirement annuities ....... . 35 forfeiture ................. . 13Salary reduction simplified Unions  (See Labor unions)Retirement benefits ........ . 36 Substantially vestedemployee pension plans  (See Unlawful discrimination suits:Sick pay .................. . 18 property .................. . 13SARSEPs) Deduction for costs ........ . 32Unemployment compensation Suggestions forSale of home ............... . 35benefits ................. . 29 publication ................ . 2Sales contracts: VReal estate: Supplemental security incomeCancellation of ............ . 31Qualified real property business VA payments ............... . 35(SSI) payments ........... . 36SARSEPs ................... . 9debt, cancellation of ..... . 20 Valuation:Supplemental unemploymentExcess contributions ....... . 10Real property tax ........... . 22 Fringe benefits ............. . 8benefits .................. . 30Savings bonds ............. . 34 Stock options ............. . 11Rebates: Surviving spouse:Savings incentive match plansCash ..................... . 31 Vehicle:Life insurance proceeds paidfor employees  (See SIMPLEUtility ..................... . 36 Commuter highway ......... . 8to ...................... . 21plans) Employer-provided ......... . 8Recovery of amounts Survivor benefits ........... . 29Scholarships andpreviously deducted .... . 22, Veterans benefits .......... . 15fellowships ............... . 3524 Disability compensation .... . 17
Self-employed persons: TItemized deductions ... . 22, 23 Retroactive VA
U.S. citizens working for foreign Tables and figures:Non-itemized determination ........... . 17
employers in U.S. treated Group-term life insurancedeductions .............. . 29 Special statute of
as ...................... . 14 (Table 1) ................ . 6Unused tax credits, refiguring limitations. .............. . 17
Senior Companion Standard deduction (Tablesof .................. . 28, 29 Viatical settlements ........ . 21
Program ................. . 15 2-4) ......... . 24, 26, 27, 28Worksheet of itemized Volunteer work ............. . 15
Service Corps of Retired Tax benefit rule ............ . 22deductions (Worksheet Emergency medical
Executives (SCORE) ..... . 152) ...................... . 25 Tax Counseling for the responders ............. . 15
Severance pay .............. . 4 Elderly ................... . 15Refunds: Firefighters ............... . 15
Outplacement services ..... . 4Federal income tax ........ . 22 Tax help .................... . 37 Tax counseling (Volunteer
Mortgage interest ......... . 22 Sick pay ..................... . 4 Income Tax AssistanceTaxpayer Advocate ......... . 37
State tax .................. . 22 Program) ............... . 15Sickness and injury Tax-sheltered annuity plans
Rehabilitative program benefits .............. . 16, 19 Volunteers in Service to(403(b) plans) ............. . 9
payments ................ . 15 America (VISTA) ......... . 15SIMPLE plans ............... . 9 Limit for .................... . 9
Reimbursements: Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 Terminal illness ............ . 22
Business expenses ......... . 3 Smallpox vaccine Terrorist attacks: WCasualty losses ........... . 31 injuries ................... . 36 Disability payments for injuries W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Meals and lodging .......... . 7 Social security and Medicare from .................... . 17 Welfare benefits ............ . 30Medical expenses ......... . 19 taxes: Victims of, tax relief ......... . 2 Whistleblower .............. . 36Moving expenses ....... . 3, 35 Foreign employers, U.S. Thrift Savings Plan .......... . 9 Winter energy payments ... . 31Related party transactions: citizens working for in Title VII, Civil Rights Act of Withholding:Stock option transfer ....... . 11 U.S. .................... . 14 1964: Barter exchangeReligious order Paid by employer ........... . 4 Back pay and damages for transactions ............ . 19members ................. . 14 Social security benefits .... . 36 emotional distress UnemploymentRental income and expenses: Standard deduction: under ................... . 32 compensation ........... . 30Personal property rental ... . 15 Recoveries ............... . 24 Tour guides, free tours Workers' compensation .... . 18Reporting of ............... . 15 Tables (2008-2006) ... . 24, 27, for ....................... . 33 Working conditionRepayments ............. . 36-37 28 Trade Act of 1974: benefits ................... . 8Tables (2009-2007) ....... . 26Repossession .............. . 31 Trade readjustment allowances Worksheets:State employees:Restricted property ..... . 12, 13 under ............... . 29, 30 Group-term life insuranceUnemployment benefits paidRetired Senior Volunteer Transferable property ...... . 13 (Worksheet 1) ............ . 6to ...................... . 30Program (RSVP) .......... . 15 Transit passes ............ . 7, 8 Recoveries of itemizedState or local governments:Retirement: Travel agencies: deductions (WorksheetInterest on obligations of ... . 34Settlement ................. . 2 Free tour to organizer of group 2) ...................... . 25State or local taxes:Retirement planning of tourists ............... . 33 Work-training programs .... . 30Refunds .................. . 22services ................. . 5, 7 Travel and transportation
Statutory stock option holding ■expenses:
period .................... . 12 Free tours from travel
Stock appreciation rights .... . 4 agencies ............... . 33
Page 42 Publication 525 (2010)

Page 43 of 43 of Publication 525 13:25 - 21-DEC-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for individual Taxpayers See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by computer,
phone, and mail.
535 Business Expenses 915 Social Security and Equivalent RailroadGeneral Guides
Retirement Benefits536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for1 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Individuals, Estates, and Trusts 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?17 Your Federal Income Tax For Individuals 537 Installment Sales 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For 541 Partnerships 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide ForIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or Wages Paid in 2011544 Sales and Other Dispositions of AssetsC-EZ) 929 Tax Rules for Children and Dependents547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts509 Tax Calendars for 2011 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction550 Investment Income and Expenses910 IRS Guide to Free Tax Services (Including Capital Gains and Losses) 946 How To Depreciate Property
Specialized Publications 551 Basis of Assets 947 Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney552 Recordkeeping for Individuals3 Armed Forces' Tax Guide
950 Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes554 Tax Guide for Seniors54 Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax555 Community PropertyAliens Abroad
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other556 Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,225 Farmer's Tax Guide
Tax-Favored Health Plansand Claims for Refund463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
970 Tax Benefits for Education559 Survivors, Executors, and AdministratorsExpenses
971 Innocent Spouse Relief561 Determining the Value of Donated501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Property 972 Child Tax CreditFiling Information
570 Tax Guide for Individuals With Income 1542 Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the502 Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
From U.S. Possessions Continental United States)the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
571 Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) 1544 Reporting Cash Payments of Over503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Plans) For Employees of Public $10,000 (Received in a Trade or504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt Business)505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Organizations 1546 Taxpayer Advocate Service ± Your514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
575 Pension and Annuity Income Voice at the IRS516 U.S. Government Civilian Employees
584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft LossStationed Abroad Spanish Language PublicationsWorkbook (Personal-Use Property)517 Social Security and Other Information for 1SP Derechos del Contribuyente587 Business Use of Your Home (IncludingMembers of the Clergy and Religious 17SP El Impuesto Federal sobre los IngresosUse by Daycare Providers)Workers Para Personas Fisicas590 Individual Retirement Arrangements519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens 547SP Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos(IRAs)521 Moving Expenses 584SP Registro de PÂerdidas por Hechos593 Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and523 Selling Your Home Fortuitos (Imprevistos), Desastres yResidents Going Abroad524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Robos (Propiedad de Uso Personal)594 The IRS Collection Process525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income 594SP El Proceso de Cobro del IRS596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)526 Charitable Contributions 596SP CrÂedito por Ingreso del Trabajo721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service527 Residential Rental Property (Including 850EN/ English-Spanish Glossary of Words andRetirement BenefitsRental of Vacation Homes) SP Phrases Used in Publications Issued901 U.S. Tax Treaties529 Miscellaneous Deductions by the Internal Revenue Service907 Tax Highlights for Persons with530 Tax Information for Homeowners 1544SP Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en ExcesoDisabilities531 Reporting Tip Income de $10,000 (Recibidos en una908 Bankruptcy Tax Guide OcupaciÂon o Negocio)
Commonly Used Tax Forms See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Business ExpensesForm Number and Title
2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals, Estates, and1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return TrustsSch A Itemized Deductions 2441 Child and Dependent Care ExpensesSch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration of RepresentativeSch C Profit or Loss From Business 2848SP Poder Legal y DeclaraciÂon del RepresentanteSch C-EZ Net Profit From Business 3903 Moving ExpensesSch D Capital Gains and Losses 4562 Depreciation and AmortizationSch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 4868 Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.Sch E Supplemental Income and Loss Individual Income Tax ReturnSch EIC Earned Income Credit 4868SP Solicitud de PrÂorroga AutomÂatica para Presentar la DeclaraciÂonSch F Profit or Loss From Farming del Impuesto sobre el Ingreso Personal de los EstadosSch H Household Employment Taxes UnidosSch J Income Averaging for Farmers and 4952 Investment Interest Expense DeductionFishermen 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and OtherSch L Standard Deduction for Certain Tax-Favored AccountsFilers 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividualsSch M Making Work Pay 8283 Noncash Charitable ContributionsSch R Credit for the Elderly or 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsthe Disabled 8606 Nondeductible IRAsSch SE Self-Employment Tax 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit1040A U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 8822 Change of Address1040EZ Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers With No 8829 Expenses for Business Use of Your HomeDependents 8863 Education Credits (American Opportunity, and Lifetime1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals Learning Credits)1040X Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 9465 Installment Agreement Request2106 Employee Business Expenses 9465SP Solicitud para un Plan de Pagos a Plazos
Publication 525 (2010) Page 43