Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 27  10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 502
Cat. No. 15002Q
Medical and
Dental
Expenses
(Including the Health 
Coverage Tax Credit)
For use in preparing
2019 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Contents
What's New .............................. 1
Reminders ............................... 1
Introduction .............................. 2
What Are Medical Expenses? ................. 2
What Expenses Can You Include This Year? ..... 2
How Much of the Expenses Can You Deduct? .... 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include? ..... 3
What Medical Expenses Are Includible? ........ 5
What Expenses Aren't Includible? ............ 15
How Do You Treat Reimbursements? ......... 17
How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction 
on Your Tax Return? ................... 19
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property ........ 19
Damages for Personal Injuries ............... 20
Impairment-Related Work Expenses .......... 21
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed 
Persons ............................. 21
Health Coverage Tax Credit ................. 22
How To Get Tax Help ...................... 22
Index .................................. 25
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 502, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub502.
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for 
medical reasons is 20 cents a mile. See Transportation 
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible, later.
Reminders
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. You can help bring 
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
calling 800-THE-LOST (800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
Jan 21, 2020

Page 2 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A 
(Form 1040 or 1040 -SR). It discusses what expenses, 
and whose expenses, you can and can't include in figuring 
the deduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements 
and how to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to re-
port the deduction on your tax return and what to do if you 
sell medical property or receive damages for a personal 
injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this 
publication the term “medical expenses” is often used to 
refer to medical and dental expenses.
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) only the part of your medical and dental expen-
ses that is more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income 
(AGI).
This publication also explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums 
if you are self -employed, and the health coverage tax 
credit that is available to certain individuals.
Pub. 502 covers many common medical expenses but 
not every possible medical expense. If you can't find the 
expense you are looking for, refer to the definition of medi-
cal expenses under What Are Medical Expenses, later.
See How To Get Tax Help  near the end of this publica-
tion for information about getting publications and forms.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and your suggestions for fu-
ture editions.
You can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to: Internal Revenue 
Service, Tax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments as we revise our tax forms, in-
structions, and publications. We can’t answer tax ques-
tions sent to the above address.
Tax questions.  If you have a tax question not an-
swered by this publication or How To Get Tax Help  sec-
tion at the end of this publication, go to the IRS Interactive 
Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/Help/ITA where you can 
find topics using the search feature or by viewing the cate-
gories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Visit IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. Your order should arrive 
within 10 business days.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other 
Tax-Favored Health Plans
Forms (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
1040-SR U.S. Tax Return for Seniors
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) Itemized 
Deductions
8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
8962 Premium Tax Credit (PTC)
What Are Medical Expenses?
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and for the pur-
pose of affecting any part or function of the body. These 
expenses include payments for legal medical services 
rendered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and other 
medical practitioners. They include the costs of equip-
ment, supplies, and diagnostic devices needed for these 
purposes.
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate or 
prevent a physical or mental disability or illness. They 
don't include expenses that are merely beneficial to gen-
eral health, such as vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for in-
surance that covers the expenses of medical care, and 
the amounts you pay for transportation to get medical 
care. Medical expenses also include amounts paid for 
qualified long -term care services and limited amounts 
paid for any qualified long-term care insurance contract.
What Expenses Can You 
Include This Year?
You can include only the medical and dental expenses 
you paid this year, but generally not payments for medical 
or dental care you will receive in a future year. (But see 
Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses Can You In-
clude, later, for an exception.) This is not the rule for de-
termining whether an expense can be reimbursed by a 
flexible spending arrangement (FSA). If you pay medical 
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the check 
generally is the date of payment. If you use a 
“pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medical 
expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
cial institution showing when payment was made is the 
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical 
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the 
  969
  1040
  1040-SR
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  8885
  8962
Page 2 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 3 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amount 
charged.
If you didn't claim a medical or dental expense that 
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file 
Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
turn, to claim a refund for the year in which you over-
looked the expense. Don't claim the expense on this 
year's return. Generally, a claim for refund must be filed 
within 3 years from the date the original return was filed or 
within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whichever is 
later.
You can't include medical expenses that were paid by 
insurance companies or other sources. This is true 
whether the payments were made directly to you, to the 
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non-
community property state and file separate returns, each 
of you can include only the medical expenses each ac-
tually paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint 
checking account in which you and your spouse have the 
same interest are considered to have been paid equally 
by each of you, unless you can show otherwise.
Community property states.  If you and your spouse 
live in a community property state and file separate re-
turns or are registered domestic partners in Nevada, 
Washington, or California, any medical expenses paid out 
of community funds are divided equally. Generally, each 
of you should include half the expenses. If medical expen-
ses are paid out of the separate funds of one individual, 
only the individual who paid the medical expenses can in-
clude them. If you live in a community property state and 
aren't filing a joint return, see Pub. 555, Community Prop-
erty. 
How Much of the Expenses 
Can You Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) only the amount of your medical and dental ex-
penses that is more than 7.5% of your AGI.
Whose Medical Expenses
Can You Include?
You can generally include medical expenses you pay for 
yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who was 
your spouse or your dependent either when the services 
were provided or when you paid for them. There are differ-
ent rules for decedents and for individuals who are the 
subject of multiple support agreements. See Support 
claimed under a multiple support agreement , later, under 
Qualifying Relative.
Spouse
You can include medical expenses you paid for your 
spouse. To include these expenses, you must have been 
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.
Example 1.  Mary received medical treatment before 
she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after they mar-
ried. Bill can include these expenses in figuring his medi-
cal expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file separate 
returns.
If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill couldn't include 
Mary's expenses on his separate return. Mary would in-
clude the amounts she paid during the year on her sepa-
rate return. If they filed a joint return, the medical expen-
ses both paid during the year would be used to figure their 
medical expense deduction.
Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for 
his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle 
this year and they file a joint return. Because John was 
married to Louise when she received the medical serv-
ices, he can include those expenses in figuring his medi-
cal expense deduction for this year.
Dependent
You can include medical expenses you paid for your de-
pendent. For you to include these expenses, the person 
must have been your dependent either at the time the 
medical services were provided or at the time you paid the 
expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependent 
for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both of 
the following requirements are met.
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined later) or a 
qualifying relative (defined later).
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resident 
of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your quali-
fying child was adopted, see Exception for adopted 
child, later.
You can include medical expenses you paid for an individ-
ual that would have been your dependent except that:
1. He or she received gross income of $4,200 or more in 
2019;
2. He or she filed a joint return for 2019; or
3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed 
as a dependent on someone else's 2019 return.
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or 
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-
ber of your household for 2019, that child doesn't have to 
be a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United 
States, Canada, or Mexico.
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child is a child who:
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 3

Page 4 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, 
or a descendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew);
2. Was:
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2019 and younger than 
you (or your spouse if filing jointly),
b. Under age 24 at the end of 2019, a full-time stu-
dent, and younger than you (or your spouse if fil-
ing jointly), or
c. Any age and permanently and totally disabled;
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2019;
4. Didn't provide over half of his or her own support for 
2019; and
5. Didn't file a joint return, other than to claim a refund.
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as your 
own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with 
you for legal adoption.
You can include medical expenses that you paid for a 
child before adoption if the child qualified as your depend-
ent when the medical services were provided or when the 
expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons 
for medical expenses they paid under an agreement with 
you, you are treated as having paid those expenses provi-
ded you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly 
attributable to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for medical 
care that was provided and paid for before adoption nego-
tiations began, you can't include them as medical expen-
ses.
You may be able to take a credit for other expen-
ses related to an adoption. See the Instructions 
for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for 
more information.
Child of divorced or separated parents.  For purposes 
of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of 
divorced or separated parents can be treated as a de-
pendent of both parents. Each parent can include the 
medical expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the 
other parent claims the child's dependency exemption, if:
1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half the year;
2. The child receives over half of his or her support dur-
ing the year from his or her parents; and
3. The child's parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year.
TIP
This doesn't apply if the child's exemption is being 
claimed under a multiple support agreement (discussed 
later).
Qualifying Relative
A qualifying relative is a person:
1. Who is your:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your grand-
child),
b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, or a son or 
daughter of any of them,
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either 
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-
ther, aunt, or uncle),
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother, 
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who 
lived with you all year as a member of your house-
hold if your relationship didn't violate local law,
2. Who wasn't a qualifying child (see Qualifying Child, 
earlier) of any taxpayer for 2019, and
3. For whom you provided over half of the support in 
2019. But see Child of divorced or separated parents, 
earlier, Support claimed under a multiple support 
agreement next, and Kidnapped child under Qualify-
ing Relative in Pub. 501, Dependents, Standard De-
duction, and Filing Information.
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-
ment. If you are considered to have provided more than 
half of a qualifying relative's support under a multiple sup-
port agreement, you can include medical expenses you 
pay for that person. A multiple support agreement is used 
when two or more people provide more than half of a per-
son's support, but no one alone provides more than half.
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in 
the agreement can't be included as medical expenses by 
anyone. However, you can include the entire unreim-
bursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
Example. You and your three brothers each provide 
one-fourth of your mother's total support. Under a multiple 
support agreement, you treat your mother as your de-
pendent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your 
brothers repaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In 
figuring your medical expense deduction, you can include 
only one-fourth of your mother's medical expenses. Your 
brothers can't include any part of the expenses. However, 
if you and your brothers share the nonmedical support 
items and you separately pay all of your mother's medical 
expenses, you can include the unreimbursed amount you 
paid for her medical expenses in your medical expenses.
Page 4 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 5 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Decedent
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are 
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental 
expenses on the decedent's final income tax return. This 
includes expenses for the decedent's spouse and de-
pendents as well as for the decedent.
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent 
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece-
dent's estate for the decedent's medical care as paid by 
the decedent at the time the medical services were provi-
ded. The expenses must be paid within the 1 -year period 
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are 
the survivor or personal representative making this 
choice, you must attach a statement to the decedent's 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR (or the decedent's amended re-
turn, Form 1040-X) saying that the expenses haven't been 
and won't be claimed on the estate tax return.
Qualified medical expenses paid before death by 
the decedent aren't deductible if paid with a 
tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA, Medi-
care Advantage MSA, or health savings account.
What if the decedent's return had been filed and the 
medical expenses weren't included?  Form 1040 -X 
can be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated 
as paid, unless the period for claiming a refund has 
passed. Generally, a claim for refund must be filed within 
3 years of the date the original return was filed, or within 2 
years from the time the tax was paid, whichever date is 
later.
Example. John properly filed his 2018 income tax re-
turn. He died in 2019 with unpaid medical expenses of 
$1,500 from 2018 and $1,800 in 2019. If the expenses are 
paid within the 1-year period, his survivor or personal rep-
resentative can file an amended return for 2018 claiming a 
deduction based on the $1,500 medical expenses. The 
$1,800 of medical expenses from 2019 can be included 
on the decedent's final return for 2019.
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased 
spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for 
your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as 
medical expenses on your Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) in the year paid, whether they are paid before or 
after the decedent's death. The expenses can be included 
if the person was your spouse or dependent either at the 
time the medical services were provided or at the time you 
paid the expenses.
What Medical Expenses Are 
Includible?
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuring 
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in 
alphabetical order.
CAUTION
!
This list doesn't include all possible medical expenses. 
To determine if an expense not listed can be included in 
figuring your medical expense deduction, see What Are 
Medical Expenses, earlier.
Abortion
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a legal abortion.
Acupuncture
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for acupuncture.
Alcoholism
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by 
the center during treatment.
You can also include in medical expenses amounts you 
pay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymous 
meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant 
to medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony-
mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving 
the excessive use of alcoholic liquors.
Ambulance
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
ambulance service.
Annual Physical Examination
See Physical Examination, later.
Artificial Limb
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an artificial limb.
Artificial Teeth
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for artificial teeth.
Bandages
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
supplies such as bandages.
Birth Control Pills
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 5

Page 6 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Body Scan
You can include in medical expenses the cost of an elec-
tronic body scan.
Braille Books and Magazines
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost 
of Braille books and magazines for use by a visually im-
paired person that is more than the cost of regular printed 
editions.
Breast Pumps and Supplies
You can include in medical expenses the cost of breast 
pumps and supplies that assist lactation. This doesn’t in-
clude the costs of excess bottles for food storage.
Breast Reconstruction Surgery
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for breast reconstruction surgery, as well as breast 
prosthesis, following a mastectomy for cancer. See Cos-
metic Surgery, later.
Capital Expenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, your 
spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-
provements that increase the value of your property may 
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of the 
improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of 
your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the 
value of your property isn't increased by the improvement, 
the entire cost is included as a medical expense.
Certain improvements made to accommodate a home 
to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your 
dependents who live with you, don't usually increase the 
value of the home and the cost can be included in full as 
medical expenses. These improvements include, but 
aren't limited to, the following items.
• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your 
home.
• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and interior 
doorways.
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifications 
to bathrooms.
• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but eleva-
tors generally add value to the house).
• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other 
warning systems.
• Modifying stairways.
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether or 
not in bathrooms).
• Modifying hardware on doors.
• Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.
• Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to your 
disabled condition are considered medical care. Addi-
tional costs for personal motives, such as for architectural 
or aesthetic reasons, aren't medical expenses.
Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure 
the amount of your capital expense to include in your 
medical expenses.
Capital Expense 
Worksheet
Worksheet A.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of your 
medical expenses due to a home improvement.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home 
improvement .......................... 1.  
2. Enter the value of your home 
immediately after the 
improvement ............... 2.  
3. Enter the value of your home 
immediately before the 
improvement ............... 3.  
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the 
increase in the value of your home due to the 
improvement .......................... 4.  
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you 
have no medical expenses due to the home 
improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your 
medical expenses due to the home 
improvement .......................... 5.  
Operation and upkeep.  Amounts you pay for operation 
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses 
as long as the main reason for them is medical care. This 
rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of 
the capital asset qualified as a medical care expense.
Improvements to property rented by a person with a 
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special 
plumbing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for 
medical reasons, in a rented house are medical expen-
ses.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 7 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. He 
can't climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor's ad-
vice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the first 
floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord didn't pay 
any of the cost of buying and installing the special plumb-
ing and didn't lower the rent. John can include in medical 
expenses the entire amount he paid.
Car
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
hand controls and other special equipment installed in a 
car for the use of a person with a disability.
Special design.  You can include in medical expenses 
the difference between the cost of a regular car and a car 
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car for 
medical reasons are explained under Transportation, 
later.
Chiropractor
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a 
chiropractor for medical care.
Christian Science Practitioner
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to 
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
Contact Lenses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can also 
include the cost of equipment and materials required for 
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme 
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.
Crutches
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to buy or rent crutches.
Dental Treatment
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for the prevention and alleviation of dental disease. 
Preventive treatment includes the services of a dental hy-
gienist or dentist for such procedures as teeth cleaning, 
the application of sealants, and fluoride treatments to pre-
vent tooth decay. Treatment to alleviate dental disease in-
cludes services of a dentist for procedures such as 
X-rays, fillings, braces, extractions, dentures, and other 
dental ailments. But see Teeth Whitening under What Ex-
penses Aren't Includible, later.
Diagnostic Devices
You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices 
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugar 
test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include 
the cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical expen-
ses.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as 
either:
• Medical expenses, or
• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a credit 
for dependent care. See Pub. 503, Child and Depend-
ent Care Expenses.
You can choose to apply them either way as long as you 
don't use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a 
medical expense deduction.
Drug Addiction
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for drug 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center 
during treatment.
Drugs
See Medicines, later.
Eye Exam
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye examinations.
Eyeglasses
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-
sons. See Contact Lenses, earlier, for more information.
Eye Surgery
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye 
surgery or radial keratotomy.
Fertility Enhancement
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the fol-
lowing procedures performed on yourself, your spouse, or 
your dependent to overcome an inability to have children.
• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including tem-
porary storage of eggs or sperm).
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 7

Page 8 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
gery that prevented the person operated on from hav-
ing children.
Founder's Fee
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
You can include in medical expenses the costs of buying, 
training, and maintaining a guide dog or other service ani-
mal to assist a visually impaired or hearing disabled per-
son, or a person with other physical disabilities. In gen-
eral, this includes any costs, such as food, grooming, and 
veterinary care, incurred in maintaining the health and vi-
tality of the service animal so that it may perform its duties.
Health Institute
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for 
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physi-
cal or mental disability or illness of the individual receiving 
the treatment.
Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medi-
cal care from an HMO. These amounts are treated as 
medical insurance premiums. See Insurance Premiums , 
later.
Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing 
aid and batteries, repairs, and maintenance needed to op-
erate it.
Home Care
See Nursing Services, later.
Home Improvements
See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution 
if a principal reason for being there is to receive medical 
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging. 
Also see Lodging, later.
Insurance Premiums
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiums 
you pay for policies that cover medical care. You can't in-
clude in medical expenses insurance premiums that were 
paid and for which you are claiming a credit or deduction. 
Medical care policies can provide payment for treatment 
that includes:
• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays;
• Prescription drugs and insulin;
• Dental care;
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses; and
• Long-term care (subject to additional limitations). See 
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts under 
Long-Term Care, later.
If you have a policy that provides payments for other 
than medical care, you can include the premiums for the 
medical care part of the policy if the charge for the medi-
cal part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part must 
be separately stated in the insurance contract or given to 
you in a separate statement.
Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC)
If you were an eligible trade adjustment assistance (TAA) 
recipient, an alternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemploy-
ment TAA (RTAA) recipient, or Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) payee, you must complete Form 
8885 before completing Schedule A, line 1. When figuring 
the amount of insurance premiums you can deduct on 
Schedule A, don't include any of the following.
• Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4, or on 
Form 14095, The Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) 
Reimbursement Request Form, to receive a reim-
bursement of the HCTC during the year.
• Any qualified health insurance coverage premiums 
you paid to "U.S. Treasury–HCTC" for eligible cover-
age months for which you received the benefit of the 
advance monthly payment program.
• Any advance monthly payments from your health plan 
administrator received from the IRS, as shown on 
Form 1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) 
Advance Payments.
If advance payments of the premium tax credit were 
made or you are eligible for both the premium tax credit 
and the HCTC and elect to take the HCTC, see the In-
structions for Form 8885 to see how to figure your credit.
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Don't include in your medical and dental expenses any in-
surance premiums paid by an employer -sponsored health 
insurance plan unless the premiums are included on your 
Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Also, don't include 
any other medical and dental expenses paid by the plan 
unless the amount paid is included on your Form W-2.
Page 8 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 9 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are a federal employee participating in 
the premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee 
Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB 
premium is paid by making a pre -tax reduction in your sal-
ary. Because you are an employee whose insurance pre-
miums are paid with money that is never included in your 
gross income, you can't deduct the premiums paid with 
that money.
Long-term care services.  Contributions made by your 
employer to provide coverage for qualified long -term care 
services under a flexible spending or similar arrangement 
must be included in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages on your Form W-2.
Retired public safety officers.  If you are a retired pub-
lic safety officer, don't include as medical expenses any 
health or long -term care insurance premiums that you 
elected to have paid with tax -free distributions from a re-
tirement plan. This applies only to distributions that would 
otherwise be included in income.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  If you 
have medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health 
reimbursement arrangement, you can't include those ex-
penses in your medical expenses.
Medicare A
If you are covered under social security (or if you are a 
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are 
enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare 
A isn't a medical expense.
If you aren't covered under social security (or weren't a 
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you can 
voluntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation, you can 
include the premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medi-
cal expense.
Medicare B
Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-
ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. 
Check the information you received from the Social Se-
curity Administration to find out your premium.
Medicare D
Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance pro-
gram for persons with Medicare A or B. You can include 
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.
Prepaid Insurance Premiums
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for 
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your depend-
ents after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in 
the year paid if they are:
1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often; 
and
2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age 
65 (but not for less than 5 years).
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
You must include in gross income cash payments you re-
ceive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. You 
must also include in gross income the value of unused 
sick leave that, at your option, your employer applies to 
the cost of your continuing participation in your employer's 
health plan after you retire. You can include this cost of 
continuing participation in the health plan as a medical ex-
pense.
If you participate in a health plan where your employer 
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the 
cost of your continuing participation in the health plan 
(and you don't have the option to receive cash), don't in-
clude the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. 
You can't include this cost of continuing participation in 
that health plan as a medical expense.
Insurance Premiums You Can't Include
You can't include premiums you pay for:
• Life insurance policies;
• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings;
• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.;
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each week 
for a stated number of weeks if you are hospitalized 
for sickness or injury;
• The part of your car insurance that provides medical 
insurance coverage for all persons injured in or by 
your car because the part of the premium providing in-
surance for you, your spouse, and your dependents 
isn't stated separately from the part of the premium 
providing insurance for medical care for others; or
• Health or long-term care insurance if you elected to 
pay these premiums with tax-free distributions from a 
retirement plan made directly to the insurance pro-
vider and these distributions would otherwise have 
been included in income.
Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-
care taxes, aren't insurance premiums.
Coverage for nondependents. Generally, you can't de-
duct any additional premium you pay as the result of in-
cluding on your policy someone who isn't your spouse or 
dependent, even if that person is your child under age 27. 
However, you can deduct the additional premium if that 
person is:
• Your child whom you don't claim as a dependent be-
cause of the rules for children of divorced or separa-
ted parents;
• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
on your return except that person received $4,200 or 
more of gross income or filed a joint return; or
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 9

Page 10 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
except that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's 2019 re-
turn.
Also, if you had family coverage when you added this indi-
vidual to your policy and your premiums didn't increase, 
you can enter on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR) the 
full amount of your medical and dental insurance premi-
ums.
Intellectually and Developmentally 
Disabled, Special Home for
You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping 
a person who is intellectually and developmentally disa-
bled in a special home, not the home of a relative, on the 
recommendation of a psychiatrist to help the person ad-
just from life in a mental hospital to community living.
Laboratory Fees
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
Lactation Expenses
See Breast Pumps and Supplies, earlier.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
You can include in medical expenses the cost of removing 
lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a 
child who has or had lead poisoning from eating the paint. 
These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or crack-
ing) or within the child's reach. The cost of repainting the 
scraped area isn't a medical expense.
If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area 
with wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex-
penses. See Capital Expenses , earlier. Don't include the 
cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.
Learning Disability
See Special Education, later.
Legal Fees
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid 
that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
ness. However, you can't include in medical expenses 
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees 
for conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or 
other fees that aren't necessary for medical care.
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments
You can include in medical expenses a part of a life -care 
fee or “founder's fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump 
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part 
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-
ble to medical care. The agreement must require that you 
pay a specific fee as a condition for the home's promise to 
provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can 
use a statement from the retirement home to prove the 
amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement 
must be based either on the home's prior experience or on 
information from a comparable home.
Dependents with disabilities. You can include in medi-
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution for 
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or 
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you be-
come unable to provide care. The payments must be a 
condition for the institution's future acceptance of your 
child and must not be refundable.
Payments for future medical care. Generally, you can't 
include in medical expenses current payments for medical 
care (including medical insurance) to be provided sub-
stantially beyond the end of the year. This rule doesn't ap-
ply in situations where the future care is purchased in con-
nection with obtaining lifetime care of the type described 
earlier.
Lodging
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals 
and lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principal 
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See 
Nursing Home, later.
You may be able to include in medical expenses the 
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-
tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while away 
from home if all of the following requirements are met.
1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical 
care.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a licensed 
hospital or in a medical care facility related to, or the 
equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
3. The lodging isn't lavish or extravagant under the cir-
cumstances.
4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure, 
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing can't be more than $50 for each night for each person. 
You can include lodging for a person traveling with the 
person receiving the medical care. For example, if a pa-
rent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night can 
be included as a medical expense for lodging. Meals 
aren't included.
Don't include the cost of lodging while away from home 
for medical treatment if that treatment isn't received from a 
doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility 
related to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that 
lodging isn't primarily for or essential to the medical care 
received.
Page 10 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 11 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Long-Term Care
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
qualified long -term care services and certain amounts of 
premiums paid for qualified long-term care insurance con-
tracts.
Qualified Long-Term Care Services
Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care 
services (defined later) that are:
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and
2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a li-
censed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual.  An individual is chronically ill 
if, within the previous 12 months, a licensed health care 
practitioner has certified that the individual meets either of 
the following descriptions.
1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance from an-
other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of 
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eating, 
toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
nence.
2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-
tected from threats to health and safety due to severe 
cognitive impairment.
Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte-
nance or personal care services is care which has as its 
primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual 
with needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-
ing protection from threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment).
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts
A qualified long -term care insurance contract is an insur-
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified 
long-term care services. The contract must:
1. Be guaranteed renewable;
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other money 
that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or borrowed;
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death 
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellation 
of the contract, and dividends under the contract must 
be used only to reduce future premiums or increase 
future benefits; and
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred for 
services or items that would be reimbursed under 
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary 
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-
odic payments without regard to expenses.
The amount of qualified long -term care premiums you 
can include is limited. You can include the following as 
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the following 
amounts.
a. Age 40 or under—$420.
b. Age 41 to 50—$790.
c. Age 51 to 60—$1,580.
d. Age 61 to 70—$4,220.
e. Age 71 or over—$5,270.
2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care 
services.
Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Also, if you are an eligible retired public safety officer, 
you can't include premiums for long-term care insurance if 
you elected to pay these premiums with tax -free distribu-
tions from a qualified retirement plan made directly to the 
insurance provider and these distributions would other-
wise have been included in your income.
Meals
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at 
a hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for be-
ing there is to get medical care.
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of 
meals that aren't part of inpatient care. Also see 
Weight-Loss Program and Nutritional Supplements, later.
Medical Conferences
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
admission and transportation to a medical conference if 
the medical conference concerns the chronic illness of 
yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of 
the medical conference must be primarily for and neces-
sary to the medical care of you, your spouse, or your de-
pendent. The majority of the time spent at the conference 
must be spent attending sessions on medical information.
The cost of meals and lodging while attending the 
conference isn't deductible as a medical expense.
Medical Information Plan
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a 
plan that keeps medical information in a computer data 
bank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon re-
quest to an attending physician.
Medicines
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one 
CAUTION
!
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 11

Page 12 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an in-
dividual. You can also include amounts you pay for insu-
lin. Except for insulin, you can't include in medical expen-
ses amounts you pay for a drug that isn't prescribed.
Imported medicines and drugs.  If you imported medi-
cines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines and 
Drugs From Other Countries under What Expenses Aren't 
Includible, later.
Nursing Home
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar insti-
tution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. This 
includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a 
principal reason for being there is to get medical care.
Don't include the cost of meals and lodging if the rea-
son for being in the home is personal. You can, however, 
include in medical expenses the part of the cost that is for 
medical or nursing care.
Nursing Services
You can include in medical expenses wages and other 
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need 
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of 
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
ices connected with caring for the patient's condition, 
such as giving medication or changing dressings, as well 
as bathing and grooming the patient. These services can 
be provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is 
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides per-
sonal and household services, amounts paid to the at-
tendant must be divided between the time spent perform-
ing household and personal services and the time spent 
for nursing services. For example, because of your medi-
cal condition, you pay a visiting nurse $300 per week for 
medical and household services. She spends 10% of her 
time doing household services such as washing dishes 
and laundry. You can include only $270 per week as med-
ical expenses. The $30 (10% × $300) allocated to house-
hold services can't be included. However, certain mainte-
nance or personal care services provided for qualified 
long-term care can be included in medical expenses. See 
Maintenance and personal care services  under 
Long-Term Care , earlier. Additionally, certain expenses 
for household services or for the care of a qualifying indi-
vidual incurred to allow you to work may qualify for the 
child and dependent care credit. See Pub. 503.
You can also include in medical expenses part of the 
amount you pay for that attendant's meals. Divide the food 
expense among the household members to find the cost 
of the attendant's food. Then divide that cost in the same 
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay 
additional amounts for household upkeep because of the 
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your 
medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you 
pay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide 
space for the attendant.
Employment taxes.  You can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state 
employment taxes you pay for an attendant who provides 
medical care. If the attendant also provides personal and 
household services, you can include as a medical ex-
pense only the amount of employment taxes paid for med-
ical services as explained earlier. For information on em-
ployment tax responsibilities of household employers, see 
Pub. 926.
Operations
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
legal operations that aren't for cosmetic surgery. See Cos-
metic Surgery  under What Expenses Aren't Includible , 
later.
Optometrist
See Eyeglasses, earlier.
Organ Donors
See Transplants, later.
Osteopath
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
an osteopath for medical care.
Oxygen
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing prob-
lems caused by a medical condition.
Physical Examination
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an annual physical examination and diagnostic tests 
by a physician. You don't have to be ill at the time of the 
examination.
Pregnancy Test Kit
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to purchase a pregnancy test kit to determine if you are 
pregnant.
Premium Tax Credit
You can't include in medical expenses the amount of 
health insurance premiums paid by or through the pre-
mium tax credit. You also can't include in medical expen-
ses any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit made that you did not have to pay back. However, 
any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
Page 12 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 13 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit that you did have to pay back can be included in 
medical expenses.
Example 1. Amy is under age 65 and unmarried. The 
cost of her health insurance premiums in 2019 is $8,700. 
Advance payments of the premium tax credit of $4,200 
are made to the insurance company and Amy pays premi-
ums of $4,500. On her 2019 tax return, Amy is allowed a 
premium tax credit of $3,600 and must repay $600 excess 
advance credit payments (which is less than the repay-
ment limitation). Amy is treated as paying $5,100 ($8,700 
less the allowed premium tax credit of $3,600) for health 
insurance premiums in 2019. When Amy fills out her 
Schedule A, she enters $5,100 on line 1.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except Amy is allowed a premium tax credit of $4,900 on 
her tax return and receives a net premium tax credit of 
$700. Amy is treated as paying $3,800 ($8,700 less the al-
lowed premium tax credit of $4,900) for health insurance 
premiums in 2019. When Amy fills out her Schedule A, 
she enters $3,800 on line 1.
Prosthesis
See Artificial Limb  and Breast Reconstruction Surgery , 
earlier.
Psychiatric Care
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting a 
mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical 
center where the dependent receives medical care. See 
Psychoanalysis next and Transportation, later.
Psychoanalysis
You can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
choanalysis. However, you can't include payments for 
psychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a psy-
choanalyst.
Psychologist
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
a psychologist for medical care.
Special Education
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a 
doctor's recommendation for a child's tutoring by a 
teacher who is specially trained and qualified to work with 
children who have learning disabilities caused by mental 
or physical impairments, including nervous system disor-
ders.
You can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition, 
meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes 
special education to help a child to overcome learning dis-
abilities. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be the 
primary reason for attending the school, and any ordinary 
education received must be incidental to the special edu-
cation provided. Special education includes:
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person,
• Teaching lip reading to a hearing disabled person, or
• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-
tion caused by a birth defect.
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of send-
ing a child with behavioral problems to a school where the 
course of study and the disciplinary methods have a ben-
eficial effect on the child's attitude if the availability of 
medical care in the school isn't a principal reason for 
sending the student there.
Sterilization
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal 
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
son unable to have children). Also see Vasectomy, later.
Stop-Smoking Programs
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
a program to stop smoking. However, you can't include in 
medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that don't 
require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches, 
that are designed to help stop smoking.
Surgery
See Operations, earlier.
Telephone
You can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
telephone equipment that lets a person who is deaf, hard 
of hearing, or has a speech disability communicate over a 
regular telephone. This includes teletypewriter (TTY) and 
telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) equipment. 
You can also include the cost of repairing the equipment.
Television
You can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs as 
subtitles for persons with a hearing disability. This may be 
the cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It may 
also be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televi-
sion that exceeds the cost of the same model regular tele-
vision set.
Therapy
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
therapy received as medical treatment.
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 13

Page 14 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transplants
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
medical care you receive because you are a donor or a 
possible donor of a kidney or other organ. This includes 
transportation.
You can include any expenses you pay for the medical 
care of a donor in connection with the donation of an or-
gan to you, your spouse, or dependent. This includes 
transportation.
Transportation
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.
You can include:
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service;
• Transportation expenses of a parent who must go with 
a child who needs medical care;
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person 
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
ment required by a patient who is traveling to get med-
ical care and is unable to travel alone; and
• Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a 
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recommen-
ded as a part of treatment.
Car expenses. You can include out -of-pocket expenses, 
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car for 
medical reasons. You can't include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.
If you don't want to use your actual expenses for 2019, 
you can use the standard medical mileage rate of 20 
cents a mile.
You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can 
add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses 
whether you use actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate.
Example. In 2019, Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for 
medical reasons. He spent $400 for gas, $30 for oil, and 
$100 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the amount 
he can include in medical expenses both ways to see 
which gives him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $400 
for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for tolls and parking 
for a total of $530.
He then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi-
plies 2,800 miles by 20 cents a mile for a total of $560. He 
then adds the $100 tolls and parking for a total of $660.
Bill includes the $660 of car expenses with his other 
medical expenses for the year because the $660 is more 
than the $530 he figured using actual expenses.
Transportation expenses you can't include.  You can't 
include in medical expenses the cost of transportation in 
the following situations.
• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-
quires an unusual means of transportation.
• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city for 
an operation or other medical care.
• Travel that is merely for the general improvement of 
one's health.
• The costs of operating a specially equipped car for 
other than medical reasons.
Trips
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, and 
essential to, receiving medical services. You may be able 
to include up to $50 for each night for each person. You 
can include lodging for a person traveling with the person 
receiving the medical care. For example, if a parent is 
traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be in-
cluded as a medical expense for lodging. Meals aren't in-
cluded. See Lodging, earlier.
You can't include in medical expenses a trip or vacation 
taken merely for a change in environment, improvement of 
morale, or general improvement of health, even if the trip 
is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see Medical 
Conferences, earlier.
Tuition
Under special circumstances, you can include charges for 
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
A lump-sum fee which includes education, board, and 
medical care—without distinguishing which part of the fee 
results from medical care —is not considered an amount 
payable for medical care. However, you can include 
charges for a health plan included in a lump -sum tuition 
fee if the charges are separately stated or can easily be 
obtained from the school.
Vasectomy
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a vasectomy.
Vision Correction Surgery
See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or 
heart disease). This includes fees you pay for member-
ship in a weight reduction group as well as fees for attend-
ance at periodic meetings. You can't include membership 
dues in a gym, health club, or spa as medical expenses, 
but you can include separate fees charged there for 
weight loss activities.
You can't include the cost of diet food or beverages in 
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages 
Page 14 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 15 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
tional needs. You can include the cost of special food in 
medical expenses only if:
1. The food doesn't satisfy normal nutritional needs,
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, and
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physician.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is limi-
ted to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss 
Program under What Expenses Aren't Includible, later.
Wheelchair
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for a wheelchair used for the relief of a sickness or 
disability. The cost of operating and maintaining the 
wheelchair is also a medical expense.
Wig
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig 
purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mental 
health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from 
disease.
X-ray 
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
X-rays for medical reasons.
What Expenses Aren't 
Includible?
Following is a list of some items that you can't include in 
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are 
listed in alphabetical order.
Baby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing 
Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you, 
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental 
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit 
can't be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Controlled Substances
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile, 
etc.) that aren't legal under federal law, even if such sub-
stances are legalized by state law.
Cosmetic Surgery
Generally, you can't include in medical expenses the 
amount you pay for cosmetic surgery. This includes any 
procedure that is directed at improving the patient's ap-
pearance and doesn't meaningfully promote the proper 
function of the body or prevent or treat illness or disease. 
You generally can't include in medical expenses the 
amount you pay for procedures such as face lifts, hair 
transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and liposuction.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you 
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a de-
formity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital ab-
normality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or 
trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that re-
moves a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She pays 
a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon-
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to the 
disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medi-
cal expenses.
Dancing Lessons
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of dancing 
lessons, swimming lessons, etc., even if they are recom-
mended by a doctor, if they are only for the improvement 
of general health.
Diaper Service
You can't include in medical expenses the amount you 
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed 
to relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Electrolysis or Hair Removal
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Flexible Spending Arrangement
You can't include in medical expenses amounts for which 
you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending ar-
rangement if you contribute a part of your income on a 
pre-tax basis to pay for the qualified benefit.
Funeral Expenses
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for funerals.
Future Medical Care
Generally, you can't include in medical expenses current 
payments for medical care (including medical insurance) 
to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year. 
This rule doesn't apply in situations where the future care 
is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care, as 
explained under Lifetime Care —Advance Payments , or 
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 15

Page 16 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualified long-term care insurance contracts, as explained 
under Long-Term Care, earlier.
Hair Transplant
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Health Club Dues
You can't include in medical expenses health club dues or 
amounts paid to improve one's general health or to relieve 
physical or mental discomfort not related to a particular 
medical condition.
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of 
membership in any club organized for business, pleasure, 
recreation, or other social purpose.
Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC)
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for health insurance you use in figuring your health cover-
age tax credit. For more information, see the Instructions 
for Form 8885.
Health Savings Accounts
You can’t include in medical expenses amounts you con-
tribute to a health savings account. You can’t include ex-
penses you pay for with a tax -free distribution from your 
health savings account. You also can’t use other funds 
equal to the amount of the distribution and include the ex-
penses. For more information, see Pub. 969.
Household Help
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor. 
This is a personal expense that isn't deductible. However, 
you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a 
person providing nursing-type services. For more informa-
tion, see Nursing Services , earlier, under What Medical 
Expenses Are Includible . Also, certain maintenance or 
personal care services provided for qualified long -term 
care can be included in medical expenses. For more infor-
mation, see Long-Term Care, earlier, under What Medical 
Expenses Are Includible.
Illegal Operations and Treatments
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances 
whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed 
practitioners.
Insurance Premiums
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses 
Are Includible, earlier.
Maternity Clothes
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for maternity clothes.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
You can't include in medical expenses amounts you con-
tribute to an Archer MSA. You can't include expenses you 
pay for with a tax -free distribution from your Archer MSA. 
You also can't use other funds equal to the amount of the 
distribution and include the expenses. For more informa-
tion on Archer MSAs, see Pub. 969.
Medicines and Drugs From Other 
Countries
In general, you can't include in your medical expenses the 
cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered and ship-
ped) from another country. You can only include the cost 
of a drug that was imported legally. For example, you can 
include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food and Drug 
Administration announces can be legally imported by indi-
viduals.
You can include the cost of a prescribed drug you pur-
chase and consume in another country if the drug is legal 
in both the other country and the United States.
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines
Except for insulin, you can't include in medical expenses 
amounts you pay for a drug that isn't prescribed. A pre-
scribed drug is one that requires a prescription by a doctor 
for its use by an individual.
Example. Your doctor recommends that you take as-
pirin. Because aspirin is a drug that doesn't require a 
physician's prescription for its use by an individual, you 
can't include its cost in your medical expenses.
Nutritional Supplements
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natu-
ral medicines,” etc., unless they are recommended by a 
medical practitioner as treatment for a specific medical 
condition diagnosed by a physician. These items are 
taken to maintain your ordinary good health and aren't for 
medical care.
Personal Use Items
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of an item 
ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes un-
less it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical or 
mental disability or illness. For example, the cost of a 
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal ex-
pense.
In order to accommodate an individual with a physical 
disability, you may have to purchase an item ordinarily 
Page 16 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 17 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
used as a personal, living, or family item in a special form. 
You can include the excess of the cost of the item in a 
special form over the cost of the item in normal form as a 
medical expense. See Braille Books and Magazines  un-
der What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
Premium Tax Credit
You can't include in medical expenses the amount of 
health insurance premiums paid by or through the pre-
mium tax credit. You also can't include in medical expen-
ses any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit made that you did not have to pay back. However, 
any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit that you did have to pay back can be included in 
medical expenses.
Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Teeth Whitening
You can't include in medical expenses amounts paid to 
whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Veterinary Fees
You generally can't include veterinary fees in your medical 
expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Service Animal un-
der What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
You can't include in medical expenses the cost of a 
weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is 
the improvement of appearance, general health, or sense 
of well-being. You can't include amounts you pay to lose 
weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific 
disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hy-
pertension, or heart disease). If the weight -loss treatment 
isn't for a specific disease diagnosed by a physician, you 
can't include either the fees you pay for membership in a 
weight-reduction group or fees for attendance at periodic 
meetings. Also, you can't include membership dues in a 
gym, health club, or spa.
You can't include the cost of diet food or beverages in 
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages 
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
tional needs.
See Weight-Loss Program under What Medical Expen-
ses Are Includible, earlier.
How Do You Treat 
Reimbursements?
You can include in medical expenses only those amounts 
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
ance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year 
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. 
This includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain 
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you re-
ceive from that policy to reduce your total medical expen-
ses, including those it doesn't reimburse.
Example. You have insurance policies that cover your 
hospital and doctors' bills but not your nursing bills. The 
insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors' bills is 
more than their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spent for medi-
cal care by the total amount of insurance you received, 
even if the policies don't cover some of your medical ex-
penses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  An HRA 
is an employer-funded plan that reimburses employees for 
medical care expenses and allows unused amounts to be 
carried forward. An HRA is funded solely by the employer 
and the reimbursements for medical expenses, up to a 
maximum dollar amount for a coverage period, aren't in-
cluded in your income.
Other reimbursements.  Generally, you don't reduce 
medical expenses by payments you receive for:
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or function 
of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or disfig-
urement to the extent the payment is based on the na-
ture of the injury without regard to the amount of time 
lost from work, or
• Loss of earnings.
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses by 
any part of these payments that is designated for medical 
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction 
on Your Tax Return, later.
For how to treat damages received for personal injury 
or sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later.
What if Your Insurance Reimbursement Is 
More Than Your Medical Expenses?
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses, 
you may have to include the excess in income. You may 
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your re-
imbursement is taxable.
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 17

Page 18 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Premiums paid by you.  If you pay either the entire pre-
mium for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan 
similar to medical insurance and your insurance payments 
or other reimbursements are more than your total medical 
expenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement. 
Generally, you don't include the excess reimbursement in 
your gross income. However, gross income does include 
total payments in excess of $370 a day ($135,050 for 
2019) for qualified long-term care services.
Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both you 
and your employer contribute to your medical insurance 
plan and your employer's contributions aren't included in 
your gross income, you must include in your gross income 
the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your 
employer's contribution.
If you aren't covered by more than one policy, you can 
figure the amount of the excess reimbursement you must 
include in gross income using Worksheet B. If you are 
covered under more than one policy, see More than one 
policy, later.
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have Only 
One Policy
Worksheet B.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your 
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's 
contributions aren't included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to your 
medical insurance for the year by your 
employer ........................ 1.  
2. Enter the total annual cost of the 
policy ............................ 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............... 3.  
4. Enter the amount of excess 
reimbursement .................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the 
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other income 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR ........... 5.  
Premiums paid by your employer.  If your employer or 
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical 
insurance plan and your employer's contributions aren't 
included in your income, you must report all of your ex-
cess reimbursement as other income.
More than one policy.  If you are covered under more 
than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid by 
both you and your employer, you must first divide the 
medical expenses among the policies to figure the excess 
reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy 
costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that 
is from your employer's contribution. Any excess reim-
bursement that is due to your employer's contributions is 
includible in your income.
You can figure the part of the excess reimbursement 
that is from your employer's contribution by using Work-
sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your em-
ployer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If you 
had more than one policy, but you didn't share in the cost 
of at least one policy, don't use Worksheet C.
Page 18 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 19 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Excess 
Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have More 
Than One Policy
Worksheet C.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when 
(a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, 
(b) at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, 
and (c) your employer's contributions aren't included in your gross 
income. If you and your employer didn't share in the cost of at least 
one policy, don't use this worksheet.
1. Enter the reimbursement from your 
employer's policy .................... 1.  
2. Enter the reimbursement from your own 
policy .............................. 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................... 3.  
4. Divide line 1 by line 3 ................ 4.  
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid 
during the year. If this amount is at least as 
much as the amount on line 3, stop here 
because there is no excess 
reimbursement ..................... 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............... 6.  
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............. 7.  
8. Enter employer's contribution to the 
annual cost of the employer's 
policy .............................. 8.  
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's 
policy .............................. 9.  
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the 
percentage of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income ............................ 10.  
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the 
amount of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income on Form 1040 or 1040-SR ...... 11.  
What if You Receive Insurance 
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses 
you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must report 
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
ously deducted as medical expenses.
However, don't report as income the amount of reim-
bursement you received up to the amount of your medical 
deductions that didn't reduce your tax for the earlier year.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Pub. 525, Taxable and Nontaxa-
ble Income.
What if You Are Reimbursed for Medical 
Expenses You Didn't Deduct?
If you didn't deduct a medical expense in the year you 
paid it because your medical expenses weren't more than 
7.5% of your AGI or because you didn't itemize deduc-
tions, don't include the reimbursement, up to the amount 
of the expense, in income. However, if the reimbursement 
is more than the expense, see What if Your Insurance Re-
imbursement Is More Than Your Medical Expenses , ear-
lier. 
How Do You Figure and Report 
the Deduction on Your Tax 
Return?
Once you have determined which medical expenses you 
can include, figure and report the deduction on your tax 
return.
What Tax Form Do You Use?
You report your medical expense deduction on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR). See the Instructions for 
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR) for more detailed in-
formation on figuring your medical and dental expense de-
duction.
Recordkeeping. You should keep records of 
your medical and dental expenses to support your 
deduction. Don't send these records with your pa-
per return.
Sale of Medical Equipment or 
Property
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in 
one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxable 
gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price 
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or 
property.
The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of the 
equipment or property that you couldn't deduct because 
of the 7.5% or 10% AGI limit used to figure your medical 
deduction. Refer to your Schedule A for the year the cost 
was included to determine which limit applied to you. Use 
Worksheet D to figure the adjusted basis of the equipment 
or property.
RECORDS
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 19

Page 20 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjusted Basis of 
Medical Equipment or 
Property Sold
Worksheet D.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical 
equipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or 
property in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted 
basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or 
property ....................... 1.  
2. Enter your total includible medical 
expenses for the year you included 
the cost in your medical 
expenses ..................... 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............ 3.  
4. Enter 7.5% or 10% of your AGI 
(whichever applies) for the year the 
cost was included in your medical 
expenses ..................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for the 
year you purchased the equipment 
or property weren't more than your 
AGI for that year, stop here. This is 
the adjusted basis of the equipment 
or property. If your allowable 
itemized deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, complete lines 6 through 
11 ............................ 5.  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ........ 6.  
7. Enter your total allowable itemized 
deductions for the year the cost was 
included in your medical 
expenses ..................... 7.  
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ............ 8.  
9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost 
was included in your medical 
expenses ..................... 9.  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ........ 10.  
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10 ......... 11.  
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your allowable 
itemized deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, this is the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property ........... 12.  
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on 
the sale of the medical equipment or property.
Gain or Loss on the 
Sale of Medical 
Equipment or Property
Worksheet E.
Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain or 
loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you 
deducted in an earlier year.
1. Enter the amount that the medical 
equipment or property sold for ...... 1.  
2. Enter your selling expenses ......... 2.  
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........... 3.  
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property from Worksheet 
D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable ..... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the 
total gain or loss from the sale of the 
medical equipment or property ...... 5.  
If you have a loss, it isn't deductible. If you have a gain, 
it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is a 
recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxable 
as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
Any part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an 
amount you previously deducted is taxable as a capital 
gain. Enter it on Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions 
of Capital Assets, and Schedule D (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), Capital Gains and Losses.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Pub. 525.
Damages for Personal Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury 
suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that 
you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include 
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the ex-
tent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year. See 
What if You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later 
Year, discussed earlier under How Do You Treat Reim-
bursements.
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered 
in an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your inju-
ries and didn't itemize your damages. Last year, you paid 
$500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deducted 
those expenses on last year's tax return. This year you 
settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement didn't 
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre-
sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted. 
The $500 is includible in your income this year because 
you deducted the entire $500 as a medical expense de-
duction last year.
Future medical expenses.  If you receive an amount in 
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of 
Page 20 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 21 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you 
must reduce any future medical expenses for these inju-
ries until the amount you received has been completely 
used.
Example. You were injured in an accident. You sued 
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. You 
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that 
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses 
for your injuries. You can't include the first $10,000 that 
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries.
Workers' compensation. If you received workers' com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to 
that injury, you must include the workers' compensation in 
income up to the amount you deducted. If you received 
workers' compensation, but didn't deduct medical expen-
ses related to that injury, don't include the workers' com-
pensation in your income.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you are a person with disabilities, you can take a busi-
ness deduction for expenses that are necessary for you to 
be able to work. If you take a business deduction for these 
impairment-related work expenses, they aren't subject to 
the 7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses.
You have a disability if you have:
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blindness 
or deafness) that functionally limits your being em-
ployed; or
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a sight 
or hearing impairment) that substantially limits one or 
more of your major life activities, such as performing 
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learning, 
or working.
Impairment-related expenses defined.  Impairment-re-
lated expenses are those ordinary and necessary busi-
ness expenses that are:
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily;
• For goods and services not required or used, other 
than incidentally, in your personal activities; and
• Not specifically covered under other income tax laws.
Where to report.  If you are self -employed, deduct the 
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, 
E, or F) used to report your business income and expen-
ses.
If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Em-
ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR) that part of the amount on Form 2106 
that is related to your impairment.
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to do 
your work. You use the reader both during your regular 
working hours at your place of work and outside your reg-
ular working hours away from your place of work. The 
reader's services are only for your work. You can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Health Insurance Costs for 
Self-Employed Persons
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year, 
you may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income, 
amounts paid for medical and qualified long -term care in-
surance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, your depend-
ents, and your children who were under age 27 at the end 
of 2019. For this purpose, you were self -employed if you 
were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving guar-
anteed payments) or you received wages from an S cor-
poration in which you were more than a 2% shareholder. 
The insurance plan must be established under your trade 
or business and the deduction can't be more than your 
earned income from that trade or business.
You can't deduct payments for medical insurance for 
any month in which you were eligible to participate in a 
health plan subsidized by your employer, your spouse's 
employer, or an employer of your dependent, or your child 
under age 27, at the end of 2019. You can't deduct pay-
ments for a qualified long-term care insurance contract for 
any month in which you were eligible to participate in a 
long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your em-
ployer or your spouse's employer.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self -Em-
ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the In-
structions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR to figure the 
amount you can deduct. But if any of the following applies, 
don't use that worksheet.
• You had more than one source of income subject to 
self-employment tax.
• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term 
care insurance to figure the deduction.
If you can't use the worksheet in the Instructions for Forms 
1040 and 1040 -SR, use the worksheet in Pub. 535, Busi-
ness Expenses, to figure your deduction.
If you were an eligible TAA recipient, ATAA recipient, 
RTAA recipient, or PBGC payee, see the Instructions for 
Form 8885 to figure the amount to enter on the worksheet.
Use Pub. 974, Premium Tax Credit, instead of the 
worksheet in the 2019 Instructions for Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR if the insurance plan established, or considered 
to be established, under your business was obtained 
through the Health Insurance Marketplace and you are 
claiming the premium tax credit.
When figuring the amount you can deduct for insurance 
premiums, don't include amounts paid for health insur-
ance coverage with retirement plan distributions that were 
tax free because you are a retired public safety officer.
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 21

Page 22 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where to report.  You take this deduction on Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR. If you itemize your deductions and don't 
claim 100% of your self -employed health insurance costs 
on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, include any remaining premi-
ums with all other medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR) subject to the 7.5% limit.
Child under age 27.  If the insurance policy covers your 
nondependent child who was under age 27 at the end of 
2019, you can claim the premiums for that coverage on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you can't claim 100% of your 
self-employed health insurance costs on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, any excess amounts attributable to that child 
aren't eligible to be claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
Generally, family health insurance premiums don't in-
crease if coverage for an additional child is added. If this 
is the situation, no allocation would be necessary. If the 
premiums did increase (such as where coverage was ex-
panded from single to family to add the nondependent 
child), you can allocate the amount on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR to the nondependent child and any excess 
amounts not attributable to that child would be eligible to 
be claimed on Schedule A.
Example 1.  Kate is self -employed in 2019 and has 
self-only coverage for health insurance. Her premium for 
that coverage was $5,000 for the year. She changes to 
family coverage only to add her 26 -year-old nondepend-
ent child to the plan. Her health insurance premium in-
creases to $10,000 for the year. After completing the 
Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in 
the Instructions for Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR, she can 
only deduct $4,000 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. The 
$4,000 is allocable to the nondependent child. On Sched-
ule A, she can only claim the $5,000 allocable to her cov-
erage. She can't claim the $1,000 excess premiums allo-
cable to the nondependent child.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that Kate had family coverage when she added her 
26-year-old nondependent child to the policy. There was 
no increase in the $10,000 premium. In this case, she 
could claim $4,000 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR and $6,000 
on Schedule A.
More information. For more information, see Pub. 535.
Health Coverage Tax Credit
The health coverage tax credit (HCTC) is a tax credit that 
pays 72.5% of qualified health insurance premiums for eli-
gible individuals and their families. The HCTC acts as par-
tial reimbursement for premiums paid for qualified health 
insurance coverage.
You must elect the HCTC. Once you make the election 
to take the HCTC for an eligible coverage month, you 
can't take the premium tax credit for the same coverage in 
that coverage month and for all subsequent coverage 
months during your tax year in which you are eligible to 
take the HCTC.
If you have qualified health insurance that covers any-
one besides yourself and your qualifying family mem-
ber(s), you may not be able to take into account all of your 
payments. You can't treat an amount as paid for insurance 
for yourself and qualifying family members unless all of 
the following requirements are met.
• The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifying 
family members is either separately stated in the con-
tract or furnished to you by the insurance company in 
a separate statement.
• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself and 
qualifying family members isn't more than the charge 
that is stated in the contract or furnished by the insur-
ance company.
• The amount stated in the contract or furnished by the 
insurance company isn't unreasonably large in relation 
to the total charges under the contract.
For more information on who is eligible to take the 
HCTC, which plans are qualified health plans for the 
HCTC, how to figure your credit if advance payments of 
the premium tax credit were made, as well as other 
changes to the HCTC, go to IRS.gov/HCTC. Also, see the 
Instructions for Form 8885.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need help prepar-
ing your tax return, or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov and find resources 
that can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving 
your wage and earning statements (Form W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099-MISC) from all employers and interest and 
dividend statements from banks (Forms 1099), you can 
find free options to prepare and file your return on IRS.gov 
or in your local community if you qualify.
The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program 
offers free tax help to people with low -to-moderate in-
comes, persons with disabilities, and limited -Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help preparing their 
own tax returns. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) 
program offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about pensions and re-
tirement-related issues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov to see your options for preparing 
and filing your return, which include the following.
• Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify 
to use brand-name software to prepare and e-file your 
federal tax return for free.
• VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 to find the nearest VITA lo-
cation for free tax return preparation.
Page 22 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 23 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 888-227-7669 to find the nearest TCE lo-
cation for free tax return preparation.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The SSA offers online service for fast, free, and se-
cure online W -2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, en-
rolled agents, and individuals who process W -2s (Wage 
and Tax Statement) and W -2Cs (Statement of Corrected 
Wage and Tax Statements). Employers can go to 
SSA.gov/employer for more information.
Getting answers to your tax questions. On 
IRS.gov, get answers to your tax questions any-
time, anywhere.
• Go to IRS.gov/Help for a variety of tools that will help 
you get answers to some of the most common tax 
questions.
• Go to IRS.gov/ITA for the Interactive Tax Assistant, a 
tool that will ask you questions on a number of tax law 
topics and provide answers. You can print the entire 
interview and the final response for your records.
• Go to IRS.gov/Forms to search for our forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. You will find details on 2019 
tax changes and hundreds of interactive links to help 
you find answers to your questions.
• You may also be able to access tax law information in 
your electronic filing software.
Tax reform.  Tax reform legislation affects individuals, 
businesses, tax -exempt and government entities. Go to 
IRS.gov/TaxReform for information and updates on how 
this legislation affects your taxes.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
paramount. We use these tools to share public informa-
tion with you. Don’t post your social security number or 
other confidential information on social media sites. Al-
ways protect your identity when using any social network-
ing site.
The following IRS YouTube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingual.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio presentations 
for individuals, small businesses, and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other languages.  For tax-
payers whose native language isn’t English, we have the 
following resources available. Taxpayers can find informa-
tion on IRS.gov in the following languages.
• Spanish (IRS.gov/Spanish).
• Chinese (IRS.gov/Chinese).
• Korean (IRS.gov/Korean).
• Russian (IRS.gov/Russian).
• Vietnamese (IRS.gov/Vietnamese).
The IRS Taxpayer Assistance Centers (TACs) provide 
over-the-phone interpreter service in over 170 languages, 
and the service is available free to taxpayers.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all of the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. You can also down-
load and view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the 1040 and 1040 -SR instructions) on mobile 
devices as an eBook at no charge at IRS.gov/eBooks. Or 
you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order and 
have them mailed to you within 10 business days.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe, pay online, or set up an on-
line payment agreement.
• Access your tax records online.
• Review the past 24 months of your payment history.
• Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the required 
identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to receive a tax 
refund is to combine direct deposit and IRS  e-file. Direct 
deposit securely and electronically transfers your refund 
directly into your financial account. Eight in 10 taxpayers 
use direct deposit to receive their refund. The IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return.  The quickest 
way to get a copy of your tax transcript is to go to IRS.gov/
Transcripts. Click on either “Get Transcript Online” or “Get 
Transcript by Mail” to order a copy of your transcript. If you 
prefer, you can order your transcript by calling 
800-908-9946.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
EIC.
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number.
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4app) 
makes it easier for everyone to pay the correct amount 
of tax during the year. The Estimator replaces the 
Withholding Calculator. The redesigned tool is a con-
venient, online way to check and tailor your withhold-
ing. It’s more user-friendly for taxpayers, including re-
tirees and self-employed individuals. The new and 
improved features include the following.
– Easy to understand language;
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 23

Page 24 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
– The ability to switch between screens, correct pre-
vious entries, and skip screens that don’t apply;
– Tips and links to help you determine if you qualify 
for tax credits and deductions;
– A progress tracker;
– A self-employment tax feature; and
– Automatic calculation of taxable social security ben-
efits.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool provides information on 
your repayments and account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesTax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), choose not to claim state and local income 
taxes, and you didn’t save your receipts showing the 
sales tax you paid.
Resolving tax-related identity theft issues.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email or telephone to request personal or financial in-
formation. This includes any type of electronic com-
munication, such as text messages and social media 
channels.
• Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection for information.
• If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you suspect 
you’re a victim of tax-related identity theft, visit 
IRS.gov/IdentityTheft to learn what steps you should 
take.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid-February 2020 
for returns that claimed the EIC or the ACTC. This ap-
plies to the entire refund, not just the portion associ-
ated with these credits.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the latest encryp-
tion technology to ensure your electronic payments are 
safe and secure. You can make electronic payments on-
line, by phone, and from a mobile device using the 
IRS2Go app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments to make a payment using any of the 
following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill or estima-
ted tax payment directly from your checking or sav-
ings account at no cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved payment 
processor to pay online, by phone, and by mobile de-
vice.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered only when filing 
your federal taxes using tax return preparation soft-
ware or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and cut-off times.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Checking the status of an amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns. Please note that it can take up to 3 weeks 
from the date you filed your amended return for it to show 
up in our system, and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter.  Go to IRS.gov/
Notices to find additional information about responding to 
an IRS notice or letter.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in mind, many 
questions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting an 
IRS Taxpayer Assistance Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax issue 
can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs now pro-
vide service by appointment so you’ll know in advance 
that you can get the service you need without long wait 
times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC, check hours, available services, and ap-
pointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under the Stay 
Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option and click on 
“Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. Their job is 
to ensure that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
Page 24 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 25 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
know and understand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help you understand what 
these rights mean to you  and how they apply. These are 
your rights. Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you can’t resolve 
with the IRS. And their service is free. If you qualify for 
their assistance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process and will do 
everything possible to resolve your issue. TAS can help 
you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty for you, 
your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an immediate 
threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS but no one 
has responded, or the IRS hasn’t responded by the 
date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico . Your local advocate’s number is in your 
local directory and at TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
Contact-Us. You can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that affect 
many taxpayers. If you know of one of these broad issues, 
please report it to them at IRS.gov/SAMS.
TAS also has a website, Tax Reform Changes , which 
shows you how the new tax law may change your future 
tax filings and helps you plan for these changes. The in-
formation is categorized by tax topic in the order of the 
IRS Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Go to TaxChanges.us for 
more information.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax professio-
nals, including tax law updates and guidance, TAS pro-
grams, and ways to let TAS know about systemic prob-
lems you’ve seen in your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs represent in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level and need 
to resolve tax problems with the IRS, such as audits, 
appeals, and tax collection disputes. In addition, clinics 
can provide information about taxpayer rights and respon-
sibilities in different languages for individuals who speak 
English as a second language. Services are offered for 
free or a small fee. To find a clinic near you, visit IRS.gov/
LITC or see IRS Pub. 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic 
List.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Abortion 5
Acupuncture 5
Adopted child's medical 
expenses 4
AGI limitation 2, 3
Alcoholism 5
Ambulances 5
Archer MSAs:
Medical expenses paid for 
decedent from 5
Artificial limbs 5
Artificial teeth 5
Aspirin 16
Assistance (See Tax help)
Assisted living homes 12
Athletic club dues 16
Automobiles (See Cars)
B
Baby sitting 15
Bandages 5
Basis:
Medical equipment or property 
(Worksheet D) 20
Birth control pills 5
Body scan 6
Braille books and magazines 6
Breast pumps and supplies 6
Breast reconstruction surgery 6
C
Calculation of deduction 19
Capital expenses 6
Improvements to rented property 6
Operation and upkeep 6
Worksheet A 6
Cars 7
Out-of-pocket expenses 14
Standard medical mileage rates 14
Child care 15
Children's medical expenses:
Adopted child 4
Dependents 3
Chiropractor 7
Christian Scientist practitioner 7
Chronically ill persons 11
Community property states 3
Computer banks to track medical 
information 11
Contact lenses 7
Controlled substances 15
Cosmetic surgery 15
Crutches 7
D
Dancing lessons 15
Decedent's medical expenses 5
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 25

Page 26 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deductible amount 3
Deductible expenses 3–15
Definition of medical expenses:
Doctor 2
Physician 2
Dental treatment 7
Artificial teeth 5
Teeth whitening 17
Dentures 5
Dependent's medical expenses:
Adopted child 4
Multiple support agreement 4
Qualifying child 3
Qualifying relative 3
Dependents:
Disabled dependent care 7, 10
Diagnostic devices 7
Diaper services 15
Disabilities, persons with:
Dependent care expenses 7, 10
Improvements to rented property 6
Special education 13
Divorced taxpayers:
Medical expenses of child 4
Drug addiction 7
Drugs (See Medicines)
Dues:
Health club 16
E
Education, special 13
Electrolysis 15
Employer-sponsored health 
insurance plans 8
Employment taxes 12
Excluded expenses:
Insurance premiums 9
Eyeglasses 7
Eye surgery 7
F
Fertility enhancement:
Eggs, temporary storage of 7
Fertility 7
In vitro fertilization 7
Figuring the deduction 19
Final return for decedent:
Medical expenses paid 5
Flexible spending arrangement 15
Food (See Weight-loss programs)
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule A:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Medical and dental expenses 2, 19
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 21
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule C:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule E:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule F:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 21
Form 1040-X:
Amended return 3
Deceased taxpayer 5
Form 1099-H:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 21
Form 2106:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Form 2555:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 21
Founder's fee (See Lifetime care, 
advance payments)
Funeral expenses 15
Future medical care 10, 15
G
Glasses 7
Guide dog or other animal 8
H
Hair:
Removal 15
Transplants 15
Wigs 15
Health club dues 16
Health Coverage Tax Credit 8
Health coverage tax credit:
Alternative TAA recipient 22
Children of divorced parents 22
Insurance that covers other 
individuals 22
Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) recipient 22
TAA recipient 22
Health institutes 8
Health insurance:
Employer-sponsored plan 8
Premiums:
Deductible 8
Nondeductible 9
Paid by employer 18
Paid by employer and you 18
Paid by you 18
Prepaid 9
Unused sick leave used to pay 9
Reimbursements (See Reimbursem
ents)
Self-employed persons 21
Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs) 8
Health reimbursement 
arrangements (HRAs) 17
Health savings accounts (HSAs):
Payments from 16
Hearing aids 8
Hearing-impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for 8
HMOs (Health maintenance 
organizations) 8
Home care (See Nursing services)
Home improvements (See Capital 
expenses:)
Hospital services 8
Hotels 10
Household help 16
HRAs (Health reimbursement 
arrangements) 17
I
Identity theft 24
Illegal operations and 
treatments 16
Illegal substances 15
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Reporting of 21
Insulin 16
Insurance (See Health insurance)
Intellectually and developmentally 
disabled persons:
Mentally disabled 10
Special homes for 10
L
Laboratory fees 10
Lactation expenses (See Breast 
pumps and supplies)
Laser eye surgery 7
Lead-based paint removal 10
Learning disabilities 13
Legal fees 10
Lessons, dancing and 
swimming 15
Lifetime care:
Advance payments for 10
Lodging 10, 14
 (See also Trips)
Long-term care 11
Chronically ill individuals 11
Maintenance and personal care 
services 11
Qualified insurance contracts 11
Qualified services 11
M
Maintenance and personal care 
services 11
Page 26 Publication 502 (2019)

Page 27 of 27  Fileid: … tions/P502/2019/A/XML/Cycle06/source 10:06 - 21-Jan-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maternity clothes 16
Meals 11, 14
 (See also Weight-loss programs)
Medical conferences 11
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 20
Medical expense records 19
Medical information plans 11
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 16
Medicare:
Medicare A, deductible expense 9
Medicare B, deductible expense 9
Medicare D, deductible expense 9
Medicines 11
Imported 12, 16
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines 16
Missing children, photographs of in 
IRS publications 1
Multiple support agreement 4
N
Nondeductible expenses 15–17
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines 16
Nursing homes 12
Nursing services 12, 15
Chronically ill individuals 11
Nutritional supplements:
Natural medicines 16
O
Operations 12
Cosmetic surgery 15
Eye surgery 7
Illegal operations and 
treatments 16
Optometrist 12
Optometrist services 7
Organ donors 14
Osteopath 12
Oxygen 12
P
Paint removal, for lead-based 10
Parking fees and tolls 14
Personal injury damages 20
Personal use items 16
Photographs of missing children in 
IRS publications 1
Physical examination 12
Physical therapy 13
Plastic surgery 15
Pregnancy test kit 12
Premiums (See Health insurance)
Premium Tax Credit 12
Prepaid insurance premiums 9
Prosthesis 5
Psychiatric care 13
Psychoanalysis 13
Psychologists 13
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Radial keratotomy 7
Recordkeeping 19
Rehabilitation facilities 12
Reimbursements 17–19
Excess includible in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 19
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Excess may be taxable (Figure 
1) 17
Health Reimbursement 
Arrangement (HRA) 17
Insurance 17
Medical expenses not deducted 19
More than one policy 18
Received in later year 19
Rental property:
Improvements to 6
Reporting:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 21
Medical and dental expenses 19
Medical deduction (See Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, Schedule A)
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 21
S
Sale of medical equipment or 
property 19
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 20
Schedules (See Form 1040 or 
1040-SR)
Seeing-eye dogs 8
Self-employed persons:
Health insurance costs 21
Senior housing 12
Separated taxpayers:
Medical expenses of child 4
Separate returns:
Community property states 3
Medical and dental expenses 3
Service animals 8
Sick leave:
Used to pay health insurance 
premiums 9
Special education 13
Spouse's medical expenses 3
Deceased spouse 5
Sterilization 13
Stop-smoking programs 13
Surgery (See Operations)
Swimming lessons 15
T
Tables and figures:
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) 20
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 19
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Reimbursements, excess may be 
taxable (Figure 1) 17
Tax help 22
Teeth:
Artificial 5
Dental treatment 7
Whitening 17
Telephone 13
Television 13
Therapy 13
Transplants 14
Travel and transportation 
expenses 14
Car expenses 14
Includible expenses 14
Parking fees and tolls 14
Trips 14
Tuition 14
V
Vasectomy 14
Veterinary fees 17
Vision correction surgery 7
Visually impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for 8
Vitamins or minerals 16
W
Weight-loss programs 14, 17
What's new:
Standard medical mileage rate 1
Wheelchairs 15
Wigs 15
Workers' compensation 21
Work expenses:
Disabled dependent care 7
Impairment-related 21
Worksheets:
Capital expenses (Worksheet A) 6
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet 
D) 20
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 19
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Publication 502 (2019)   Page 27