Userid: SD_FMZHB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\fmzhb\documents\2009 Product files\Pub 550.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2
Treasury Investment
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Chapter 1. Investment Income ....... . 3
Income andService General Information ............. . 3
Interest Income ................ . 5
Discount on Debt Instruments ..... . 13
Expenses When To Report Interest Income ... . 17
How To Report Interest Income .... . 17
Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions .............. . 20(Including Capital How To Report Dividend Income ... . 23
Stripped Preferred Stock ......... . 25Gains and Losses) REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs ................... . 25
S Corporations ............... . 26For use in preparing Investment Clubs .............. . 27
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other2009 Returns Reportable Transactions ........ . 29
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ..... . 32
Limits on Deductions ........... . 32
Interest Expenses ............. . 32
Bond Premium Amortization ....... . 35
Expenses of Producing Income .... . 36
Nondeductible Expenses ......... . 37
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 38
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 38
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ........... . 39
What Is a Sale or Trade? ......... . 39
Basis of Investment Property ...... . 42
How To Figure Gain or Loss ...... . 46
Nontaxable Trades ............. . 46
Transfers Between Spouses ...... . 48
Related Party Transactions ....... . 48
Capital Gains and Losses ........ . 49
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ................. . 49
Holding Period ............. . 53
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ...... . 54
Short Sales ............... . 55
Wash Sales ............... . 56
Options ................. . 57
Straddles ................ . 59
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ...... . 62
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded
Securities ............. . 63
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ......... . 63
Rollover of Gain From Sale
of Empowerment Zone
Assets ............... . 65
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses .................. . 65
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities ................ . 73
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ..... . 74Get forms and other information
Glossary ...................... . 76faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 78
Internet www.irs.gov
Jan 04, 2010

Page 2 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
resident alien and do not have and are not eligi- investment property and provides informationWhat's New on property trades and tax shelters.ble to get a social security number (SSN), you
must apply for an ITIN. For details on how to do The glossary at the end of this publica-Alternative minimum tax (AMT) for private so, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual tion defines many of the terms used.activity bonds. Tax-exempt interest on pri- Taxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc-
TIPvate activity bonds issued in 2009 and 2010 will tions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher-not be treated as a tax preference item for AMT ever an SSN is requested on your tax return.purposes. For details, see Qualified bonds is-
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitlesued in 2009 or 2010 under Taxable Interest in
Investment income. This generally includesyou to social security benefits or change yourChapter 1.
interest, dividends, capital gains, and otheremployment or immigration status under U.S.
types of distributions.Exclusion of gain on sale of qualified small law.business stock. The percentage exclusion
for qualified small business stock sold is in- Foreign accounts and trusts. You must Investment expenses. These include interestcreased from 50% to 75% for stock acquired complete Part III of Schedule B (Form 1040A or paid or incurred to acquire investment propertyafter February 17, 2009, and before January 1, 1040) if you: and expenses to manage or collect income from2011. Also, the 60% exclusion for certain em- investment property.• Had a foreign account, orpowerment zone business stock does not apply
to stock acquired after February 17, 2009. See • Received a distribution from, or were a
Section 1202 Exclusion under Gain on Qualified Comments and suggestions. We welcomegrantor of, or a transferor to, a foreign
Small Business Stock in Chapter 4. your comments about this publication and yourtrust.
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:Sale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis-
trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone)Reminders assets acquired after 1997 and held more than 5 Internal Revenue Service
years will qualify for a special tax benefit. If you Individual Forms and Publications BranchU.S. property acquired from a foreign per- sell or trade a DC Zone asset at a gain, you may SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ison. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter- be able to exclude the qualified capital gain from 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526est from a foreign person or firm, you may have Washington, DC 20224your gross income. This exclusion applies to anto withhold income tax on the amount you pay interest in, or property of, certain businessesfor the property (including cash, the fair market operating in the District of Columbia. For morevalue of other property, and any assumed liabil- We respond to many letters by telephone.information about the exclusion, see the Sched-ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-ule D instructions. For more information aboutships, trusts, and estates may also have to clude your daytime phone number, including theDC Zone assets, see Publication 954, Tax In-withhold on certain distributions and other trans- area code, in your correspondence.centives for Distressed Communities.actions involving U.S. real property interests. If
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Theyou fail to withhold, you may be held liable for Photographs of missing children. The Inter- asterisk must be included in the address.)the tax, penalties that apply, and interest. For nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-more information, see Publication 515, With- National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-holding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For- dren. Photographs of missing children selected ally to each email, we do appreciate youreign Entities.
by the Center may appear in this publication on feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
citizen with investment income from sources help bring these children home by looking at the Ordering forms and publications. Visitoutside the United States (foreign income), you photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andmust report that income on your tax return un- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether address below and receive a response within 10you reside inside or outside the United States days after your request is received.and whether or not you receive a Form 1099
from the foreign payer. Introduction Internal Revenue Service
Employee stock options. If you received an 1201 N. Mitsubishi MotorwayThis publication provides information on the taxoption to buy or sell stock or other property as Bloomington, IL 61705-6613treatment of investment income and expenses.payment for your services, see Publication 525, It explains what investment income is taxableTaxable and Nontaxable Income, for the special and what investment expenses are deductible. It Tax questions. If you have a tax question,tax rules that apply. explains when and how to show these items on check the information available on www.irs.gov
your tax return. It also explains how to determineAlien's individual taxpayer identification or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax
number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident or and report gains and losses on the disposition of questions sent to either of the above addresses.
Page 2 Publication 550 (2009)

Page 3 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Ordering forms and publications  above by federal tax law to make a return, statement,
for information about getting these publications or other document that relates to you. This in-
and forms. cludes payers of interest and dividends.
1.
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
account belong to one person, list that person's
name first on the account and give that person'sGeneral Information SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsInvestment
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,A few items of general interest are covered here. later.) If the joint account contains combined
Income Recordkeeping.You should keep a list funds, give the SSN of the person whose name
showing sources and amounts of in- is listed first on the account. This is because only
vestment income that you receive dur- one name and SSN can be shown on Form
RECORDS
ing the year. Also, keep the forms you receive 1099.Topics
that show your investment income (Forms These rules apply both to joint ownership byThis chapter discusses: 1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi- a married couple and to joint ownership by other
dends and Distributions, for example) as an im- individuals. For example, if you open a joint• Interest income,
portant part of your records. savings account with your child using funds be-• Dividends and other corporate distribu- longing to the child, list the child's name first onTax on investment income of certain chil-tions, the account and give the child's SSN.dren. Part of a child's 2009 investment income• Real estate mortgage investment conduits may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may Custodian account for your child. If your(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- happen if all of the following are true. child is the actual owner of an account that isvestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- recorded in your name as custodian for the child,eralized debt obligations (CDOs), 1. The child had more than $1,900 of invest- give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,ment income.• S corporations, and you must give your child's SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, even2. The child is required to file a tax return.• Investment clubs. though the dividends are paid to you as custo-3. The child was: dian.
Useful Items a. Under age 18 at the end of 2009, Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You willYou may want to see: be subject to a penalty if, when required, you failb. Age 18 at the end of 2009 and did not
to:have earned income that was morePublication
than half of the child's support, or • Include your SSN on any return, state-
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income ment, or other document,c. A full-time student over age 18 and
under age 24 at the end of 2009 and❏ 537 Installment Sales • Give your SSN to another person who has
did not have earned income that was to include it on any return, statement, or❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions more than half of the child's support. other document, or
❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
• Include the SSN of another person on any4. At least one of the child's parents was(IRAs)
return, statement, or other document.alive at the end of 2009.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-5. The child does not file a joint return for❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.2009.(OID) Instruments
You will not be subject to this penalty if youA child born on January 1, 1992, is considered
can show that your failure to provide the SSNto be age 18 at the end of 2009; a child bornForm (and Instructions)
was due to a reasonable cause and not to willfulon January 1, 1991, is considered to be age 19
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) neglect.at the end of 2009; a child born on January 1,
Interest and Ordinary Dividends If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be1986, is considered to be age 24 at the end of
2009. subject to backup withholding.❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
If all of these statements are true, Form 8615and Losses
must be completed and attached to the child's Backup withholding. Your investment in-❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms tax return. If any of these statements is not true, come is generally not subject to regular with-1099, 1098, 3921, 3922, 5498, and Form 8615 is not required and the child's income holding. However, it may be subject to backupW-2G is taxed at his or her own tax rate. withholding to ensure that income tax is col-
However, the parent can choose to include lected on the income. Under backup withhold-❏ 3115 Application for Change in
the child's interest and dividends on the parent's ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,Accounting Method
return if certain requirements are met. Use Form original issue discount (OID), dividends, cash❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax Ð 8814 for this purpose. patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,Individuals For more information about the tax on invest- as income tax, 28% of the amount you are paid.
ment income of children and the parents' elec-❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Backup withholding applies if:tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have and Dependents. 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-Investment Income of More Than tion number (either a social security num-Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest,$1,900 ber or an employer identification number)dividends, and other investment income you re- in the required manner,❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isInterest and Dividends generally taxable income. You should receive a 2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share fies the payer that you gave an incorrect❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series
of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the identification number,EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds
fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itsIssued After 1989 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you areinstructions will tell you where to report the in- subject to backup withholding on interest❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record come on your Form 1040. or dividends because you have underre-Redemption of Series EE and I
ported interest or dividends on your in-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After Social security number (SSN). You must
come tax return, or1989 give your name and SSN to any person required
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. You are required, but fail, to certify that Certification. For new accounts paying in- W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num-
you are not subject to backup withholding terest or dividends, you must certify under pen- ber and Certification, or similar form, to make
for the reason described in (3). alties of perjury that your social security number this certification. If you fail to make this certifica-
is correct and that you are not subject to backup tion, backup withholding may begin immediately
withholding. Your payer will give you a Form on your new account or investment.
Underreported interest and dividends.
You will be considered to have underreportedTable 1-1. Where To Report
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-Common Types of
mined for a tax year that:Investment Income Keep for Your Records
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this • You failed to include any part of a reporta-
publication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend ble interest or dividend payment required
Income in chapter 1.) to be shown on your return, or
• You were required to file a return and toType of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form include a reportable interest or dividendreport on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ...
payment on that return, but you failed to
file the return.Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
totals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule B as
How to stop backup withholding due towell.) well.)
underreporting. If you have been notified that
you underreported interest or dividends, you canTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use
totals more than Schedule B Schedule B request a determination from the IRS to prevent
$1,500 backup withholding from starting or to stop
backup withholding once it has begun. You must
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule B; also use show that at least one of the following situationsyou will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815 applies.because of higher
education expenses • No underreporting occurred.
• You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSOrdinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need
about whether underreporting occurred.that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule B as
less well.) well.) • Backup withholding will cause or is caus-
ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelyOrdinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use that you will underreport interest and divi-that total more than Schedule B Schedule B dends in the future.$1,500
• You have corrected the underreporting by
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the filing a return if you did not previously file
you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and one and by paying all taxes, penalties, andSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax interest due for any underreported interestWorksheet Worksheet or dividend payments.
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form If the IRS determines that backup withholdingyou have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A.
should stop, it will provide you with a certificationSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax
and will notify the payers who were sent noticesWorksheet or the You cannot use Form
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ earlier.
Worksheet How to stop backup withholding due to an
incorrect identification number. If you haveCapital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
been notified by a payer that you are subject todistributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and
backup withholding because you have providednot have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
an incorrect SSN or employer identificationSchedule D) Worksheet Worksheet
number, you can stop it by following the instruc-
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13; also tions the payer gives you.
distributions (if you use the Qualified
Reporting backup withholding. If backuphave to file Schedule Dividends and Capital
withholding is deducted from your interest orD) Gain Tax Worksheet or
dividend income or other reportable payment,the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet the bank or other business must give you an
information return for the year (for example, a
Gain or loss from sales Line 13; also use Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-
of stocks or bonds Schedule D and the held. The information return will show anyQualified Dividends and backup withholding as ªFederal income tax with-You cannot use FormCapital Gain Tax 1040A held.ºWorksheet or the
Schedule D Tax Nonresident aliens. Generally, payments
Worksheet made to nonresident aliens are not subject to
backup withholding. You can use FormGain or loss from Line 13; also use W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, toinvestment property and the Qualified certify exempt status. However, this does notDividends and Capital
exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-Gain Tax Worksheet or
holding rate that may apply to your investmentthe Schedule D Tax
Worksheet income. For information on the 30% rate, see
Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen- Nominee for more information about this tax. Private activ-
alties for giving false information to avoid ity bonds  are discussed later under State orOriginal issue discountbackup withholding. The civil penalty is $500. Local Government Obligations.
Private activity bondThe criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of
up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-Term loanboth. ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not
Where to report investment income. Table taxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif-1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched- on converted United States Government Lifeferent types of interest income.ules to use to report some common types of Insurance policies and on National Service LifeIn general, any interest that you receive orinvestment income. But, see the rest of this Insurance policies.that is credited to your account and can bepublication for detailed information about report- withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have toing investment income. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.rule are discussed later.Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youproperty (such as a savings account, bond, or Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally generally do not include it in your income untilstock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-tenants in common, each person's share of any statement, by banks, savings and loans, and cation 590 for more information.interest or dividends from the property is deter- other payers of interest. This form shows you the
mined by local law. interest you received during the year. Keep this Taxable Interest Ð Generalform for your records. You do not have to attach
Example. You and your husband have a it to your tax return. Taxable interest includes interest you receivejoint money market account. Under state law, Report on your tax return the total amount of from bank accounts, loans you make to others,half the income from the account belongs to you, interest income that you receive for the tax year. and other sources. The following are someand half belongs to your husband. If you file sources of taxable interest.Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT.separate returns, you each report half of the
Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youincome. Dividends that are actually interest. Certainmust still report all of your taxable interest in-
distributions commonly called dividends are ac-come. For example, you may receive distributiveIncome from property given to a child.
tually interest. You must report as interestshares of interest from partnerships or S corpo-Property you give as a parent to your child under
so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on sharerations. This interest is reported to you onthe Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the
accounts in:Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,
(Form 1120S).becomes the child's property. • Cooperative banks,
Income from the property is taxable to the Nominees. Generally, if someone receives • Credit unions,child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal interest as a nominee for you, that person willobligation to support the child is taxable to the • Domestic building and loan associations,give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interestparent or guardian having that legal obligation. received on your behalf. • Domestic savings and loan associations,
Savings account with parent as trustee. If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes
• Federal savings and loan associations,Interest income from a savings account opened amounts belonging to another person, see the
andfor a child who is a minor, but placed in the name discussion on Nominee distributions , later,
and subject to the order of the parents as trust- under How To Report Interest Income. • Mutual savings banks.
ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the Incorrect amount. If you receive a Formstate in which the child resides, both of the 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or The ªdividendsº will be shown as interest incomefollowing are true. other incorrect information), you should ask the on Form 1099-INT.
• The savings account legally belongs to the issuer for a corrected form. The new Form
child. 1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor- Money market funds. Money market funds
rected.º are offered by nonbank financial institutions• The parents are not legally permitted to
such as mutual funds and stock brokerageuse any of the funds to support the child. Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income houses, and pay dividends. Generally, amountsmay also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original you receive from money market funds should beIssue Discount. For more information aboutAccuracy-related penalty. An accu- reported as dividends, not as interest.amounts shown on this form, see Original Issueracy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for
Discount (OID), later in this chapter.underpayments of tax due to negligence or dis- Certificates of deposit and other deferred
regard of rules or regulations or substantial un- Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest interest accounts. If you open any of these
derstatement of tax. For information on the dividends you receive from a mutual fund or accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals
penalty and any interest that applies, see Penal- other regulated investment company are not in- of 1 year or less during the term of the account.
ties in chapter 2. cluded in your taxable income. (However, see You generally must include this interest in your
Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex- income when you actually receive it or are enti-
empt-interest dividends should be shown in box tled to receive it without paying a substantial
8 of Form 1099-INT. penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-
Interest Income ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a singleInformation-reporting requirement. Al- payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-Terms you may need to know more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discountable, you must show them on your tax return if(see Glossary): (OID), later.you have to file. This is an information-reporting
Interest subject to penalty for early with-Accrual method requirement and does not change the ex-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredempt-interest dividends into taxable income.Below-market loan interest account before maturity, you may haveSee How To Report Interest Income, later.
to pay a penalty. You must report the totalCash method
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Demand loan specified private activity bonds may be subject count during the year, without subtracting the
to the alternative minimum tax. The ex- penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Forgone interest
empt-interest dividends subject to the alterna- ings under How To Report Interest Income ,Gift loan tive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of Form later, for more information on how to report the
Interest 1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructions interest and deduct the penalty.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of Installment sale payments. If a contract for Below-Market Loans
deposit. The interest you pay on money bor- the sale or exchange of property provides for
rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet deferred payments, it also usually provides for If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,
the minimum deposit required for a certificate of interest payable with the deferred payments. you must report as interest income any forgone
deposit from the institution and the interest you That interest is taxable when you receive it. If interest (defined later) from that loan. The be-
earn on the certificate are two separate items. little or no interest is provided for in a deferred low-market loan rules and exceptions are de-
You must report the total interest you earn on payment contract, part of each payment may be scribed in this section. For more information,
the certificate in your income. If you itemize treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Code
deductions, you can deduct the interest you pay Original Issue Discount in Publication 537. and its regulations.
as investment interest, up to the amount of your If you receive a below-market loan, you may
net investment income. See Interest Expenses Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as
in chapter 3. interest on an annuity contract you sell before its any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is
maturity date is taxable. personal interest.
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- low-market loans apply to:make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as
to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer- interest unless state law automatically changes • Gift loans,
tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2009, but you it to a payment on the principal. • Pay-related loans,received only $265, which represented the $575
you earned minus $310 interest charged on your • Corporation-shareholder loans,Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex-
$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form clude from your gross income interest on frozen • Tax avoidance loans, and1099-INT for 2009 showing the $575 interest deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
you earned. The bank also gives you a state- • Certain loans made to qualified continuingyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-
ment showing that you paid $310 interest for care facilities under a continuing care con-posit because:
2009. You must include the $575 in your in- tract.• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
solvent, orule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject A pay-related loan is any below-market loan
to the net investment income limit. between an employer and an employee or be-• The state in which the institution is located
tween an independent contractor and a personhas placed limits on withdrawals becauseGift for opening account. If you receive non- for whom the contractor provides services.other financial institutions in the state arecash gifts or services for making deposits or for A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketbankrupt or insolvent.opening an account in a savings institution, you loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofmay have to report the value as interest. the main purposes of the interest arrangement.The amount of interest you must exclude isFor deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or the interest that was credited on the frozen de-services valued at more than $10 must be re- Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-posits minus the sum of:ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or terest is:
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 • The net amount you withdrew from these • The amount of interest that would be pay-must be reported as interest. The value is deter- deposits during the year, and able for that period if interest accrued onmined by the cost to the financial institution. the loan at the applicable federal rate and• The amount you could have withdrawn as
was payable annually on December 31,of the end of the year (not reduced by anyExample. You open a savings account at
minuspenalty for premature withdrawals of ayour local bank and deposit $800. The account
time deposit).earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- • Any interest actually payable on the loan
culator. If no other interest is credited to your for the period.If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you come on deposits that were frozen at the end of
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You Applicable federal rate. Applicable federal2009, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-
must report $35 interest income on your tax rates are published by the IRS each month in theport Interest Income  for information about re-
return. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS officesporting this interest income exclusion on your
have these bulletins available for research. Seetax return.Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on chapter 5 for other ways to get this information.insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- The interest you exclude is treated as credited
surance company that can be withdrawn annu- to your account in the following year. You must Rules for below-market loans. The rules that
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to include it in income in the year you can withdraw apply to a below-market loan depend on
your account. However, if you can withdraw it it. whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, or
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or term loan.
other specified date), the interest is taxable in Example. $100 of interest was credited on Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is anythe year that date occurs. your frozen deposit during the year. You with- below-market loan where the forgone interest isdrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofPrepaid insurance premiums. Any increase in the nature of a gift.the end of the year. You must include $80 inin the value of prepaid insurance premiums, A demand loan is a loan payable in full at anyyour income and exclude $20 from your incomeadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is time upon demand by the lender. A demand loanfor the year. You must include the $20 in yourinterest if it is applied to the payment of premi- is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedincome for the year you can withdraw it.ums due on insurance policies or made avail- or if interest is charged at a rate below the
able for you to withdraw. applicable federal rate.Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a A demand loan or gift loan that is a be-U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, discount when interest has been defaulted or low-market loan is generally treated as ansuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, when the interest has accrued but has not been arm's-length transaction in which the lender isissued by any agency or instrumentality of the paid, the transaction is described as trading a treated as having made:United States is taxable for federal income tax bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not
purposes. income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. • A loan to the borrower in exchange for a
When you receive a payment of that interest, it is note that requires the payment of interestInterest on tax refunds. Interest you receive a return of capital that reduces the remaining at the applicable federal rate, andon tax refunds is taxable income. cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues • An additional payment to the borrower inInterest on condemnation award. If the con- after the date of purchase, however, is taxable an amount equal to the forgone interest.demning authority pays you interest to compen- interest income for the year received or accrued.
sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in The borrower is generally treated as transferring
interest is taxable. this chapter. the additional payment back to the lender as
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest. The lender must report that amount as 2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or For other information on U.S. savings
interest income. municipal government that are made avail- bonds, write to:
able under a program of general applica-
The lender's additional payment to the bor- tion to the public, For Series HH/H:rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution Bureau of the Public Debtto capital, pay for services, or other payment, 3. Certain employee-relocation loans, Division of Customer Assistancedepending on the substance of the transaction. 4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un- P.O. Box 2186The borrower may have to report this payment less the interest income would be effec- Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186.as taxable income, depending on its classifica- tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.tion. trade or business and would not be ex-
These transfers are considered to occur an- empt from U.S. tax under an income tax
nually, generally on December 31. treaty, For Series EE and I:
Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is 5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- Bureau of the Public Debtnot a demand loan. A term loan is a be- tributions to which are deductible, if the Division of Customer Assistancelow-market loan if the amount of the loan is more total outstanding amount of loans between P.O. Box 7012than the present value of all payments due the organization and lender is $250,000 or Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012.under the loan. less at all times during the tax year, and
Or, on the Internet, visit: www.A lender who makes a below-market term 6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer- ment can be shown to have no significant products.htm/.
ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to effect on the federal tax liability of the
the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi- lender or the borrower.
Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The
For a loan described in (6) above, all the crual method of accounting, you must reportamount of this payment is the amount of the loan
facts and circumstances are used to determine if interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itminus the present value, at the applicable fed-
the interest arrangement has a significant effect accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interesteral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An
on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor- until you receive it or until the bonds mature.equal amount is treated as original issue dis-
rower. Some factors to be considered are:count (OID). The lender must report the annual
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashpart of the OID as interest income. The borrower • Whether items of income and deduction method of accounting, as most individual tax-may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex- generated by the loan offset each other, payers do, you generally report the interest onpense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later. • The amount of these items, U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But see
Reporting options for cash method taxpayers,• The cost to you of complying with the be-Exceptions to the below-market loan rules. below.low-market loan rules, if they were to ap-Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
ply, anddiscussed here. Series HH bonds. These bonds were issued
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-Exception for loans of $10,000 or less. direct deposit to your bank account. If you are aing the transaction as a below-marketThe rules for below-market loans do not apply to cash method taxpayer, you must report interestloan.any day on which the total outstanding amount on these bonds as income in the year you re-of loans between the borrower and lender is ceive it.If you structure a transaction to meet this$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to: Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;exception, and one of the principal purposes of
they were last offered in August 2004. Before1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift structuring the transaction in that way is the
1980, series H bonds were issued. Series Hloan is not directly used to buy or carry avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-
bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.income-producing assets, and ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will
If you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustnot apply.2. Pay-related loans or corpora- report the interest when you receive it.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans oftion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-federal tax is not a principal purpose of the years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.viduals, if the outstanding loans between theinterest arrangement.
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the Series EE and series I bonds. Interest onThis exception does not apply to a term loan forgone interest to be included in income by the these bonds is payable when you redeem thedescribed in (2) above that previously has been lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to bonds. The difference between the purchasesubject to the below-market loan rules. Those the amount of the borrower's net investment price and the redemption value is taxable inter-rules will continue to apply even if the outstand- income for the year. If the borrower's net invest- est.ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds wereException for loans to continuing care fa- zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the first offered in January 1980. They have a matur-cilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa- avoidance of federal tax is one of the main ity period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Ecilities under continuing care contracts are not purposes of the interest arrangement. bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-subject to the rules for below-market loans for
ity period of series E bonds has been extendedthe calendar year if the lender or the lender's Effective dates.  These rules apply to term to 40 years for bonds issued before Decemberspouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year. loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-For the definitions of qualified continuing care loans outstanding after that date. vember 1965. Paper series EE and series Efacility and continuing care contract, see Internal
bonds are issued at a discount. The face value isRevenue Code section 7872(h).
payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EEU.S. Savings BondsException for loans without significant tax bonds are issued at their face value. The face
effect. Loans are excluded from the be- This section provides tax information on U.S. value plus accrued interest is payable to you at
low-market loan rules if their interest arrange- savings bonds. It explains how to report the maturity.
ments do not have a significant effect on the interest income on these bonds and how to treat  Owners of paper series E and EE bonds can
federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender. transfers of these bonds. convert them to electronic bonds. These con-
These loans include: verted bonds do not retain the denominationU.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi- listed on the paper certificate but are posted at1. Loans made available by the lender to the viduals are the following. their purchase price (with accrued interest).general public on the same terms and con- • Series EE bondsditions that are consistent with the lender's Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first
customary business practice, • Series I bonds offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-Table 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings
quest permission to change from method 2 toBond Interest Keep for Your Records
method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,
follow the form instructions for an automaticIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... change. No user fee is required. 
you buy a bond in your name and the name of you. Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inanother person as co-owners, using only your the names of co-owners, such as you and yourown funds
child or you and your spouse, interest on the
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
who is the sole owner of the bond bought the bond.
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion One co-owner's funds used. If you used
co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax
purchase price on the interest. This is true even if you let the
other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate the proceeds. Under these circumstances, theproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive aproperty report one-half of the interest.
Form 1099-INT at the time of redemption and
must provide you with another Form 1099-INT
showing the amount of interest from the bond
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur- 1. You have typed or printed the following that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all number at the top: ª131.º deemed the bond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee
accrued interest is payable to you at maturity. distributions under How To Report Interest In-2. It includes your name and social security come, later, for more information about how aReporting options for cash method tax- number under ª131.º person who is a nominee reports interest in-payers. If you use the cash method of report- 3. It includes the year of change (both the come belonging to another person.ing income, you can report the interest on series beginning and ending dates).EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of the Both co-owners' funds used. If you and
following ways. 4. It identifies the savings bonds for which the other co-owner each contribute part of the
you are requesting this change. bond's purchase price, the interest is generally1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest taxable to each of you, in proportion to the5. It includes your agreement to:until the earlier of the year you cash or amount each of you paid.dispose of the bonds or the year in which a. Report all interest on any bonds ac- Community property. If you and yourthey mature. (However, see Savings quired during or after the year of spouse live in a community property state andbonds traded, later.) change when the interest is realized hold bonds as community property, one-half ofNote. Series E bonds issued in 1979 ma- upon disposition, redemption, or final the interest is considered received by each oftured in 2009. If you have used method 1, maturity, whichever is earliest, and you. If you file separate returns, each of youyou generally must report the interest on
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-these bonds on your 2009 return. b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
est. For more information about communityquired before the year of change when2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-the interest is realized upon disposition,in redemption value as interest each year. erty.redemption, or final maturity, whichever
is earliest, with the exception of the in- Table 1-2. These rules are also shown inYou must use the same method for all series EE, terest reported in prior tax years. Table 1-2.series E, and series I bonds you own. If you do
not choose method 2 by reporting the increase You must attach this statement to your tax Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savings
in redemption value as interest each year, you return for the year of change, which you must file bonds bought for and registered only in the
must use method 1. by the due date (including extensions). name of your child is income to your child, even
if you paid for the bonds and are named asYou can have an automatic extension of 6If you plan to cash your bonds in the
beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,months from the due date of your return for thesame year that you will pay for higher
or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds isyear of change (excluding extensions) to file theeducational expenses, you may want
TIP
income to your child in the earlier of the year thestatement with an amended return. On the state-to use method 1 because you may be able to
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year thement, type or print ªFiled pursuant to sectionexclude the interest from your income. To learn
bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you musthow, see Education Savings Bond Program ,
port the interest income each year.have filed your original return for the year of thelater.
change by the due date (including extensions). Choice to report interest each year. TheChange from method 1. If you want to choice to report the accrued interest each yearBy the date you file the original state-change your method of reporting the interest can be made either by your child or by you forment with your return, you must alsofrom method 1 to method 2, you can do so your child. This choice is made by filing an in-send a signed copy to the address be-
without permission from the IRS. In the year of come tax return that shows all the interestlow.change, you must report all interest accrued to earned to date, and by stating on the return thatInternal Revenue Servicedate and not previously reported for all your your child chooses to report the interest eachAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsbonds. year. Either you or your child should keep a copyBranch)Once you choose to report the interest each of this return.P.O. Box 7604year, you must continue to do so for all series Unless your child is otherwise required to fileBenjamin Franklin StationEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for a tax return for any year after making this choice,Washington, DC 20044any you get later, unless you request permission your child does not have to file a return only toIf you use a private delivery service, send theto change, as explained next. report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bondsigned copy to the address below.Change from method 2. To change from interest under this choice. However, see Tax on
Internal Revenue Servicemethod 2 to method 1, you must request permis- investment income of certain children , earlier,
Attention: CC:IT&A sion from the IRS. Permission for the change is under General Information. Neither you nor your
(Automatic Rulings Branch) Room 5336automatically granted if you send the IRS a child can change the way you report the interest
1111 Constitution Avenue, NWstatement that meets all the following require- unless you request permission from the IRS, as
Washington, DC 20224ments. discussed earlier under Change from method 2.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Ownership transferred. If you bought series earned to the date of transfer if you have not bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and had
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your already reported it. However, if you are consid- not chosen to report the interest each year. At
own funds and had them reissued in your ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in the date of death, interest of $200 had accrued
co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, value both before and after the transfer contin- on the bond and its value of $700 was included
you must include in your gross income for the ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to in your uncle's estate. Your uncle's executor
year of reissue all interest that you earned on defer reporting the interest earned each year. chose not to include the $200 accrued interest in
these bonds and have not previously reported. You must include the total interest in your in- your uncle's final income tax return. The $200 is
But, if the bonds were reissued in your name come in the year you cash or dispose of the income in respect of the decedent.
alone, you do not have to report the interest bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, You are a cash method taxpayer and do not
accrued at that time. whichever is earlier. choose to report the interest each year as it is
This same rule applies when bonds (other The same rules apply to previously unre- earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches
than bonds held as community property) are ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-
transferred between spouses or incident to di- the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or est income Ðthe difference between maturity
vorce. series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.
series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-
Example. You bought series EE bonds en- traded, later. ous itemized deduction not subject to the
tirely with your own funds. You did not choose to 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federalDecedents. The manner of reporting interestreport the accrued interest each year. Later, you estate tax paid because the $200 interest wasincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,transfer the bonds to your former spouse under included in your uncle's estate.after the death of the owner, depends on thea divorce agreement. You must include the de- accounting and income-reporting methods pre-ferred accrued interest, from the date of the Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executorviously used by the decedent.original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer, had chosen to include the $200 accrued interest
Decedent who reported interest each year.in your income in the year of transfer. Your in your uncle's final return, you would report only
If the bonds transferred because of death wereformer spouse includes in income the interest on $300 as interest when you cashed the bond at
owned by a person who used an accrualthe bonds from the date of transfer to the date of maturity. $300 is the interest earned after your
method, or who used the cash method and hadredemption. uncle's death.
chosen to report the interest each year, the
Purchased jointly. If you and a co-owner interest earned in the year of death up to the Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make oreach contributed funds to buy series E, series date of death must be reported on that person's have made the choice to report the increase inEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the final return. The person who acquires the bonds redemption value as interest each year, youbonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, includes in income only interest earned after the include in gross income for the year you acquireyou must include in your gross income for the date of death. the bond all of the unreported increase in valueyear of reissue your share of all the interest of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds youDecedent who postponed reporting inter-earned on the bonds that you have not previ- hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-est. If the transferred bonds were owned by aously reported. The former co-owner does not ited from your uncle.decedent who had used the cash method andhave to include in gross income at the time of
had not chosen to report the interest each year,reissue his or her share of the interest earned Example 4. When your aunt died, sheand who had bought the bonds entirely with histhat was not reported before the transfer. This owned series H bonds that she had acquired in aor her own funds, all interest earned beforeinterest, however, as well as all interest earned trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-death must be reported in one of the followingafter the reissue, is income to the former ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashways.co-owner. method and did not choose to report the interestThis income-reporting rule also applies when on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-the bonds are reissued in the name of your Your aunt's executor chose not to include anysentative (executor, administrator, etc.)former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the interest earned before your aunt's death on herwho files the final income tax return of thenew co-owner will report only his or her share of final return.decedent can choose to include on thatthe interest earned after the transfer. return all of the interest earned on the The income in respect of the decedent is theIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought bonds before the decedent's death. The sum of the unreported interest on the series Ejointly are reissued to each of you separately in person who acquires the bonds then in- bonds and the interest, if any, payable on thethe same proportion as your contribution to the cludes in income only interest earned after series H bonds but not received as of the date ofpurchase price, neither you nor your co-owner the date of death. your aunt's death. You must report any interesthas to report at that time the interest earned received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interestbefore the bonds were reissued. return. The part of the interest that was payableearned up to the date of death is income in but not received before your aunt's death isExample 1. You and your spouse each respect of the decedent. It should not be income in respect of the decedent and mayspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series included in the decedent's final return. All qualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you of the interest earned both before and after tion on when to report the interest on the seriesand your spouse as co-owners. You both post- the decedent's death (except any part re- E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded ,pone reporting interest on the bond. You later ported by the estate on its income tax re- later.have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one turn) is income to the person who acquires
in your name and one in your spouse's name. At the bonds. If that person uses the cash Savings bonds distributed from a retirementthat time neither you nor your spouse has to method and does not choose to report the or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.report the interest earned to the date of reissue. interest each year, he or she can postpone savings bond in a taxable distribution from areporting it until the year the bonds are retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE cashed or disposed of or the year they the year of distribution includes the bond's re-savings bond entirely with your own funds. The mature, whichever is earlier. In the year demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-bond was issued to you and your spouse as that person reports the interest, he or she crued before the distribution). When you redeemco-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- can claim a deduction for any federal es- the bond (whether in the year of distribution orest on the bond. You later have the bond reis- tate tax that was paid on the part of the later), your interest income includes only thesued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and interest included in the decedent's estate. interest accrued after the bond was distributed.one in your spouse's name. You must report half To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-For more information on income in respect of athe interest earned to the date of reissue. bution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators.
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a bonds distributed from a retirement or
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax- profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interest
include in your income for that year the interest payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE Income, later.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re- Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the you claim an exemption) to attend an eligible
porting the interest on your series EE or series E amount you received as nominee for the educational institution.
bonds, you did not recognize taxable income other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Qualified expenses include any contribution
when you traded the bonds for series HH or this section, for more information about you make to a qualified tuition program or to a
series H bonds, unless you received cash in the the reporting requirements.) Coverdell education savings account. For infor-
trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se- mation about these programs, see Publication• You received the bond in a taxable distri-ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can- 970, Tax Benefits for Education.bution from a retirement or profit-sharingnot trade any other series of bonds for series HH Qualified expenses do not include expensesplan. The interest shown on your Formbonds.) Any cash you received is income up to for room and board or for courses involving1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-the amount of the interest earned on the bonds sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of aest portion of the amount taxable as atraded. When your series HH or series H bonds degree or certificate granting program.distribution from the plan and not taxablemature, or if you dispose of them before matur- as interest. (This amount is generally Eligible educational institutions. Theseity, you report as interest the difference between shown on Form 1099-R, Distributions institutions include most public, private, andtheir redemption value and your cost. Your cost From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalis the sum of the amount you paid for the traded Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance schools that are accredited and are eligible toseries EE or series E bonds plus any amount Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) participate in student aid programs run by theyou had to pay at the time of the trade. Department of Education. See chapter 11 of
For more information on including the correct Publication 970 for information on foreignExample.  In 2004, you traded series EE amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- schools that are eligible.bonds (on which you postponed reporting the ings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi-interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 Reduction for certain benefits. You mustnee distributions under How To Report Interestin cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- reduce your qualified higher educational ex-Income, later.come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-interest of $523 and a redemption value of empt from state and local taxes. The
ships.$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma- Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP
turity, when you receive $2,500. You must report cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. interest in box 3. Do not include this income on tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
This is the difference between their redemption your state or local income tax return.
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
tion of distributions from a qualified tuitionamount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is
program.also the difference between the accrued interest Education Savings Bond Program
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or
You may be able to exclude from income all orcash received on the trade.) inheritances) received as educational as-
part of the interest you receive on the redemp- sistance, such as:Choice to report interest in year of trade. tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theYou could have chosen to treat all of the previ- year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- a. Veterans' educational assistance bene-ously unreported accrued interest on series EE penses during the same year. This exclusion is fits,or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as known as the Education Savings Bond Program.income in the year of the trade. If you made this b. Qualified tuition reductions, orYou do not qualify for this exclusion if yourchoice, it is treated as a change from method 1. c. Employer-provided educational assis-filing status is married filing separately.See Change from method 1  under Series EE tance.and series I bonds, earlier.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
5. Any expense used in figuring the AmericanForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter- terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds
Opportunity, Hope, and lifetime learningest. When you cash a bond, the bank or other Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-
credits.payer that redeems it must give you a Form tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you For information about these benefits, see Pub-receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified lication 970.1099-INT should show the interest as the differ- U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued
ence between the amount you received and the Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-issued either in your name (sole owner) or in
1099-INT may show more interest than you ings bonds you redeem during the year are notyour and your spouse's names (co-owners).
have to include on your income tax return. For more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-You must be at least 24 years old before the
example, this may happen if any of the following tional expenses for the year, you may be able tobond's issue date. For example, a bond bought
are true. exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds areby a parent and issued in the name of his or her
more than the expenses, you may be able tochild under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-• You chose to report the increase in the exclude only part of the interest.sion by the parent or child.redemption value of the bond each year. To determine the excludable amount, multi-The interest shown on your Form The issue date of a bond may be earlier ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts than the date the bond is purchased The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thepreviously included in income. because the issue date assigned to a
CAUTION
! qualified higher educational expenses you paidbond is the first day of the month in which it is• You received the bond from a decedent. during the year. The denominator (bottom part)purchased.The interest shown on your Form of the fraction is the total proceeds you received
1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- during the year.Beneficiary. You can designate any individ-est reported by the decedent before death, ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the Example. In February 2009, Mark andor on the decedent's final return, or by the bond. Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-estate on the estate's income tax return.
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April• Ownership of the bond was transferred. sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- 1996. They received proceeds of $8,124, repre-The interest shown on your Form tion information from the Department of senting principal of $5,000 and interest of1099-INT will not be reduced by interest Treasury. $3,124. In 2009, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-that accrued before the transfer. ter's college tuition. They are not claiming an
• You were named as a co-owner and the Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa- education credit for that amount, and their
other co-owner contributed funds to buy tional expenses are tuition and fees required for daughter does not have any tax-free educational
the bond. The interest shown on your you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom assistance. They can exclude $1,538 ($3,124 ×
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($4,000 ÷  $8,124)) of interest in 2009. They interest or domestic production activities) to the proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less
amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the any tax withheld) and the purchase price of themust pay tax on the remaining $1,586 ($3,124 −
total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. new Treasury security. However, you must re-$1,538) interest.
port the full amount of the interest income onRoyalties included in modified AGI. Be-Figuring the interest part of the proceeds each of your Treasury bills at the time it reachescause the deduction for interest expenses due(Form 8815, line 6). To figure the amount of maturity.to royalties and other investments is limited tointerest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use the
your net investment income (see InvestmentLine 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions. Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes
Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-If you previously reported any interest deduction for interest expenses until you have ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasuryfrom savings bonds cashed during figured this exclusion of savings bond interest. bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of these2009, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-
 Therefore, if you had interest expenses that are Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi-sheet below instead. due to royalties and deductible on Schedule E nations of $100 to $1 million. Both notes and
(Form 1040), you must make a special computa- bonds generally pay interest every 6 months.Alternate Line 6 Worksheet tion of your deductible interest to figure the net Generally, you report this interest for the year
royalty income included in your modified AGI.1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can
You must figure deductible interest without re-line 5 ................... . redeem these securities for face value.
gard to this exclusion of bond interest.2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-
You can use a ªdummyº Form 4952, Invest-paper series EE bonds cashed in tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-
2009 .................... . ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make a
3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) special computation. On this form, include in competitive bid and a determination is made that
4. Enter the face value of all electronic your net investment income your total interest the purchase price is less than the face value,series EE bonds (including income for the year from series EE and I U.S. you will receive a refund for the difference be-post-1989 series EE bonds savings bonds. Use the deductible interest tween the purchase price and the face value.converted from paper to electronic amount from this form only to figure the net This amount is considered original issue dis-format) and all series I bonds royalty income included in your modified AGI. count. However, the original issue discount rulescashed in 2009 ............. . Do not attach this form to your tax return. (discussed later) do not apply if the discount is5. Add lines 3 and 4 ........... . After you figure this interest exclusion, use a less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the face6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... . separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc- amount, multiplied by the number of full years7. Enter the amount of interest tion for investment interest expenses, and at- from the date of original issue to maturity. Seereported as income in previous tach that form to your return. De minimis OID  under Original Issue Discountyears ................... .
(OID), later. If the purchase price is determined8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
to be more than the face amount, the differenceresult here and on Form 8815, line 6 est exclusion, you must keep a written
is a premium. (See Bond Premium Amortizationrecord of the qualified U.S. savings
RECORDS
in chapter 3.)Modified adjusted gross income limit. bonds you redeem. Your record must include
The interest exclusion is limited if your modified the serial number, issue date, face value, and For other information on these notes or
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- bonds, write to:
est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,
• $69,950 to $84,950 for taxpayers filing sin- Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series Bureau of The Public Debtgle or head of household, and EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, P.O. Box 7015
• $104,900 to $134,900 for married taxpay- to record this information. You should also keep Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-ers filing jointly, or for a qualifying
Or, on the Internet, visit: http://www.mentation that shows you paid qualified higherwidow(er) with dependent child.
treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm.educational expenses during the year.You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the
U.S. Treasury Bills,upper limit for your filing status.
Notes, and Bonds Treasury inflation-protected securitiesModified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice aof this exclusion, is adjusted gross income Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37) (obligations) of the U.S. Government. that is adjusted to take into account inflation andfigured before the interest exclusion, and modi-
deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-fied by adding back any: Taxation of interest. Interest income from
ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt InstrumentsTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to1. Foreign earned income exclusion, under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.federal income tax, but is exempt from all state
and local income taxes. You should receive2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-of American Samoa, Payments of principal and interest generally dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-will be credited to your designated checking or4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for informationsavings account by direct deposit through the about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received TreasuryDirect  system. tain other designated issues.under an employer's adoption assistance
program, Treasury bills. These bills generally have a
Bonds Sold Between Interest4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity6. Deduction for tuition and fees, period. They are issued at a discount in the Dates
7. Deduction for student loan interest, and amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The dif-
ference between the discounted price you pay If you sell a bond between interest payment8. Deduction for domestic production activi- for the bills and the face value you receive at dates, part of the sales price represents interestties. maturity is interest income. Generally, you re- accrued to the date of sale. You must report that
Use the worksheet in the instructions for line port this interest income when the bill is paid at part of the sales price as interest income for the
9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you maturity. See Discount on Short-Term Obliga- year of sale.
claim any of the exclusion or deduction items tions under Discount on Debt Instruments, later. If you buy a bond between interest payment
listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur- dates, part of the purchase price represents
amount of the exclusion or deduction (except ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will interest accrued before the date of purchase.
any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan receive payment for the difference between the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return of your capital investment, rather than Obligations that are not bonds. Inter- made) and the bank must meet safety and
est on a state or local government obli- soundness requirements.)interest income, by reducing your basis in the
gation may be tax exempt even if thebond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under
TIP • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-obligation is not a bond. For example, interest onHow To Report Interest Income , later in this tion.a debt evidenced only by an ordinary writtenchapter, for information on reporting the pay-
• Federal Housing Administration.agreement of purchase and sale may be taxment.
exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on • Federal National Mortgage Association.default by the state or political subdivision mayInsurance • Government National Mortgage Corpora-be tax exempt.
tion.Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
Registration requirement. A bond issued af-ciary of the insured person are usually not tax- • Resolution Funding Corporation.ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-able. But if you receive the proceeds in • Student Loan Marketing Association.tered form for the interest to be tax exempt.installments, you must usually report part of
each installment payment as interest income. Indian tribal government. Bonds issued after Tax credit bonds. Tax credit bonds are bondsFor more information about insurance pro- 1982 by an Indian tribal government (including that generally do not pay interest. Instead, theceeds received in installments, see Publication tribal economic development bonds issued after bondholder is allowed an annual tax credit. The525. February 17, 2009) are treated as issued by a credit compensates the holder for lendingstate. Interest on these bonds is generally tax money to the issuer and functions as interestexempt if the bonds are part of an issue of whichInterest option on insurance. If you leave life paid on the bond. Use Form 8912, Credit tosubstantially all of the proceeds are to be used ininsurance proceeds on deposit with an insur- Holders of Tax Credit Bonds, to claim the creditthe exercise of any essential government func-ance company under an agreement to pay inter- for the following tax credit bonds and to figuretion. However, the essential government func-est only, the interest paid to you is taxable. the amount of the credit to report as interesttion requirement does not apply to tribal income.economic development bonds issued after Feb-Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
ruary 17, 2009, for tax-exempt treatment. Inter- • Clean renewable energy bond.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
est on private activity bonds (other than certainceive are taxed as pension and annuity income • Gulf tax credit bond.bonds for tribal manufacturing facilities) is tax-from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. • Midwestern tax credit bond.able.See Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions
and Annuities, for information on taxation of • Qualified forestry conservation bond.Original issue discount. Original issue dis-
pension and annuity income from nonqualified count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern- • New clean renewable energy bond.plans. ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest. • Qualified energy conservation bond.For information on the treatment of OID
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seeState or Local • Qualified zone academy bond.
Tax-exempt state and local government bondsGovernment Obligations • Qualified school construction bond.under Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapter
4.Interest you receive on an obligation issued by a Build America bonds. A build Americastate or local government is generally not tax- Stripped bonds or coupons. For special bond is any bond (other than a private activityable. The issuer should be able to tell you rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga- bond) issued after February 17, 2009, andwhether the interest is taxable. The issuer tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  under before January 1, 2011, by an issuer who makesshould also give you a periodic (or year-end) Original Issue Discount (OID), later. an irrevocable election to have the rules of Inter-
statement showing the tax treatment of the obli- nal Revenue Code section 54AA apply and ex-
Information reporting requirement. If yougation. If you invested in the obligation through a cept for that election, the interest on the bond
must file a tax return, you are required to showtrust, a fund, or other organization, that organi- would have been excludable from income under
any tax-exempt interest you received on yourzation should give you this information. Internal Revenue Code section 103.
return. This is an information-reporting require- These bonds pay interest that is taxable.Even if interest on the obligation is not ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- However, the bondholder is allowed a tax creditsubject to income tax, you may have to est to taxable interest. See Reporting equal to 35% of the interest payable on thereport capital gain or loss when you sell
CAUTION
! tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter- interest payment date of the bond. The credit isit. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may est Income, later in this chapter. treated as taxable interest. Use Form 8912 toapply to other dispositions of the obligation. claim the credit for a build America bond.
Taxable Interest Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds ofTax-Exempt Interest these bonds are used to finance mortgage loansInterest on some state or local obligations is for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state orInterest on a bond used to finance government taxable. local government home mortgage bonds issuedoperations generally is not taxable if the bond is after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondsFederally guaranteed bonds. Interest onissued by a state, the District of Columbia, a are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-federally guaranteed state or local obligationsU.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi- ans' mortgage bonds.issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rulesions. Political subdivisions include:
does not apply to interest on obligations guaran- Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds• Port authorities, teed by the following U.S. Government agen- issued by state or local governments after Octo-cies.• Toll road commissions, ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a
• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran- bond any portion of the proceeds of which is• Utility services authorities,
tee was under the Northwest Power Act as expected to be used to buy (or to replace funds• Community redevelopment agencies, and in effect on July 18, 1984). used to buy) higher yielding investments. A
bond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for • Department of Veterans Affairs. intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of thecertain obligations issued after 1980).
• Federal home loan banks. (The guarantee issue in this manner.
There are other requirements for tax-exempt must be made after July 30, 2008, in con-
bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern- nection with the original bond issue during Private activity bonds. Interest on a private
ment agency or see sections 103 and 141 the period beginning on July 30, 2008, and activity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined
through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and ending on December 31, 2010 (or a re- below) is taxable. Generally, a private activity
the related regulations. newal or extension of a guarantee so bond is part of a state or local government bond
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
issue that meets both of the following require- of a series of refundings). However, this rule REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for
ments. does not apply to any refunding bond that was information about applying the rules discussed
issued to refund any qualified bond that was in this section to the regular interest holder of a
1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is- issued during 2004 through 2008. real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-
sue is to be used for a private business nancial asset securitization investment trust, orEnterprise zone facility bonds. Interest onuse. other CDO.certain private activity bonds issued by a state or
2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin- local government to finance a facility used in an
cipal or interest is: Original Issueempowerment zone or enterprise community is
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see Discount (OID)a. Secured by an interest in property to be Publication 954.used for a private business use (or pay- OID is a form of interest. You generally includements for this property), or New York Liberty bonds. New York Liberty OID in your income as it accrues over the term ofbonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, to the debt instrument, whether or not you receiveb. Derived from payments for property (or finance the construction and rehabilitation of any payments from the issuer.borrowed money) used for a private real property in the designated ªLiberty Zoneº of A debt instrument generally has OID whenbusiness use. New York City. Interest on these bonds issued the instrument is issued for a price that is lessbefore 2010 is tax exempt. than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDAlso, a bond is generally considered a private
is the difference between the stated redemptionactivity bond if the amount of the proceeds to Market discount. Market discount on a price at maturity and the issue price.be used to make or finance loans to persons tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youother than government units is more than 5% All debt instruments that pay no interestbought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canof the proceeds or $5 million (whichever is before maturity are presumed to be issued at achoose to accrue the market discount over theless). discount. Zero coupon bonds are one exampleperiod you own the bond and include it in your of these instruments.income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ- The OID accrual rules generally do not applyket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debtity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-Instruments, later. If you do not make thatqualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ- turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,ing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New York See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.1993, any gain from market discount is taxableLiberty bond, a Midwestern disaster area bond,
For information about the sale of a debt in-when you dispose of the bond.a Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, a Gulf Op-
strument with OID, see chapter 4.portunity Zone Bond treated as an exempt facil- For more information on the treatment of
ity bond, or any recovery zone facility bond market discount when you dispose of a De minimis OID. You can treat the discountissued after February 17, 2009, and before Jan- tax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru- as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)uary 1, 2011), qualified student loan bond, quali- ments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-fied small issue bond (including a tribal chapter 4. plied by the number of full years from the date ofmanufacturing facility bond), qualified redevel- original issue to maturity. This small discount isopment bond, qualified mortgage bond (includ- known as ªde minimisº OID.ing a Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond, a Midwestern
disaster area bond, or a Hurricane Ike disaster Discount on Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond witharea bond, treated as a qualified mortgage a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,bond), qualified veterans' mortgage bond, or Debt Instruments issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofqualified 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10benefit of certain tax-exempt organizations). Terms you may need to know (the number of full years from the date of originalInterest that you receive on these (see Glossary): issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20tax-exempt bonds if issued after August 7, 1986, discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asMarket discountgenerally is a ªtax preference itemº and may be zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willsubject to the alternative minimum tax. See Market discount bond recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)Form 6251 and its instructions for more informa-
Original issue discount (OID)tion. Example 2. The facts are the same as inThe interest on the following bonds is not a Premium Example 1, except that the bond was issued attax preference item and is not subject to the $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountalternative minimum tax. is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youIn general, a debt instrument, such as a bond, must include the OID in income as it accrues• Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds. note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- over the term of the bond.ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at a• New York Liberty bonds.
Debt instrument bought after original is-lower than current market rate will usually be• Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds. sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deissued at less than its face amount. This dis-
minimis OID at a premium, the discount is notcount is, in effect, additional interest income.• Midwestern disaster area bonds.
includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentThe following are some of the types of dis-• Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds. with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountcounted debt instruments.
is reported under the market discount rules. See• Exempt facility bonds issued after July 30, • U.S. Treasury bonds. Market Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.2008.
• Corporate bonds.• Qualified mortgage bonds issued after Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules
• Municipal bonds.July 30, 2008. discussed here do not apply to the following debt
instruments. • Certificates of deposit.• Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds is-
sued after July 30, 2008. • Notes between individuals. 1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)Qualified bonds issued in 2009 or 2010. • Stripped bonds and coupons.
The interest on any qualified bond issued in 2. U.S. savings bonds.• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).2009 or 2010 is not a tax preference item and is 3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aThe discount on these instruments (except mu-not subject to the alternative minimum tax. For fixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearnicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. Thethis purpose, a refunding bond (whether a cur- from the date of issue).discount on municipal bonds generally is notrent or advanced refunding) is treated as issued
taxable (but see State or Local Governmenton the date the refunded bond was issued (or on 4. Obligations issued by an individual before
Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See alsothe date the original bond was issued in the case March 2, 1984.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- purchase was greater than the total of all Debt instruments issued after 1984. For
ing are true. these debt instruments, you report the total OIDamounts payable on the instrument after the
that applies each year regardless of whetherpurchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
a. The lender is not in the business of you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.est.
lending money. If you bought an OID debt instrument at a Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-premium, you generally do not have to reportb. The amount of the loan, plus the ment is increased by the amount of OID that youany OID as ordinary income.amount of any outstanding prior loans include in your gross income.
between the same individuals, is Qualified stated interest. In general, this is$10,000 or less. stated interest that is unconditionally payable in
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)cash or property (other than debt instruments ofc. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of
the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.the principal purposes of the loan. If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1
Acquisition premium. You bought a debt year, you must include in income each year a
instrument at an acquisition premium if both of part of the total interest due and report it in the
the following are true. same manner as other OID.Form 1099-OID This also applies to similar deposit arrange-• You did not pay a premium. ments with banks, building and loan associa-The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-
• The instrument's adjusted basis immedi- tions, etc., including:ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)
ately after purchase (including purchase atshould give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issue • Time deposits,original issue) was greater than its ad-Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OID
justed issue price. This is the issue price • Bonus plans,for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form
plus the OID previously accrued, minus1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID • Savings certificates,any payment previously made on the in-for the part of the year that you held the bond. It
• Deferred income certificates,strument other than qualified stated inter-also will show, in box 2, the stated interest that
est.you must include in your income. A copy of Form • Bonus savings certificates, and
1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file your
• Growth savings certificates.copy with your return. Keep it for your records. Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OIDIn most cases, you must report the entire includible in your income. For information aboutamount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyfiguring the correct amount of OID to include ininterest income. But see Refiguring OID shown must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDsyour income, see Figuring OID on Long-Termon Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, and that are not in registered form. They are notDebt Instruments in Publication 1212.also Original issue discount (OID) adjustment issued in the depositor's name and are transfer-
under How To Report Interest Income , later in able from one individual to another.Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form
this chapter, for more information. Banks must provide the IRS and the person1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.or acquired it from another holder during theForm 1099-OID not received. If you had OID
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,for the year but did not receive a Form Time deposit open account arrangement.earlier, for information about the treatment of1099-OID, see the OID tables found at http:// This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity dateperiodic interest that may be shown in box 2 ofwww.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ in which you make deposits on a schedule ar-Form 1099-OID for that instrument.0,,id=109875,00.html, which list total OID on ranged between you and your bank. But there iscertain debt instruments and has information no actual or constructive receipt of interest untilthat will help you figure OID. If your debt instru- the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,Applying the OID Rulesment is not listed, consult the issuer for further you and your bank enter into an arrangementinformation about the accrued OID for the year. The rules for reporting OID depend on the date under which you agree to deposit $100 each
the long-term debt instrument was issued. month for a period of 5 years. Interest will beNominee. If someone else is the holder of
compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablerecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
Debt instruments issued after 1954 and only at the end of the 5-year period. You mustment that belongs to you and receives a Form
before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a include a part of the interest in your income as1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give
government instrument). For these instru- OID each year. Each year the bank must giveyou a Form 1099-OID.
ments, you do not report the OID until the year you a Form 1099-OID to show you the amountIf you receive a Form 1099-OID that includes
you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If you must include in your income for the year.amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-
a gain results and the instrument is a capitalinee distributions under How To Report Interest
asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is Redemption before maturity. If, before theIncome, later.
ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is maturity date, you redeem a deferred interestRefiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the account for less than its stated redemption priceYou must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or box instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the following no reporting of OID is required. that you previously included in income but didapply. In general, the amount of gain that is ordinary not receive.
interest income equals the following amount:• You bought the debt instrument after its
Renewable certificates. If you renew a CD atoriginal issue and paid a premium or an
Number of full months Original maturity, it is treated as a redemption and aacquisition premium. you held the instrument × Issue purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or Number of full months from date of Discount gardless of the terms of renewal.
a stripped coupon (including certain zero  original issue to date of maturity
coupon instruments). See Figuring OID
under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later Face-Amount CertificatesDebt instruments issued after May 27, 1969in this chapter. (after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- These certificates are subject to the OID rules.ment), and before 1985. If you hold these They are a form of endowment contracts issueddebt instruments as capital assets, you mustSee Original issue discount (OID) adjustment by insurance or investment companies for eitherinclude a part of the discount in your grossunder How To Report Interest Income , later in a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, withincome each year that you own the instruments.this chapter, for information about reporting the the face amount becoming payable on the ma-correct amount of OID. Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- turity date of the certificate.
ment is increased by the amount of OID that youPremium. You bought a debt instrument at In general, the difference between the face
include in your gross income.a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after amount and the amount you paid for the contract
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is OID. You must include a part of the OID in treat the amount of the redemption price of the When you buy a market discount bond, you
your income over the term of the certificate. bond that is more than the basis of the bond as can choose to accrue the market discount over
the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the the period you own the bond and include it inThe issuer must give you a statement on
amount payable on the coupons that is moreForm 1099-OID indicating the amount you must your income currently as interest income. If you
than the basis of the coupons as the OID.include in your income each year. do not make this choice, the following rules
generally apply.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
• You must treat any gain when you disposecoupon, treat it as if it were originally issued onInflation-Indexed of the bond as ordinary interest income,the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,Debt Instruments up to the amount of the accrued markettreat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-
discount. See Discounted Debt Instru-If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If
ments under Capital Gains and Losses in(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any
chapter 4.must report as OID any increase in the infla- excess of the amount payable on the due date of
tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrument the coupon over your purchase price. • You must treat any partial payment of prin-
that occurs while you held the instrument during cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID onthe year. In general, an inflation-indexed debt come, up to the amount of the accruedstripped bonds and stripped coupons depend oninstrument is a debt instrument on which the market discount. See Partial principal pay-the date the debt instruments were purchased,payments are adjusted for inflation and deflation ments, later in this discussion.not the date issued.(such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-
• If you borrow money to buy or carry theYou must refigure the OID shown on theties). You should receive Form 1099-OID from
bond, your deduction for interest paid onForm 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bondthe payer showing the amount you must report
the debt is limited. See Limit on interestor coupon. For information about figuring theas OID and any qualified stated interest paid to
deduction for market discount bondscorrect amount of OID on these instruments toyou during the year. For more information, see
under When To Deduct Investment Inter-include in your income, see Figuring OID onPublication 1212.
est in chapter 3.Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication
1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
coupons should not rely on the OID shown inStripped Bonds and Coupons Market discount. Market discount is theSection II of The OID tables (available at http:// amount of the stated redemption price of a bondIf you strip one or more coupons from a bond www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ at maturity that is more than your basis in theand sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and 0,,id=109875,00.html ) because the amounts bond immediately after you acquire it. You treatcoupons are treated as separate debt instru- listed in Section II for stripped bonds or coupons market discount as zero if it is less thanments issued with OID. are figured without reference to the date or price one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-The holder of a stripped bond has the right to at which you acquired them. tion price of the bond multiplied by the number ofreceive the principal (redemption price) pay- Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru- full years to maturity (after you acquire thement. The holder of a stripped coupon has the ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt bond).right to receive interest on the bond. instruments is figured under the discount bond If a market discount bond also has OID, theStripped bonds and stripped coupons in- method. This method is described in Regula- market discount is the sum of the bond's issueclude: tions section 1.1275-7(e). price and the total OID includible in the gross• Zero coupon instruments available income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, theStripped tax-exempt obligations. You dothrough the Department of the Treasury's total OID that accrued) before you acquired thenot have to pay tax on OID on any strippedSeparate Trading of Registered Interest bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-tax-exempt bond or coupon that you boughtand Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro- ately after you acquired it.before June 11, 1987. However, if you acquiredgram and government-sponsored enter-
it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OIDprises such as the Resolution Funding Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally,on it to determine its basis when you dispose ofCorporation and the Financing Corpora- a bond that you acquired at original issue is not ait. See Original issue discount (OID) on debttion, and market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in ainstruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter• Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se- bond is determined by reference to the adjusted4.curities that represent ownership interests basis of another person who acquired the bondYou may have to pay tax on part of the OIDin those securities, such as obligations at original issue, you are also considered toon stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons thatbacked by U.S. Treasury bonds that are have acquired it at original issue.you bought after June 10, 1987. For informationoffered primarily by brokerage firms. on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-
Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on nal issue can be a market discount bond if either
Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond and Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication of the following is true.
sell the bond or coupons, include in income the 1212. • Your cost basis in the bond is less thaninterest that accrued while you held the bond the bond's issue price.before the date of sale to the extent you did not Market Discount Bonds
previously include this interest in your income. • The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
For an obligation acquired after October 22, A market discount bond is any bond having ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-
1986, you must also include the market discount market discount except: ization. (This does not apply if the bond is
that accrued before the date of sale of the issued in exchange for a market discount• Short-term obligations (those with fixedstripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did bond issued before July 19, 1984, and thematurity dates of up to 1 year from thenot previously include this discount in your in- terms and interest rates of both bonds aredate of issue),come. the same.)
Add the interest and market discount that • Tax-exempt obligations that you bought
you include in income to the basis of the bond before May 1, 1993, Accrued market discount. The accrued mar-and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be- ket discount is figured in one of two ways.• U.S. savings bonds, andtween the items you keep and the items you sell,
based on the fair market value of the items. The Ratable accrual method. Treat the market• Certain installment obligations.
difference between the sale price of the bond (or discount as accruing in equal daily installments
coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (or during the period you hold the bond. Figure theMarket discount arises when the value of a
coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale. daily installments by dividing the market dis-debt obligation decreases after its issue date.
count by the number of days after the date youTreat any item you keep as an OID bond Generally, this is due to an increase in interest
acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-originally issued and bought by you on the sale rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar-
ity date. Multiply the daily installments by thedate of the other items. If you keep the bond, ket, it may have market discount.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
number of days you held the bond to figure your 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for any Figuring the accrued discount. Figure the
accrued discount by using either the ratableaccrued market discount. accrual period, if the debt instrument has
accrual method or the constant yield methodOID, orConstant yield method. Instead of using discussed previously in Accrued market dis-the ratable accrual method, you can choose to 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter- count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier.figure the accrued discount using a constant est paid in the accrual period, if the debt
interest rate (the constant yield method). Make instrument has no OID. Government obligations. For an obligation
this choice by attaching to your timely filed return described above that is a short-term govern-Under method (2) above, figure accrueda statement identifying the bond and stating that ment obligation, the amount you include in yourmarket discount for a period by multiplying theyou are making a constant interest rate election. income for the current year is the accrued acqui-total remaining market discount by a fraction.The choice takes effect on the date you acquired sition discount, if any, plus any other accruedThe numerator (top part) of the fraction is thethe bond. If you choose to use this method for interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi-OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomany bond, you cannot change your choice for tion discount is the stated redemption price atpart) is the total remaining OID at the beginningthat bond. maturity minus your basis. of the period.For information about using the constant If you choose to use the constant yieldUnder method (3) above, figure accrued method to figure accrued acquisition discount,yield method, see Constant yield method under market discount for a period by multiplying the treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as theDebt Instruments Issued After 1984  in Publica- total remaining market discount by a fraction. issue price. If you choose to use this method,tion 1212. To use this method to figure market The numerator is the stated interest paid in the you cannot change your choice.discount (instead of OID), treat the bond as accrual period, and the denominator is the totalhaving been issued on the date you acquired it. stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin- Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga-Treat the amount of your basis (immediately ning of the accrual period. tion listed above that is not a government obliga-after you acquired the bond) as the issue price.
tion, the amount you include in your income forThen apply the formula shown in Publication the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plusDiscount on1212. any other accrued interest payable. If youShort-Term Obligations choose the constant yield method to figure ac-Choosing to include market discount in in- crued OID, apply it by using the obligation'sWhen you buy a short-term obligation (one withcome currently. You can make this choice if issue price.a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from theyou have not revoked a prior choice to include
date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga- Choosing to include accrued acquisitionmarket discount in income currently within the
tion, you can generally choose to include any discount instead of OID. You can choose tolast 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-
report accrued acquisition discount (defineddiscount and interest payable on the obligationtaching to your timely filed return a statement in
earlier under Government obligations ) ratherin income currently. If you do not make thiswhich you:
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-choice, the following rules generally apply.• State that you have included market dis- tions. Your choice will apply to the year for which• You must treat any gain when you sell,count in your gross income for the year it is made and to all later years and cannot beexchange, or redeem the obligation as or-under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev- changed without the consent of the IRS.dinary income, up to the amount of theenue Code, and You must make your choice by the due dateratable share of the discount. See Dis- of your return, including extensions, for the first• Describe the method you used to figure counted Debt Instruments under Capital year for which you are making the choice. Attachthe accrued market discount for the year. Gains and Losses in chapter 4. a statement to your return or amended return
indicating:Once you make this choice, it will apply to all • If you borrow money to buy or carry the
market discount bonds that you acquire during obligation, your deduction for interest paid • Your name, address, and social security
the tax year and in later tax years. You cannot on the debt is limited. See Limit on interest number,
revoke your choice without the consent of the deduction for short-term obligations under
• The choice you are making and that it isIRS. For information on how to revoke your When To Deduct Investment Interest in
being made under section 1283(c)(2) ofchoice, see section 32 of the Appendix to Reve- chapter 3. the Internal Revenue Code,nue Procedure 2008-52 in Internal Revenue
Bulletin 2008-36. You can find this revenue pro- • The period for which the choice is beingShort-term obligations for which no choice
cedure at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09. made and the obligation to which it ap-is available. You must include any discount or
html. plies, andinterest in current income as it accrues for any
Also see Election To Report All Interest as short-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt • Any other information necessary to showOID, later. If you make that election, you must obligation) that is: you are entitled to make this choice.
use the constant yield method. • Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,
Effect on basis. You increase the basis of Choosing to include accrued discount and• Held primarily for sale to customers in theyour bonds by the amount of market discount other interest in current income. If you ac-ordinary course of your trade or business,you include in your income. quire short-term discount obligations that are not
• Held by a bank, regulated investment subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-
Partial principal payments. If you receive a come of the accrued discount or other interest,company, or common trust fund,
partial payment of principal on a market discount you can choose to have those rules apply. This• Held by certain pass-through entities, choice applies to all short-term obligations youbond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,
acquire during the year and in all later years.• Identified as part of a hedging transaction,and you did not choose to include the discount in
You cannot change this choice without the con-orincome currently, you must treat the payment as
sent of the IRS.ordinary interest income up to the amount of the • A stripped bond or stripped coupon held The procedures to use in making this choicebond's accrued market discount. Reduce the by the person who stripped the bond or are the same as those described for choosing toamount of accrued market discount reportable coupon (or by any other person whose include acquisition discount instead of OID onas interest at disposition by that amount. basis in the obligation is determined by nongovernment obligations in current income.There are three methods you can use to reference to the basis in the hands of the However, you should indicate that you are mak-figure accrued market discount for this purpose. person who stripped the bond or coupon). ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of theYou can choose to figure accrued market dis-
Internal Revenue Code.count:
Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your Also see the following discussion. If you
1. On the basis of the constant yield method, obligation by the amount of discount you include make the election to report all interest currently
described earlier, in income currently. as OID, you must use the constant yield method.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
withdrawal or redemption is substantially the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-Election To Report
less than the interest payable at maturity. mium (discussed in chapter 3 under BondAll Interest as OID Premium Amortization).
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a Accrual method. If you use an accrual List each payer's name and the amount of inter-
debt instrument acquired during the tax year as method, you report your interest income when est income received from each payer on line 1. If
OID and include it in income currently. For pur- you earn it, whether or not you have received it. you received a Form 1099-INT or Form
poses of this election, interest includes stated Interest is earned over the term of the debt 1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-
interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis instrument. age firm as the payer.
OID, market discount, de minimis  market dis- You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use
Example. If, in the previous example, youcount, and unstated interest as adjusted by any Form 1040, as described next.
use an accrual method, you must include theamortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 insteadinterest in your income as you earn it. You wouldmium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3.
of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:report the interest as follows: 2007, $80; 2008,
$249.60; and 2009, $179.20. 1. You forfeited interest income because of
the early withdrawal of a time deposit,Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds isWhen To Report taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and 2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987,
payable. It does not matter when you mail the you choose to reduce interest income fromInterest Income coupon for payment. the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
mium, and you are deducting the excess ofTerms you may need to know bond premium amortization for the accrual(see Glossary): period over the qualified stated interest for
How To Report the period (discussed in chapter 3 underAccrual method
Bond Premium Amortization), orCash method Interest Income 3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-
vate activity bonds issued after August 7,Terms you may need to know
When to report your interest income depends on 1986.(see Glossary):
whether you use the cash method or an accrual
method to report income. Nominee Schedule B. You must complete Schedule
B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file FormOriginal issue discount (OID) 1040 and any of the following apply.Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
the cash method. If you use this method, you 1. Your taxable interest income is more thangenerally report your interest income in the year Generally, you report all of your taxable interest $1,500.in which you actually or constructively receive it. income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line
However, there are special rules for reporting 2. You are claiming the interest exclusion8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
the discount on certain debt instruments. See under the Education Savings Bond Pro-You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest
U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In- gram (discussed earlier).income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must
struments, earlier. use Form 1040A or Form 1040. 3. You received interest from aIn addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if seller-financed mortgage, and the buyerExample. On September 1, 2007, you you must use Form 1040, as described later, or used the property as a home.loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com- if any of the statements listed under Schedule B,
pounded annually. You are not in the business 4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.later, are true.
of lending money. The note stated that principal savings bond interest that includes
and interest would be due on August 31, 2009. amounts you reported before 2009.Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule B
In 2009, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi- (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Form 5. You received, as a nominee, interest thatpal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash 1040A and any of the following are true. actually belongs to someone else.method, you must include in income on your
1. Your taxable interest income is more than2009 return the $508.80 interest you received in 6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
$1,500.that year. on frozen deposits.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusionConstructive receipt. You constructively 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-receive income when it is credited to your ac- on a bond that you bought between inter-
gram (discussed earlier).count or made available to you. You do not need est payment dates.
to have physical possession of it. For example, 3. You received interest from a 8. You are reporting OID in an amount lessyou are considered to receive interest, divi- seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer than the amount shown on Formdends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- used the property as a home. 1099-OID.count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 9. Statement (2) in the preceding list is true.financial institution, or interest on life insurance
savings bond interest that includespolicy dividends left to accumulate, when they On Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and theamounts you reported before 2009.are credited to your account and subject to your amount received from each. If you received awithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet 5. You received, as a nominee, interest that Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-entered in your passbook. actually belongs to someone else. kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
You constructively receive income on the 6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestdeposit or account even if you must: Reporting tax-exempt interest. Total youron frozen deposits. tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued• Make withdrawals in multiples of even 7. You are reporting OID in an amount less OID on certain state and municipal bonds) andamounts, than the amount shown on Form exempt-interest dividends from a mutual fund as
• Give a notice to withdraw before making 1099-OID. shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. Add this
the withdrawal, amount to any other tax-exempt interest you8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest received. Report the total on line 8b of Form• Withdraw all or part of the account to with- on a bond that you bought between inter- 1040A or Form 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ,draw the earnings, or est payment dates. enter ªTEIº and the amount in the space to the
• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless 9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 left of line 2. Do not add tax-exempt interest in
the interest you are to receive on an early and choose to reduce interest income from the total on Form 1040EZ, line 2.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Interest on U.S. Savings Bonds and Treas. obligations3
$
Federal income tax withheld Investment expenses54
$$
Foreign tax paid6
$
Specified private activity
bond interest
9Tax-exempt interest8
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7
$
Early withdrawal penalty2
$
Interest income1
$ 2009
Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subject If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form 2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings
to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251, 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be Bond Interest Previously Reportedº and
Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al- able to take a credit for the amount shown in box enter amounts previously reported or inter-
ready included in the amount in box 8. Do not 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this est accrued before you received the bond.
add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from, amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotalthe amount in box 8. taxes.º To take the credit, you may have to file and enter the result on line 2.Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-Do not report interest from an individ- mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditual retirement arrangement (IRA) as Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-for Individuals.tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
! ings bonds for you when you were a child. TheForm 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis- bonds were issued in your name, and the inter-counted obligation for the part of the year youForm 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income, est on the bonds was reported each year as itowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID.except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and accrued. (See Choice to report interest eachInclude this amount in your total taxable interestTreasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable In March 2009, you redeemed one of the1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,interest income you received. You must report bonds Ð a $1,000 series EE bond. The bondearlier.all of your taxable interest income even if you do was originally issued in March 1990. When youYou must report all taxable OID even if younot receive a Form 1099-INT. Contact your fi- redeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 fordo not receive a Form 1099-OID.nancial institution if you do not receive a Form it.Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable1099-INT by February 15. The Form 1099-INT you received shows in-interest on the obligation other than OID. AddIf you forfeited interest income because of terest income of $841.20. However, since thethis amount to the OID shown in box 1 andthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- interest on your savings bonds was reportedinclude the result in your total taxable income.ductible amount will be shown on Form yearly, you need only include the $26.00 interestIf you forfeited interest or principal on the1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with- that accrued from January 2009 to March 2009.obligation because of an early withdrawal, thedrawal of savings, later.
You received no other taxable interest fordeductible amount will be shown in box 3. SeeBox 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount
2009. You file Form 1040A.Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.of interest income you received from U.S. sav-
Box 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
amount if you were subject to backup withhold- line 1, enter your interest income as shown onTreasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3
ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form Form 1099-INT Ð $841.20. (If you had otherto any other taxable interest income you re-
1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 38; or on taxable interest income, you would enter it nextceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was
Form 1040, line 61. and then enter a subtotal, as described earlier,previously included in your interest income. If
Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment before going to the next step.) Several linespart of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-
expenses you may be able to deduct as an above line 2, enter ªU.S. Savings Bond Interestously included in your interest income, see U.S.
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- Previously Reportedº and enter $815.20savings bond interest previously reported, later.
ment expenses. ($841.20 − $26.00). Subtract $815.20 fromIf you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought
$841.20 and enter $26.00 on line 2. Enterafter 1989 and you paid qualified educational U.S. savings bond interest previously re- $26.00 on Schedule B, line 4, and on Formexpenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu- ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for 1040A, line 8a.cation Savings Bond Program, later. U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show
Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form interest you do not have to report. See Form Example 2. Your uncle died and left you a1099-INT will contain an amount if you were 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  under $1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondsubject to backup withholding. Report the U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. when it reaches maturity.amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,
Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, line 61. Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500line 1, report all the interest shown on your Form
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment of the amount you receive upon redemption is1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
expenses you may be able to deduct as an interest income. Your uncle's executor included
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal in your uncle's final return $200 of the interest
ment expenses. of all interest listed on line 1. that had accrued at the time of your uncle's
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
death. You have to include only $300 in your Below this subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings Bond enter ªAccrued Interestº and the amount of ac-
income. Interest Previously Reportedº and enter the crued interest that you paid to the seller. That
amount figured on the worksheet below. amount is taxable to the seller, not you. SubtractThe bank where you redeem the bond gives
that amount from the interest income subtotal.you a Form 1099-INT showing interest income
Enter the result on line 2 and also on Form 1040,of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT A. Enter the amount of cash received line 8a.showing taxable interest income of $300 from upon redemption of the bond .. . $121.48 For more information, see Bonds Sold Be-your savings account. B. Enter the value of the bond at the
tween Interest Dates, earlier.You file Form 1040 and you complete time of distribution by the plan .. . 112.24
C. Subtract the amount on line B fromSchedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the Nominee distributions. If you received athe amount on line A. This is the$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your Form 1099-INT that includes an amount youamount of interest accrued on theForms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put received as a nominee for the real owner, reportbond since it was distributed bya subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter the full amount shown as interest on the Formthe plan ................. . $9.24ªU.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re- 1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule B (FormD. Enter the amount of interest shownportedº and enter the $200 interest included in 1040A or 1040). Then, below a subtotal of allon your Form 1099-INT ...... . $71.48your uncle's final return. Subtract the $200 from interest income listed, enter ªNominee Distribu-E. Subtract the amount on line C fromthe subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You then tionº and the amount that actually belongs tothe amount on line D. This is thecomplete the rest of the form. someone else. Subtract that amount from theamount you include in ªU.S.
interest income subtotal. Enter the result on lineWorksheet for savings bonds distributed Savings Bond Interest Previously
2 and also on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040.Reportedº ............... . $62.24from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. If
you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable File Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If youSubtract $62.24 from the subtotal and enter thedistribution from a retirement or profit-sharing received interest as a nominee in 2009, youresult on Schedule B, line 2. You then completeplan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds , must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest withthe rest of the form.earlier), your interest income does not include the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with athe interest accrued before the distribution and Interest excluded under the Education Sav- Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal oftaxed as a distribution from the plan. ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-
your interest exclusion when you redeem quali- nue Service Center by March 1, 2010 (March 31,Use the worksheet below to figure the fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- 2010, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).amount you subtract from the interest cational expenses during the same year. Give the actual owner of the interest Copy B ofshown on Form 1099-INT.
 For more information on the exclusion and the Form 1099-INT by February 1, 2010. On
qualified higher educational expenses, see the Form 1099-INT, you should be listed as the
earlier discussion under Education SavingsA. Enter the amount of cash received ªPayer.º Prepare one Form 1099-INT for each
Bond Program.upon redemption of the bond ... . other owner and show that person as the ªRecip-
You must show your total interest from quali- ient.º However, you do not have to file Form
fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2009B. Enter the value of the bond at the 1099-INT to show payments for your spouse.
on Form 8815, line 6, and on Schedule B (Formtime of distribution by the plan ... . For more information about the reporting re-
1040A or 1040). After completing Form 8815, quirements and the penalties for failure to file (orC. Subtract the amount on line B from enter the result from line 14 (Form 8815) on furnish) certain information returns, see thethe amount on line A. This is the Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 3. General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,amount of interest accrued on the 5498, and W2-G.Interest on seller-financed mortgage. If anbond since it was distributed by the Similar rules apply to OID reported to you asplan .................... . individual buys his or her home from you in a a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file asale that you finance, you must report the Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show theD. Enter the amount of interest shown buyer's name, address, and social security num- proper distributions of the OID.on your Form 1099-INT ....... . ber on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1.
If you do not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty. Example. You and your sister have a jointE. Subtract the amount on line C from The buyer may have to pay a $50 penalty if he or savings account that paid $1,500 interest forthe amount on line D. This is the she does not give you this information. 2009. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds inamount you include in ªU.S. Savings You must also give your name, address, and this account, and you and she have agreed toBond Interest Previously Reportedº social security number (or employer identifica- share the yearly interest income in proportion totion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you mayYour employer should tell you the value of the amount that each of you has invested. Be-have to pay a $50 penalty.each bond on the date it was distributed. cause your social security number was given to
the bank, you received a Form 1099-INT forFrozen deposits. Even if you receive a FormExample. You received a distribution of se- 2009 that includes the interest income earned1099-INT for interest on deposits that you couldries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2006 belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, ornot withdraw at the end of 2009, you must ex-from your company's profit-sharing plan. 30% of the total interest of $1,500.clude these amounts from your gross income.In March 2009, you redeemed a $100 series You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT(See Interest income on frozen deposits  underEE bond that was part of the distribution you by February 1, 2010, showing $450 of interestInterest Income , earlier.) Do not include thisreceived in 2006. You received $121.48 for the income that she earned for 2009. You must alsoincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040. Inbond the company bought in May 1992. The send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT,Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, in-value of the bond at the time of distribution in along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenueclude the full amount of interest shown on your2006 was $112.24. (This is the amount you Service Center by March 1, 2010 (March 31,Form 1099-INT on line 1. Several lines aboveincluded on your 2006 return.) The bank gave 2010, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).line 2, put a subtotal of all interest income. Belowyou a Form 1099-INT that shows $71.48 interest Show your own name, address, and social se-this subtotal, enter ªFrozen Depositsº and show(the total interest from the date the bond was curity number as that of the ªPayerº on the Formthe amount of interest that you are excluding.purchased to the date of redemption). Since a 1099-INT. Show your sister's name, address,Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enterpart of the interest was included in your income and social security number in the blocks pro-the result on line 2.in 2006, you need to include in your 2009 in- vided for identification of the ªRecipient.º
come only the interest that accrued after the Accrued interest on bonds. If you received a When you prepare your own federal income
bond was distributed to you. Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest tax return, report the total amount of interest
On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1, paid on a bond you bought between interest income, $1,500, on Schedule B (Form 1040A or
include all the interest shown on your Form payment dates, include the full amount shown 1040), Part I, line 1, and identify the name of the
1099-INT as well as any other taxable interest as interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B bank that paid this interest. Show the amount
income you received. Several lines above line 2, (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, belonging to your sister, $450, as a subtraction
put a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. below a subtotal of all interest income listed, from a subtotal of all interest on Schedule B and
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
identify this subtraction as a ªNominee Distribu- you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu- • The dividends are not of the type listed
tion.º (Your sister will report the $450 of interest later under Dividends that are not qualifiedtions received on your behalf.
income on her own tax return, if she has to file a dividends.If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includes
return, and identify you as the payer of that amounts belonging to another person, see Nom- • You meet the holding period (discussedamount.) inees under How To Report Dividend Income , next).later, for more information.
Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. If
you are reporting OID in an amount less than the Holding period. You must have held the stockForm 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-
amount shown on Form 1099-OID or other writ- for more than 60 days during the 121-day periodments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest
ten statement (such as for a REMIC regular that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.that are received by a broker on your behalf
interest), include the full amount of OID shown The ex-dividend date is the first date followingmust be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,
on your Form 1099-OID or other statement on the declaration of a dividend on which the buyerMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. of a stock is not entitled to receive the nextSee also Reporting Substitute Payments under
Show the OID you do not have to report below a dividend payment. When counting the numberShort Sales in chapter 4.
subtotal of the interest and OID listed. Identify of days you held the stock, include the day you
the amount as ªOID Adjustmentº and subtract it disposed of the stock, but not the day you ac-Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If
from the subtotal. quired it. See the examples, later.you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
amount (or other incorrect information), you Exception for preferred stock. In the casePenalty on early withdrawal of savings. If should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The of preferred stock, you must have held the stockyou withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor- more than 90 days during the 181-day periodor other deferred interest account before matur- rected.º that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend dateity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form if the dividends are due to periods totaling more1099-INT or similar statement given to you by Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are duethe financial institution will show the total exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-amount of interest in box 1 and will show the dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the ing period in the preceding paragraph applies.penalty separately in box 2. You must include in owner of record (usually the payee shown on the
income all the interest shown in box 1. You can dividend check) must include the dividend in Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares ofdeduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De- income. XYZ Corp. common stock on July 9, 2009. XYZduct the entire penalty even if it is more than Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents peryour interest income. Dividends received in January. If a mutual share. The ex-dividend date was July 17, 2009.fund (or other regulated investment company) or Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsreal estate investment trust (REIT) declares a $500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxdividend (including any exempt-interest divi- 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold thedend or capital gain distribution) in October,Dividends and 5,000 shares on August 12, 2009. You held yourNovember, or December payable to sharehold- shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of theOther Corporate ers of record on a date in one of those months 121-day period (from July 10, 2009, throughbut actually pays the dividend during January of August 12, 2009). The 121-day period began onDistributions the next calendar year, you are considered to May 18, 2009 (60 days before the ex-dividendhave received the dividend on December 31. date), and ended on September 15, 2009. YouDividends are distributions of money, stock, or You report the dividend in the year it was de- have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-other property paid to you by a corporation. You clared. cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61also may receive dividends through a partner- days.ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that is Ordinary Dividendstaxed as a corporation. However, some Example 2. Assume the same facts as inamounts you receive that are called dividends Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- Example 1 except that you bought the stock onare actually interest income. (See Dividends that mon type of distribution from a corporation. They July 16, 2009 (the day before the ex-dividendare actually interest  under Taxable Interest Ð are paid out of the earnings and profits of a date), and you sold the stock on September 17,General, earlier.) corporation and are ordinary income to you. This 2009. You held the stock for 63 days (from JulyThe most common kinds of distributions are: means they are not capital gains. You can as- 17, 2009, through September 17, 2009). The
sume that any dividend you receive on common $500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of• Ordinary dividends,
or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends• Capital gain distributions, and the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- because you held the stock for 61 days of the
nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the 121-day period (from July 17, 2009, through• Nondividend distributions.
Form 1099-DIV you receive. September 15, 2009).Most distributions are paid in cash (check).
However, distributions can consist of more Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofstock, stock rights, other property, or services. Qualified Dividends ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 9,
2009. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofForm 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show that are subject to the same 0% or 15% maxi- July 17, 2009. The ABC Mutual Fund advisesyou the distributions you received from them mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. you that the portion of the dividend eligible to beduring the year. Keep this form with your rec- They should be shown in box 1b of the Form treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents perords. You do not have to attach it to your tax 1099-DIV you receive. share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutualreturn. Qualified dividends are subject to the 15% Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply isDividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV. and qualified dividends of $200. However, you
25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldEven if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you sold the 10,000 shares on August 12, 2009. You
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends aremust still report all of your taxable dividend in- have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual
subject to the 0% rate.come. For example, you may receive distributive Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund
To qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate,shares of dividends from partnerships or S cor- stock for less than 61 days.
all of the following requirements must be met.porations. These dividends are reported to you Holding period reduced where risk of losson Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 • The dividends must have been paid by a is diminished. When determining whether(Form 1120S). U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- you met the minimum holding period discussed
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-Nominees. If someone receives distribu- earlier, you cannot count any day during which
tions as a nominee for you, that person will give tion later.) you meet any of the following conditions.
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You had an option to sell, were under a (through an agent) more shares of stock in theTable 1-3. Income Tax Treaties
contractual obligation to sell, or had made corporation instead of receiving the dividends in
Income tax treaties that the United States(and not closed) a short sale of substan- cash. If you are a member of this type of plan
has with the following countries satisfytially identical stock or securities. and you use your dividends to buy more stock at
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign a price equal to its fair market value, you still2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to corporation. must report the dividends as income.buy substantially identical stock or securi-
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-Australia Indonesia Romaniaties.
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceAustria Ireland Russian3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding less than its fair market value, you must reportBangladesh Israel Federationone or more other positions in substantially as dividend income the fair market value of theBarbados Italy Slovaksimilar or related property. additional stock on the dividend payment date.Belgium Jamaica Republic
You also must report as dividend income anyFor information about how to apply condition Canada Japan Slovenia
service charge subtracted from your cash divi-(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5. China Kazakhstan South Africa
dends before the dividends are used to buy theCyprus Korea SpainQualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor- additional stock. But you may be able to deductCzech Latvia Sri Lankaporation is a qualified foreign corporation if it the service charge. See Expenses of ProducingRepublic Lithuania Swedenmeets any of the following conditions. Income in chapter 3.Denmark Luxembourg Switzerland
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S. Egypt Mexico Thailand
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at apossession. Estonia Morocco Trinidad and
price less than fair market value. If you chooseFinland Netherlands Tobago2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits to do this, you must report as dividend incomeFrance New Zealand Tunisiaof a comprehensive income tax treaty with the difference between the cash you invest andGermany Norway Turkeythe United States that the Treasury De- the fair market value of the stock you buy. WhenGreece Pakistan Ukrainepartment determines is satisfactory for this figuring this amount, use the fair market value ofHungary Philippines Unitedpurpose and that includes an exchange of the stock on the dividend payment date.Iceland Poland Kingdominformation program. For a list of those
India Portugal Venezuelatreaties, see Table 1-3.
Money Market Funds3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)
  above, but the stock for which the dividend Report amounts you receive from money marketis paid is readily tradable on an estab- Dividends that are not qualified dividends. funds as dividend income. Money market fundslished securities market in the United The following dividends are not qualified divi- are a type of mutual fund and should not beStates. See Readily tradable stock, later. dends. They are not qualified dividends even if confused with bank money market accounts that
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV. pay interest.Exception. A corporation is not a qualified
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in- • Capital gain distributions.
Capital Gain Distributionsvestment company during its tax year in which • Dividends paid on deposits with mutualthe dividends are paid or during its previous tax savings banks, cooperative banks, credit Capital gain distributions (also called capitalyear. unions, U.S. building and loan associa- gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC). tions, U.S. savings and loan associations, your account by mutual funds (or other regu-
Dividends paid out of a CFC's earnings and federal savings and loan associations, and lated investment companies) and real estate
profits that were not previously taxed are quali- similar financial institutions. (Report these investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in
fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualified amounts as interest income.) box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from
foreign corporation and the other requirements the mutual fund or REIT.• Dividends from a corporation that is ain this discussion are met. Certain dividends Report capital gain distributions as long-termtax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas- capital gains, regardless of how long you ownederative during the corporation's tax year insive foreign investment company but for section your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. Seewhich the dividends were paid or during1297(d) of the Internal Revenue Code may be Capital gain distributions under How To Reportthe corporation's previous tax year.treated as qualified dividends. For more infor- Dividend Income, later in this chapter.mation, see Notice 2004-70, which can be found • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-
at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-44_IRB/ar09.html. ployer securities which are held on the Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
date of record by an employee stock own- and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITsReadily tradable stock. Any stock (such as ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax oncommon, ordinary, or preferred stock), or an corporation. them. You must treat your share of these gainsAmerican depositary receipt in respect of that
as distributions, even though you did not actu-stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if • Dividends on any share of stock to the
ally receive them. However, they are not in-it is listed on one of the following securities extent that you are obligated (whether
cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they aremarkets: the New York Stock Exchange, the under a short sale or otherwise) to make
reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex- related payments for positions in substan-
holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capitalchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin- tially similar or related property.
Gains.nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, or you know or have reason to know that the of the undistributed capital gains is:the Pacific Exchange, Inc. payments are not qualified dividends.
• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box
• Gain from qualified small business stock1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent
(section 1202 gain, box 1c), oryou know or have reason to know the pay-
ments are not qualified dividends. • Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).
For information about these terms, see Capital
Dividends Used To Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Buy More Stock
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of
The corporation in which you own stock may Form 2439) as long-term capital gains on
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan Schedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f).
lets you choose to use your dividends to buy Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- basis of your stock. After the basis of your stock If you receive taxable stock dividends or
tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured stock rights, include their fair market value at thehas been reduced to zero, you must report the
section 1250 gain. For any gain on qualified time of the distribution in your income.liquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whether
small business stock, follow the reporting in- you report the gain as a long-term or short-term
structions under Section 1202 Exclusion  in capital gain depends on how long you have held Constructive distributions. You must treatchapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 4 of the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4. certain transactions that increase your propor-the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule tionate interest in the earnings and profits orStock acquired at different times. If youD instructions. assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-acquired stock in the same corporation in moreThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual tions of stock or stock rights. These constructivethan one transaction, you own more than onefund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. distributions are taxable if they have the sameblock of stock in the corporation. If you receiveYou take credit for this tax by including it on result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),distributions from the corporation in completeForm 1040, line 70, and checking box a on that or (5) of the above discussion.liquidation, you must divide the distributionline. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, This treatment applies to a change in youramong the blocks of stock you own in the follow-and keep Copy C for your records. stock's conversion ratio or redemption price, aing proportion: the number of shares in that
difference between your stock's redemptionBasis adjustment. Increase your basis in block over the total number of shares you own.
price and issue price, a redemption that is notyour mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by Divide distributions in partial liquidation among
treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, andthe difference between the gain you report and that part of the stock that is redeemed in the
any other transaction having a similar effect onthe credit you claim for the tax paid. partial liquidation. After the basis of a block of
your interest in the corporation.stock is reduced to zero, you must report the
part of any later distribution for that block as aNondividend Distributions Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.
capital gain. If you hold preferred stock having a redemption
A nondividend distribution is a distribution that is price higher than its issue price, the differenceDistributions less than basis. If the totalnot paid out of the earnings and profits of a (the redemption premium) generally is taxableliquidating distributions you receive are lesscorporation. You should receive a Form as a constructive distribution of additional stockthan the basis of your stock, you may have a1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora- on the preferred stock.capital loss. You can report a capital loss onlytion showing you the nondividend distribution. For stock issued before October 10, 1990,after you have received the final distribution inOn Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution you include the redemption premium in yourliquidation that results in the redemption or can-will be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such income ratably over the period during which thecellation of the stock. Whether you report thea statement, you report the distribution as an stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedloss as a long-term or short-term capital lossordinary dividend. after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-depends on how long you held the stock. See tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-Holding Period in chapter 4. crual over the period during which the stockBasis adjustment. A nondividend distribution
cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issuereduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed Distributions of Stock discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.
and Stock Rights sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.This nontaxable portion is also called a return of
The redemption premium is not a construc-capital; it is a return of your investment in the Distributions by a corporation of its own stock tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, instock of the company. If you buy stock in a are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock the following situations.corporation in different lots at different times, rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri-and you cannot definitely identify the shares 1. The stock was issued before October 10,butions by a corporation of rights to acquire thesubject to the nondividend distribution, reduce 1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividendsthe basis of your earliest purchases first. deemable solely at the option of the is-and stock rights are not taxable to you, and youWhen the basis of your stock has been re- suer), and the redemption premium isdo not report them on your return.duced to zero, report any additional nondividend ªreasonable.º (For stock issued before Oc-distribution that you receive as a capital gain. tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.Whether you report it as a long-term or demption premium that is not ªreasonableºDistributions of stock dividends and stock rightsshort-term capital gain depends on how long is a constructive distribution.) The redemp-are taxable to you if any of the following apply.you have held the stock. See Holding Period in tion premium is reasonable if it is not morechapter 4. 1. You or any other shareholder has the than 10% of the issue price on stock not
choice to receive cash or other property redeemable for 5 years from the issue dateExample. You bought stock in 1996 for instead of stock or stock rights. or is in the nature of a penalty for making a$100. In 1999, you received a nondividend dis- premature redemption.tribution of $80. You did not include this amount 2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
in your income, but you reduced the basis of erty to some shareholders and an increase 2. The stock was issued after October 9,
your stock to $20. You received a nondividend in the percentage interest in the corpora- 1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-
distribution of $30 in 2009. The first $20 of this tion's assets or earnings and profits to able solely at the option of the issuer), and
amount reduced your basis to zero. You report other shareholders. the redemption premium is ªde minimis.º
the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for The redemption premium is de minimis if it3. The distribution is in convertible preferred2009. You must report as a long-term capital is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of thestock and has the same result as in (2).gain any nondividend distribution you receive on redemption price multiplied by the number
this stock in later years. 4. The distribution gives preferred stock to of full years from the date of issue to the
some common stock shareholders and date redeemable.
common stock to other common stockLiquidating Distributions 3. The stock was issued after October 9,shareholders. 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui- 5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The fied time or is redeemable at your option,dating dividends, are distributions you receive distribution, however, is not taxable if it is but the redemption is unlikely because it isduring a partial or complete liquidation of a cor- an increase in the conversion ratio of con- subject to a contingency outside your con-poration. These distributions are, at least in part, vertible preferred stock made solely to take trol (not including the possibility of default,one form of a return of capital. They may be paid into account a stock dividend, stock split, insolvency, etc.).in one or more installments. You will receive or similar event that would otherwise resultForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showing 4. The stock was issued after December 19,in reducing the conversion right.)you the amount of the liquidating distribution in 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-
The term ªstockº includes rights to acquirebox 8 or 9. tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-
stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes aAny liquidating distribution you receive is not mium is in the nature of a penalty for
holder of rights or convertible securities.taxable to you until you have recovered the premature redemption or redemption is not
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more likely than not to occur. The redemp- receive it. If you choose to have the corporation must reduce the basis (cost) of the items
tion will be treated under a ªsafe harborº as sell the certificate for you and give you the pro- bought. If the dividend is more than the
not more likely than not to occur if all of the ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-
following are true. tween the proceeds and the part of your basis in port the excess as income.
the corporation's stock that is allocated to the
a. You and the issuer are not related These rules are the same whether the cooper-certificate.
under the rules discussed in chapter 4 ative paying the dividend is a taxable orHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate
under Losses on Sales or Trades of tax-exempt cooperative.that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
Property, substituting ª20%º for ª50%.º of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notceive it. You must include its fair market value inb. There are no plans, arrangements, or report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-income on the date you receive it.agreements that effectively require or port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Formare intended to compel the issuer to 1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3. redeem the stock. Other Distributions
c. The redemption would not reduce the You may receive any of the following distribu-stock's yield. tions during the year.
How To ReportExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re- dividends you receive from a mutual fund or Dividend Incomeceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market other regulated investment company are not in-
value when distributed. If you receive stock or cluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest Terms you may need to knowstock rights that are not taxable to you, see dividends should be shown in box 8 of Form (see Glossary):Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment 1099-INT.
Property in chapter 4 for information on how to NomineeInformation reporting requirement. Al-figure their basis. though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- Restricted stock
able, you must show them on your tax return ifFractional shares. You may not own enough
you have to file a return. This is an informationstock in a corporation to receive a full share of Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orreporting requirement and does not change thestock if the corporation declares a stock divi- Form 1040A to report your dividend income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.dend. However, with the approval of the share- Report the total of your ordinary dividends onSee Reporting tax-exempt interest  under Howholders, the corporation may set up a plan in line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ReportTo Report Interest Income, earlier.which fractional shares are not issued, but in- qualified dividends on line 9b.stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- If you receive capital gain distributions, youto the shareholders. Any cash you receive for empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- may be able to use Form 1040A or you mayfractional shares under such a plan is treated as vate activity bonds may be subject to the have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-an amount realized on the sale of the fractional alternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-shares. You must determine your gain or loss dividends subject to the alternative minimum tax butions required to be reported as capital gains,and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- should be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT. you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Formule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the See Form 6251 and its instructions for more 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.difference between the cash you receive and the information.
basis of the fractional shares sold. Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichDividends on insurance policies. Insurance
you received $10 or more in dividends and otherpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and usesExample. You own one share of common distributions, you should receive a Formto pay your premiums are not taxable. However,stock that you bought on January 3, 2000, for 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Formyou must report as taxable interest income the$100. The corporation declared a common stock 1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxableinterest that is paid or credited on dividends leftdividend of 5% on June 30, 2009. The fair mar- dividend income.with the insurance company.ket value of the stock at the time the stock
 If dividends on an insurance contract (other See Form 1099-DIV for more information ondividend was declared was $200. You were paid
than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- how to report dividend income.$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under
uted to you, they are a partial return of thea plan described in the above paragraph. You Form 1040A or Form 1040. You must fill inpremiums you paid. Do not include them in yourfigure your gain or loss as follows: Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II, andgross income until they are more than the total of
attach it to your Form 1040A or 1040, if:all net premiums you paid for the contract. (ForFair market value of old stock ... . $200.00
information on the treatment of a distributionFair market value of stock dividend • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-(cash received) ............. . + 10.00 box 1a) are more than $1,500, orbution Before Annuity Starting Date From aFair market value of old stock and
• You received, as a nominee, dividendsstock dividend .............. . $210.00 Nonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi-
that actually belong to someone else.Basis (cost) of old stock odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and
after the stock dividend Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu- If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,(($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ........ . $95.24 tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.Basis (cost) of stock dividend 21.
(($10 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ......... . + 4.76 List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachDividends on veterans' insurance. Divi-Total .................... . $100.00 payer's name and the amount of ordinary divi-dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- dends you received. If your securities are heldCash received .............. .  $10.00 cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on by a brokerage firm (in ªstreet nameº), list theBasis (cost) of stock dividend .... . − 4.76 dividends left with the Department of Veterans name of the brokerage firm that is shown onAffairs is not taxable. Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock isGain  $5.24
held by a nominee who is the owner of record,Patronage dividends. Generally, patronageBecause you had held the share of stock for and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsdividends you receive in money from a coopera-more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend on the stock, show the name of the nominee andtive organization are included in your income.was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is the dividends you received or for which you wereDo not include in your income patronagea long-term capital gain. credited.dividends you receive on:
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedScrip dividends. A corporation that de- • Property bought for your personal use, or on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as aclares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip
nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter thiscertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. • Capital assets or depreciable property
total on Form 1040, line 9a.The certificate is generally nontaxable when you bought for use in your business. But you
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nondividend distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2009
Dividends received on restricted stock. Re- on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A is If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
stricted stock is stock that you get from your ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-different from the amount shown on your Form
employer for services you perform and that is dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in theW-2.
nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-Independent contractor. If you receivedof forfeiture. You do not have to include the ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-restricted stock for services as an independentvalue of the stock in your income when you tions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedcontractor, the rules in the previous discussionreceive it. However, if you get dividends on re- dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youstricted stock, you must include them in your Investment interest deducted. If you claimreceive on the stock as income fromincome as wages, not dividends. See Restricted a deduction for investment interest, you mayself-employment.Property in Publication 525 for information on have to reduce the amount of your qualifiedrestricted stock dividends. dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% taxQualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Your employer should include these divi- rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofdends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If dends you choose to include in investment in-Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in boxyou also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi- come when figuring the limit on your investment1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add thedends, list them on Schedule B (Form 1040A or interest deduction. This is done on the Qualifiedamount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the1040), line 5, with the other dividends you re- Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet oramount in box 1a. Do not include any of theceived. Enter a subtotal of all your dividend the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-following on line 9b.income several lines above line 6. Below the mation about the limit on investment interest,
subtotal, enter ªDividends on restricted stock see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.• Qualified dividends you received as a
reported as wages on Form 1040 (or Form nominee. See Nominees, later.
1040A), line 7,º and enter the amount of the Capital gain distributions. How to report• Dividends on stock for which you did notdividends included in your wages on line 7 of capital gain distributions depends on whether
meet the holding period. See Holding pe-Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Subtract this amount you have any other capital gains or losses. If you
riod, earlier under Qualified Dividends.from the subtotal and enter the result on line 6. do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2a
of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040),• Dividends on any share of stock to theElection. You can choose to include the Part II, line 13. If you do not have any otherextent that you are obligated (whethervalue of restricted stock in gross income as pay capital gains or losses, you may be able tounder a short sale or otherwise) to makefor services. If you make this choice, report the report your capital gain distributions directly onrelated payments for positions in substan-dividends on the stock like any other dividends. Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. Intially similar or related property.List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule B, along either case, see Reporting Capital Gains andwith your other dividends (if the amount of ordi- • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if Losses in chapter 4 for more information.nary dividends received from all sources is more you know or have reason to know that the The mutual fund (or other regulated invest-than $1,500). If you receive both a Form payments are not qualified dividends. ment company) or real estate investment trust1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing these divi- (REIT) making the distribution should tell you• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxdends, do not include the dividends in your how much of it is:1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentwages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form
you know or have reason to know the pay-1040A. Attach a statement to your Form 1040 or • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),
ments are not qualified dividends.Form 1040A explaining why the amount shown or
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Section 1202 gain (box 2c). Stripped preferred stock defined. Stripped treated as a partnership with the residual inter-
est holders treated as the partners. The regularpreferred stock is any stock that meets both ofFor information about these terms, see Capital interests are treated as debt instruments.the following tests.Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. REMIC income or loss is not income or loss
1. There has been a separation in ownershipEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section from a passive activity.
between the stock and any dividend on the1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- For more information about the qualificationsstock that has not become payable.tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and
section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-2. The stock:small business stock (section 1202 gain), follow tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve-
the reporting instructions under Section 1202 a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, nue Code, and the regulations under those
Exclusion in chapter 4. sections.b. Does not participate in corporate growth
to any significant extent, andNondividend distributions. Report nondivi-
dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) c. Has a fixed redemption price. Regular Interest
only after your basis in the stock has been re-
duced to zero. After the basis of your stock has A REMIC can have several classes (also known
been reduced to zero, you must show this as ªtranchesº) of regular interests. A regularTreatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre-amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you held interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D, ceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-clude certain amounts in your gross incomePart II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than lar amount).while you hold the stock. These amounts are1 year. Enter ªNondividend Distribution Exceed- A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtordinary income. They are equal to the amountsing Basisº in column (a) of Schedule D and the instrument for income tax purposes. Accord-you would have included in gross income if thename of the company. Report your gain in col- ingly, the OID, market discount, and incomestock were a bond that:umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu- reporting rules that apply to bonds and other
tion that is more than your basis in the stock. debt instruments as described earlier in this1. Was issued on the purchase date of the
publication under Discount on Debt Instrumentsstock, andNominees. If you received ordinary dividends apply, with certain modifications discussed be-2. Has OID equal to:as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your low.
name but actually belong to someone else), Generally, you report your income from aa. The redemption price for the stock, mi-include them on line 5 of Schedule B (Form regular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For morenus1040A or 1040). Several lines above line 6, put a information on how to report interest and OID,subtotal of all dividend income listed on line 5. b. The price at which you bought the see How To Report Interest Income, earlier.Below this subtotal, enter ªNominee Distribu- stock.
tionº and show the amount received as a nomi- Holders must use accrual method. Holders
nee. Subtract the total of your nominee Report these amounts as other income on of regular interests must use an accrual method
distributions from the subtotal. Enter the result Form 1040, line 21. For information about OID, of accounting to report OID and interest income.
on line 6. see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. Because income under an accrual method is not
determined by the receipt of cash, you may haveThis treatment also applies to you if youFile Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you
to include OID or interest income in your taxablereceived dividends as a nominee in 2009, you acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by
income even if you have not received any cashmust file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividends gift) that your basis in the stock is determined by
payments.with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with a using a buyer's basis.
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of
Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- Treatment of person stripping stock. If you receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Formnue Service Center by March 1, 2010 (March 31, strip the rights to one or more dividends from 1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receive2010, if you file form 1099-DIV electronically). stripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- a written statement by March 15, 2010 (if youGive the actual owner of the dividends Copy B of ing purchased the stock. You are treated as are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesthe Form 1099-DIV by February 1, 2010. On making the purchase on the date you disposed additional information. The statement shouldForm 1099-DIV, you should be listed as the of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the contain enough information to enable you toªPayer.º The other owner should be listed as the stripped preferred stock is treated as your figure your accrual of market discount or amor-ªRecipient.º You do not, however, have to file a purchase price. The rules described in Treat- tizable bond premium.Form 1099-DIV to show payments for your ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interestspouse. For more information about the report-
income that accrued to you for the period youing requirements and the penalties for failure to
held the regular interest.file (or furnish) certain information returns, see
Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OIDthe General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, REMICs, FASITs, and interest, if any, that accrued to you for the5498, and W-2G.
period you held the regular interest. You will notand Other CDOsLiquidating distributions. If you receive a need to make any adjustments to the amounts
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation reported even if you held the regular interest forHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in-will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the only a part of the calendar year. However, if youvestment conduits (REMICs), financial assetamount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8 bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-securitization investment trusts (FASITs), andand 9. quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown on
other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) Form 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount
must follow special rules for reporting income (OID), earlier.
and any expenses from these investment prod-
ucts. You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-Stripped
tions and other persons specified in Regulations
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.Preferred Stock REMICs
These persons and fiscal year taxpayers may
A real estate mortgage investment conduit If the dividend rights are stripped from certain obtain tax information by contacting the REMIC
(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre- or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-
pose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se-ferred stock may have to include amounts in est directly from the REMIC or issuer of the
cured by interests in real property. A REMICincome equal to the amounts that would have CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgage
issues regular and residual interests to inves-been included if the stock were a bond with Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-
tors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generallyoriginal issue discount (OID). mation, explains how to request this information.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 938 is available only on the sale. See Wash Sales , in chapter 4, for more Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
Internet at www.irs.gov. information about selling a residual interest. receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-
Treatment of distributions. You must in- ment by March 15, 2010, that provides addi-
clude in your gross income the part of any distri- tional information. The statement should containIf you hold a regular interest or CDO through bution that is more than your adjusted basis. enough information about the CDO to enablea nominee (rather than directly), you can re- Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or you to figure your accrual of market discount orquest the information from the nominee. exchange of your residual interest. amortizable bond premium.
Allocated investment expenses. Regular in- Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interestSchedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residualterest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to income paid to you for the period you held theinterest, you should receive Schedule Q (Formdeduct the REMIC's investment expenses, but CDO.1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OIDHolder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Losssingle-class REMIC is one that generally would accrued to you and the interest, if any, paid toAllocation, and instructions from the REMICbe classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had you for the period you held the CDO. You shouldeach quarter. Schedule Q will indicate yournot elected REMIC status. not need to make any adjustments to theshare of the REMIC's quarterly taxable incomeThe single-class REMIC will report your amounts reported even if you held the CDO for(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to yourshare of its investment expenses in box 5 of only a part of the calendar year. However, if youtax return. Keep it for your records.Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. It bought the CDO at a premium or acquisitionUse Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, towill also include this amount in box 1 of Form premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Formreport your total share of the REMIC's taxable1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on the 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,income (or loss) for each quarter included inadditional written statement. earlier.your tax year.You may be able to take a deduction for
For more information about reporting your If you did not receive a Form 1099, see Youthese expenses subject to a 2% limit that also
income (or loss) from a residual interest in a may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier.applies to certain other miscellaneous itemized
REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) anddeductions. See chapter 3 for more information.
Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions. FASITsRedemption of regular interests at maturity.
Redemption of debt instruments at their maturity Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- A financial asset securitization investment trust
is treated as a sale or exchange. You must gross-income limit, you may be able to claim a (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-
report redemptions on your tax return whether or miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or- tions such as credit card receivables, home eq-
not you realize gain or loss on the transaction. dinary and necessary expenses that you paid or uity loans, and automobile loans.
Your basis is your adjusted issue price, which incurred in connection with your investment in a A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as aincludes any OID you previously reported in REMIC. These expenses may include certain debt instrument. The rules described under Col-income. expense items incurred by the REMIC and lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-Any amount that you receive on the retire- passed through to you. The REMIC will report ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that ament of a debt instrument is treated in the same these expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must useway as if you had sold or exchanged that instru- See chapter 3 for information on how to report an accrual method of accounting to report OIDment. A debt instrument is retired when it is these expenses. and interest income.reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-
For more information about FASITs, seeceled. Collateralized Debt sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
Sale or exchange of a regular interest. Obligations (CDOs) enue Code.
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a
Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialA collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debtREMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.
rules for FASITs are repealed. How-instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest,The ordinary income part, if any, is:
ever, the special rules still apply to anythat is secured by a pool of mortgages or other
CAUTION
!• The amount that would have been in- FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to theevidence of debt and that has principal pay-cluded in your income if the yield to matur- extent that regular interests issued by the FASITments that are subject to acceleration. (Note:ity on the regular interest had been 110% before that date continue to remain outstandingWhile REMIC regular interests are collateralizedof the applicable federal rate at the begin- in accordance with the original terms of issu-debt obligations, they have unique rules that doning of your holding period, minus ance.not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs,
also known as ªpay-through bonds,º are com-• The amount you included in your income.
monly divided into different classes (also called
ªtranchesº).Residual Interest CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort- S Corporationsgages, automobile loans, equipment leases, orA residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that credit card receivables.is not a regular interest. It is designated as a In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxFor more information about the qualificationsresidual interest by the REMIC. on its income. Instead, its income and expensesand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of aIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, are passed through to the shareholders, whoCDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalyou must take into account, on a quarterly basis, then report these items on their own income taxRevenue Code and the regulations under thatyour daily portion of the taxable income or net returns.section.loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax If you are an S corporation shareholder, yourThe OID, market discount, and in-year that you hold the residual interest. You share of the corporation's current year incomecome-reporting rules that apply to bonds andmust report these amounts as ordinary income or loss and other tax items are taxed to youother debt instruments, as described earlier inor loss. whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-this chapter under Discount on Debt Instru-
ally, those items increase or decrease the basisBasis in the residual interest. Your basis in ments, also apply to a CDO.
of your S corporation stock as appropriate. Forthe residual interest is increased by the amount You must include interest income from your
more information on basis adjustments for Sof taxable income you take into account. Your CDO in your gross income under your regular
corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds underbasis is decreased (but not below zero) by the method of accounting. Also include any OID
Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4.amount of cash or the fair market value of any accrued on your CDO during the tax year.
Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-property distributed to you, and by the amount of Generally, you report your income from a
cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-any net loss you have taken into account. If you CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-
turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stocksell your residual interest, you must adjust your tion about reporting these amounts on your re-
of the corporation. The part of any distributionbasis to reflect your share of the REMIC's tax- turn, see How To Report Interest Income ,
that is more than your basis is treated as a gainable income or net loss immediately before the earlier.
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from the sale or exchange of property. The cor- club member, this member must give his or her partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to
poration's distributions may be in the form of social security number (SSN) to the payer of figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter
cash or property. investment income. (When an investment is on your tax return.
S corporation distributions are not treated as held in the names of two or more club members,
No social security coverage for investmentdividends except in certain cases in which the the SSN of only one member must be given to
club earnings. If an investment club partner-corporation has accumulated earnings and prof- the payer.) This member is considered as the
ship's activities are limited to investing in sav-its from years before it became an S corporation. record owner for the actual owner, the invest-
ings certificates, stock, or securities, andment club. This member is a ªnomineeº andReporting S corporation income, deduc- collecting interest or dividends for its members'must file an information return with the IRS. Fortions, and credits. The S corporation should accounts, a member's share of income is notexample, the nominee member must file Formsend you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the clubshowing your share of the S corporation's in- untarily pay the self-employment tax to increaseas the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN,come, credits, and deductions for the tax year. your social security coverage and ultimate bene-and the EIN of the club.You must report your distributive share of the S fits.corporation's income, gain, loss, deductions, or
Tax Treatment of the Clubcredits on the appropriate lines and schedules of
your Form 1040. Club as a CorporationGenerally, an investment club is treated as aFor more information about your treatment of partnership for federal tax purposes unless itS corporation tax items, see Shareholder's In- An investment club formed after 1996 is taxedchooses otherwise. In some situations, how-structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). as a corporation if:ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust.
Limit on losses and deductions. The de- • It is formed under a federal or state lawClubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, theduction for your share of losses and deductions that refers to it as incorporated or as arules for determining how an investment club isshown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limited corporation, body corporate, or body poli-treated were different from those explained into the adjusted basis of your stock and any debt tic,the following discussions. An investment clubthe corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction • It is formed under a state law that refers tothat existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsnot allowed because of this limit is carried over it as a joint-stock company or joint-stockthe same way it was treated before 1997, unlessand treated as a loss or deduction in the next tax association, orit chooses to be treated a different way under theyear.
new rules. To make that choice, the club must • It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.Passive activity losses. Rules apply that file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of
Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain the Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. To
limits and tell you where on your return to report choose to be taxed as a corporation, the clubClub as a Partnership
your share of S corporation items from passive cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) or
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or aactivities. otherwise subject to special treatment under the
trust, it will be treated as a partnership. tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makeForm 8582. If you have a passive activity the choice.loss from an S corporation, you must complete Filing requirement. If your investment club is
Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065. Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as afigure the amount of the allowable loss to enter However, as a partner in the club, you must corporation, it must file Form 1120. In that case,on your return. See Publication 925 for more report on your individual return your share of the you do not report any of its income or expensesinformation. club's income, gains, losses, deductions, and on your individual return. All ordinary incomecredits for the club's tax year. (Its tax year gener- and expenses and capital gains and losses mustally must be the same tax year as that of the be reported on the Form 1120. Any distributionpartners owning a majority interest.) You must the club makes that qualifies as a dividend mustreport these items whether or not you actuallyInvestment Clubs be reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distribu-receive any distribution from the partnership. tions to the shareholder are $10 or more for the
An investment club is formed when a group of year.Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy offriends, neighbors, business associates, or You must report any distributions that youSchedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share ofothers pool their money to invest in stock or receive from the club on your individual return.Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part-other securities. The club may or may not have a You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIVnership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1written agreement, a charter, or bylaws. from the club showing the distributions you re-are your share of the partnership's income, de-Usually the group operates informally with ceived.ductions, and credits. Report each amount onmembers pledging to pay a regular amount into Some corporations can choose not to bethe appropriate lines and schedules of your in-the club monthly. Some clubs have a committee taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-come tax return.that gathers information on securities, selects ers. See S Corporations, earlier.The club's expenses for producing or collect-the most promising securities, and recommends For more information about corporations,ing income, for managing investment property,that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotate see Publication 542, Corporations.or for determining any tax are listed separatelythese responsibilities among all their members. on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner whoMost clubs require all members to vote for or itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)against all investments, sales, trades, and other Club as a Trustcan deduct his or her share of those expenses.transactions. The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 23, In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aIdentifying number. Each club must have an along with other miscellaneous deductions sub- trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementemployer identification number (EIN) to use ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3  for more through which trustees take title to property forwhen filing its return. The club's EIN also may information on the 2% limit. the purpose of protecting or conserving it for thehave to be given to the payer of dividends or For more information about reporting your beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inother income from investments recorded in the income from a partnership, see the Schedule chancery or probate courts. An arrangement isclub's name. To obtain an EIN, first get Form K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part- treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeSS-4, Application for Employer Identification nerships. is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingNumber, from the Internal Revenue Service or Passive activity losses. Rules apply that and conserving property for beneficiaries whoyour nearest Social Security Administration of- limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of cannot share in that responsibility and so are notfice. See chapter 5 of this publication for more Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofinformation about how to get this form. will tell you where on your return to report your business for profit. If you need more information
Investments in name of member. When share of partnership items from passive activi- about trusts, see Regulations section
an investment is recorded in the name of one ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a 301.7701-4.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as a trust. Report the amounts shown on Schedule
trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receive K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules of
a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from the your income tax return.
Page 28 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 29 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb 
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-Tax Shelters and realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses 1. Disclosure of reportable transactions.
in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- You must disclose information for each re-
Other matching of income and deductions, financing portable transaction in which you partici-
pate. See Reportable Transactiontechniques that do not conform to standard com-
Disclosure Statement, later.mercial business practices, or the mischaracter-Reportable Material advisors with respect to any re-ization of the substance of the transaction.
portable transaction must disclose informa-Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax- tion about the transaction on Form 8918.Transactions payer generally risks little. This requirement applies to material advi-
Abusive tax shelters commonly involve sors who provide material aid, assistance,
package deals that are designed from the start or advice on any reportable transaction after
Introduction to generate losses, deductions, or credits that October 22, 2004.
Material advisors will receive a reportablewill be far more than present or future invest-Investments that yield tax benefits are some-
transaction number for the disclosed report-ment. Or, they may promise investors from thetimes called ªtax shelters.º In some cases, Con-
able transaction. They must provide thisgress has concluded that the loss of revenue is start that future inflated appraisals will enable
number to all persons to whom they actedan acceptable side effect of special tax provi- them, for example, to reap charitable contribu-
as a material advisor. They must providesions designed to encourage taxpayers to make tion deductions based on those appraisals. (But the number at the time the transaction iscertain types of investments. In many cases, see the appraisal requirements discussed under entered into. If they do not have the numberhowever, losses from tax shelters produce little Rules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) at that time, they must provide it within 60or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are They are commonly marketed in terms of the days from the date the number is mailed toexaggerated beyond those intended. Those ratio of tax deductions allegedly available to them. For information on penalties for fail-cases are called ªabusive tax shelters.º An in- each dollar invested. This ratio (or ªwrite-offº) is ure to disclose and failure to maintain lists,vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub-
frequently said to be several times greater than see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707,ject to restrictions, including the requirement
one-to-one. 6707A, and 6708. that it be disclosed, as discussed later.
Because there are many abusive tax shel- 2. Requirement to maintain list. Material
Topics ters, it is not possible to list all the factors you advisors must maintain a list of persons to
This chapter discusses: should consider in determining whether an offer- whom they provide material aid, assis-
tance, or advice on any reportable transac-ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you
• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, tion after October 22, 2004. Beforeshould ask the following questions, which might
October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersprovide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax
who acted as material advisors with re-shelters, • Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco- spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter
• Investor's reporting requirements, and nomic benefits? (including a reportable transaction, dis-
cussed later) were required to maintain a• Penalties that may apply. • Is this a transaction you would seriously
list of persons involved in the tax shelter.consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you The list must be available for inspection byhoped to make a profit?Useful Items the IRS, and the information required to be
You may want to see: • Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, included on the list generally must be kept
for 7 years. See Regulations sectionare they insured for less than their
Publication 301.6112-1 for more information (includingpurchase price?
what information is required to be included❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods • Is there a nontax justification for the way on the list).
profits and losses are allocated to part-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal 3. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-ners?Rights, and Claims for Refund ality privilege between you and a federally
• Do the facts and supporting documents authorized tax practitioner does not apply❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
make economic sense? In that connec- to written communications made after Oc-Property
tion, are there sales and resales of the tax tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules your direct or indirect participation in anyshelter property at ever increasing prices?
tax shelter.• Does the investment plan involve a gim-Form (and Instructions)
4. Appraisal requirement for donatedmick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement property. If you claim a deduction of morenomic reality of the transaction?
than $5,000 for an item or group of similar❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement • Does the promoter offer to backdate docu- items of donated property, you generally
ments after the close of the year? Are you❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions must get a qualified appraisal from a quali-
instructed to backdate checks covering fied appraiser and you must complete and❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure your investment? attach section B of Form 8283 to your taxStatement return. If you claim a deduction of more• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured than $500,000 for the donated property,See chapter 5  for information about getting by the promoter that you will never have to you generally must attach the qualified ap-these publications and forms. pay it? praisal to your tax return. For more infor-
mation about appraisals, including• Does this transaction involve laundering
exceptions, see Publication 561.United States source income through for-
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha- 5. Passive activity loss and credit limits.
ven and owned by United States The passive activity loss and credit rules
shareholders? limit the amount of losses and credits that
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can be claimed from passive activities and on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-Reportable Transaction Disclosure
action. For information on exceptions, see Rev-limit the amount that can offset nonpassive Statement
enue Procedure 2007-20 in Internal Revenueincome, such as certain portfolio income
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each Bulletin 2007-7, available at www.irs.gov/irb/from investments. For more detailed infor- reportable transaction in which you participated. 2007-07_IRB/ar15.html.mation about determining and reporting in- Generally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourcome, losses, and credits from passive Loss transactions. For individuals, a lossreturn for each tax year in which you participated transaction is any transaction that results in aactivities, see Publication 925. in the transaction. Under certain circumstances, deductible loss if the gross amount of the loss isa transaction must be disclosed within 90 days6. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed at least $2 million in a single tax year or $4of the transaction being identified as a listedan accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty million in any combination of tax years. A losstransaction or a transaction of interest. In addi-(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter- from a foreign currency transaction under Inter-tion, for the first year Form 8886 is attached toest will be imposed on the amount of the nal Revenue Code section 988 is a loss transac-your return, you must send a copy of the form to:penalty from the due date of the return tion if the gross amount of the loss is at least
(including any extensions) to the date you Internal Revenue Service $50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not the
OTSA Mail Stop 4915 loss flows through from an S corporation orpay the penalty.
1973 North Rulon White Blvd. partnership.7. Accounting method restriction. Tax Ogden, Utah 84404 Certain losses (such as losses from casual-shelters generally cannot use the cash ties, thefts, and condemnations) are exceptedmethod of accounting. from this category and do not have to be re-If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail ported on Form 8886. For information on other8. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform to include any required information on the form, exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 incapitalization rules generally apply to pro- you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty for Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or futureducing property or acquiring it for resale. failure to disclose a reportable transaction, later published guidance) available at www.irs.gov/Under those rules, the direct cost and part under Penalties. irb/2004-50_IRB/ar11.html.of the indirect cost of the property must be The following discussion briefly describes re-
Transactions of interest. A transaction ofportable transactions. For more details, see thecapitalized or included in inventory. For
interest is a transaction entered into after No-instructions for Form 8886.more information, see Publication 538.
vember 1, 2006, that is the same as or substan-9. Denial of deduction for interest on an Reportable transaction. A reportable trans- tially similar to one of the types of transactions
underpayment due to a reportable action is any of the following. that the IRS has identified by notice, regulation,
transaction. You cannot deduct any inter- or other form of published guidance as a trans-• A listed transaction.est you paid or accrued on any part of an action of interest. As of the date this publication
• A confidential transaction.underpayment of tax due to an understate- was prepared for print, the IRS has identified the
following transactions of interest.ment arising from a reportable transaction • A transaction with contractual protection.
(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect- • ªTogglingº grantor trusts as described in• Loss transactions.ing the tax treatment of the item are not Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-
adequately disclosed. This rule applies to • Transactions of interest entered into after able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar20.
reportable transactions entered into in tax November 1, 2006. html.
years beginning after October 22, 2004. • Certain transactions involving contribu-
tions of a successor member interest in aNote. Transactions with a brief asset hold- limited liability company as described ining period were removed from the definition ofAuthority for Disallowance of Tax Notice 2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, avail-reportable transaction for transactions entered able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar19.Benefits into after August 2, 2007. html.
The IRS has published guidance concluding that Listed transaction. A listed transaction is a • Certain transactions involving the sale orthe claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax transaction that is the same as or substantially other disposition of all interests in a chari-similar to one of the types of transactions thatshelters should be disallowed. The guidance is table remainder trust and claiming little orthe IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidancethe conclusion of the IRS on how the law is no taxable gain as described in Noticetransaction. These transactions have been iden-applied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is 2009-99, 2009-47 I.R.B. 1194, available attified in notices, regulations, and other publishedpublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for www.irs.gov/irb/2009-47_IRB/ar11.html.guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingtaxpayers' information and also for use by IRS
guidance, see Notice 2009-59 in Internal Reve- • Certain transactions involving a U.S. tax-officials. So, if your return is examined and an payer owning controlled foreign corpora-nue Bulletin 2009-31, available at www.irs.gov/abusive tax shelter is identified and challenged, tions (CFC) that hold stock of a lower-tierirb/2009-31_IRB/ar07.html.published guidance dealing with that type of CFC through a domestic partnership toConfidential transaction. A confidentialshelter, which disallows certain claimed tax avoid reporting income as described intransaction is one that is offered to you undershelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the Notice 2009-7, 2009-3 I.R.B. 312, avail-conditions of confidentiality and for which youexamining official's challenge of the tax benefits able at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-03_IRB/ar10.have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-that you claimed. In such a case, the examiner html.tion is offered under conditions of confidentialitywill not compromise even if you or your repre-
if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onsentative believes that you have authority for the For updates to this list, go to www.irs.gov/your disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc- businesses/corporations and click on ªAbusivepositions taken on your tax return. ture of the transaction and the limit protects the Tax Shelters and Transactions.ºThe courts have generally been un- confidentiality of the advisor's tax strategies.
sympathetic to taxpayers involved in The transaction is treated as confidential even if Penaltiesabusive tax shelter schemes and have the conditions of confidentiality are not legally
CAUTION
!
ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the binding on you. Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be ancases in which these shelters have been chal- Transaction with contractual protection. expensive proposition when you consider all oflenged. Generally, a transaction with contractual protec- the consequences. First, the promoter generally
tion is a transaction in which you or a related charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-
party has the right to a full or partial refund of amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-Investor Reporting
fees if all or part of the intended tax conse- mined, you will be faced with payment of more
You may be required to file a reportable transac- quences of the transaction are not sustained, or tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a
a transaction for which the fees are contingenttion disclosure statement. 20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75%
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
civil fraud penalty. You may also be subject to minus the amount of tax shown on the return, For details on the amount of the penalty and
the penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties reduced by any rebates. The term ªrebateº gen- exceptions, see Publication 561.
are explained in the following paragraphs. erally means a decrease in the tax shown on
Penalty for failure to disclose a reportableyour original return as the result of your filing anAccuracy-related penalties. An accuracy- transaction. If you fail to include any requiredamended return or claim for refund.related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un- information regarding a reportable transactionderpayments of tax due to: For items other than tax shelters, you can file (discussed earlier) on a return or statement, youForm 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items• Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- may have to pay a penalty. The amount of thethat could cause a substantial understatementtions, penalty is $10,000 if you are an individual, orof income tax. In that way, you can avoid the $50,000 if you are not. In the case of a listed• Substantial understatement of tax, or substantial understatement penalty if you have a transaction, the amount of the penalty isreasonable basis for your position on the tax• Substantial valuation misstatement. $100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000 ifissue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax you are not. This penalty applies whether or notThis penalty will not be imposed if you can show return does not reduce the amount of the under- there is an understatement of tax and is in addi-that you had reasonable cause for any under- statement. tion to any other penalty that may be imposed.statement of tax and that you acted in good faith. Also, the understatement penalty will not be The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty forYour failure to disclose a reportable transaction imposed if you can show that there was reason-is a strong indication that you failed to act in failing to disclose a reportable transaction underable cause for the underpayment caused by thegood faith. certain limited circumstances, but cannot re-understatement and that you acted in good faith.
scind the penalty for failing to disclose a listedAn important factor in establishing reasonableIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen- transaction.cause and good faith will be the extent of youralty, interest will be imposed on the amount of
effort to determine your proper tax liability underthe penalty from the due date of the return (in- Accuracy-related penalty for a reportablethe law.cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen-
transaction understatement. If you have aalty. Valuation misstatement. In general, you reportable transaction understatement, you may
are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialNegligence or disregard of rules or regula- have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of thevaluation misstatement if all of the following aretions. The penalty for negligence or disregard amount of that understatement. This applies totrue.of rules or regulations is imposed only on the any item due to a listed transaction or otherpart of the underpayment that is due to negli- reportable transaction with a significant purpose• The value or adjusted basis of any prop-gence or disregard of rules or regulations. The of avoiding or evading federal income tax. Theerty claimed on the return is 150% or morepenalty will not be charged if you can show that penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part ofof the correct amount.you had reasonable cause for understating your any reportable transaction understatement if thetax and that you acted in good faith. • You underpaid your tax by more than transaction was not properly disclosed. You may Negligence includes any failure to make a $5,000 because of the misstatement. not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet thereasonable attempt to comply with the provi- • You cannot establish that you had reason- strengthened reasonable cause and good faithsions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- able cause for the underpayment and that exception.cludes any failure to keep adequate books and you acted in good faith. This penalty does not apply to the part of anrecords. A return position that has a reasonable
understatement on which the fraud penalty orbasis is not negligence. The 20% penalty does not apply to any under- gross valuation misstatement penalty is im-Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or statement that is subject to the accuracy-related posed.intentional disregard of rules or regulations. penalty for a reportable transaction understate-The penalty for disregard of rules and regula- ment (discussed later). Civil fraud penalty. If there is any underpay-tions can be avoided if all of the following are
You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penaltytrue.
gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate of 75% of the underpayment will be added to• You keep adequate books and records. the value or the adjusted basis of property by your tax.
200% or more of the amount determined to be• You have a reasonable basis for your po- Joint return. The fraud penalty on a jointcorrect, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,sition on the tax issue. return applies to a spouse only if some part ofinstead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid
• You make an adequate disclosure of your the underpayment is due to the fraud of thatbecause of the gross valuation misstatement.
position. spouse.The penalty rate is also 40% if the property's
correct value or adjusted basis is zero.Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessedattach it to your tax return. To disclose a position
and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forPenalty for incorrect appraisals. The personcontrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Also
payment, an investor can be penalized with upwho prepares an appraisal of the value of prop-use Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac-
to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to payerty may have to pay a penalty if:tion (discussed earlier).
continues.• He or she knows, or reasonably shouldSubstantial understatement of tax. An
have known, that the appraisal would beunderstatement is considered to be substantial if Whether To Investused in connection with a return or claimit is more than the greater of:
for refund, and In light of the adverse tax consequences and the• 10% of the tax required to be shown on
substantial amount of penalties and interest that• The claimed value of the property on athe return, or
will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-return or claim for refund which is based• $5,000. lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-on that appraisal results in a substantial
ments carefully and seek competent legal andvaluation misstatement or a gross valua-An ªunderstatementº is the amount of tax re-
financial advice.tion misstatement as discussed above.quired to be shown on your return for a tax year
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 31

Page 32 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to • Expenses (other than interest) that are
most income-producing activities. These rules clearly and directly allocable to your port-
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the folio income, or
3. amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, • Interest expense properly allocable tothis is the amount of cash and the adjusted basis portfolio income.of property you contribute to the activity. It also
However, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityInvestment be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or if
plained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeExpenses Additional information. For more informa-Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-Passive activity losses and credits. TheTerms you may need to know
tion 925.amount of losses and tax credits you can claim(see Glossary):
from passive activities is limited. Generally, you
At-risk rules are allowed to deduct passive activity losses
only up to the amount of your passive activityPassive activity income. Also, you can use credits from passive Interest Expenses
Portfolio income activities only against tax on the income from
passive activities. There are exceptions for cer- This section discusses interest expenses you
tain activities, such as rental real estate activi- may be able to deduct as an investor.
ties. For information on business interest, seeTopics
chapter 4 of Publication 535.This chapter discusses: Passive activity. A passive activity gener-
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-ally is any activity involving the conduct of any
penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Limits on Deductions, trade or business in which you do not materially
terest, as explained in Publication 936, Homeparticipate and any rental activity. However, if• Interest Expenses, Mortgage Interest Deduction, and interest onyou are involved in renting real estate, the activ-
certain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Bond Premium Amortization, ity is not a passive activity if both of the following
tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.are true.• Expenses of Producing Income,
• More than one-half of the personal serv-• Nondeductible Expenses, and Investment Interestices you perform during the year in all
• How To Report Investment Expenses. trades or businesses are performed in real If you borrow money to buy property you hold forproperty trades or businesses in which investment, the interest you pay is investmentyou materially participate. interest. You can deduct investment interestUseful Items
subject to the limit discussed later. However,You may want to see: • You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-ices during the year in real property trades
duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-Publication or businesses in which you materially par-
come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norticipate.❏ 535 Business Expenses can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,
also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules The term ªtrade or businessº generally means Investment interest does not include anyany activity that involves the conduct of a trade❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and qualified home mortgage interest or any interestor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Dependents taken into account in computing income or lossing a trade or business, or involves certain re- from a passive activity.search or experimental expenditures. However,Form (and Instructions)
it does not include rental activities or certain Investment property. Property held for in-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized activities treated as incidental to holding prop- vestment includes property that produces inter-Deductions erty for investment. est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived
in the ordinary course of a trade or business. It❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense You are considered to materially participate in
also includes property that produces gain or lossDeduction an activity if you are involved on a regular, con-
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade ortinuous, and substantial basis in the operations
business) from the sale or trade of propertySee chapter 5  for information about getting of the activity.
producing these types of income or held forthese publications and forms. Other income (nonpassive income). Gen- investment (other than an interest in a passiveerally, you can use losses from passive activities activity). Investment property also includes anonly to offset income from passive activities. interest in a trade or business activity in whichYou generally cannot use passive activity losses you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions to offset your other income, such as your wages passive activity).or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-Your deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.cludes gross income from interest, dividends,be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combineannuities, or royalties that is not derived in the
your share of investment interest from a partner-ordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The at-risk rules,
ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourincludes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The limit on investment interest, or
passive activity) producing portfolio income or• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expenseheld for investment. This includes capital gainitemized deductions. distributions from mutual funds (and other regu- If you borrow money for business or personallated investment companies) and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you mustinvestment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. OnlyYou cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest  is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt usedoffset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa- ment interest. The allocation is not affected by
of Producing Income. tion of your passive activity income or loss: the use of property that secures the debt.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using any the amount of any interest expense you were not
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to reasonable method. allowed to deduct in earlier years because of the
buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt limit.
Additional allocation rules. For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- Choosing to deduct disallowed interestmation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- expense before the year of disposition. Youchapter 4 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-personal interest. pense in any year before the year you dispose of
the bond, up to your net interest income from theDebt proceeds received in cash. If you re- When To Deduct
bond during the year. The rest of the disallowedceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are Investment Interest
interest expense remains deductible in the yeargenerally not treated as investment property.
If you use the cash method of accounting, you you dispose of the bond.
Debt proceeds deposited in account. If you must pay the interest before you can deduct it. Net interest income. This is the interestdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- If you use an accrual method of accounting, income (including OID) from the bond that youposit is treated as investment property, regard- you can deduct interest over the period it ac- include in income for the year, minus the interestless of whether the account bears interest. But, if crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an expense paid or accrued during the year toyou withdraw the funds and use them for an- exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re- purchase or carry the bond.other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to lated party under When To Report Investment
determine the amount considered to be for in- Expenses, later in this chapter.
Limit on interest deduction for short-termvestment purposes.
obligations. If the current income inclusionExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 3, 2009, payable in 90 days at 12%
borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theinterest. On December 2, 2009, you paid this
ately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not amount you can deduct for interest expense youwith a new note for $1,030, due on March 2,
buy the household items until June 1. You had paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry a2010. If you use the cash method of accounting,
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no short-term obligation is limited.you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest
other transactions on the bank account until on your return for 2009 because you did not The interest is deductible only to the extent it
June. You did not sell the stock and you made actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you is more than:
no principal payments on the debt. You paid may be able to deduct a portion of the interest on • The amount of acquisition discount or OIDinterest from another account. The $8,000 is the loans through December 31, 2009, on your on the obligation for the tax year, plustreated as being used for an investment pur- return for 2009.
pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an • The amount of any interest payable on the
Interest paid in advance. Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. obligation for the year that is not included
pay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this in income because of your accounting
beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you method (other than interest taken into ac-the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must count in determining the amount of acqui-under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter- sition discount or OID).can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to
The method of determining acquisition discountyear.personal purposes.
and OID for short-term obligations is discussedAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re- Interest on margin accounts. If you are a in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interest gations.ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat on margin accounts to buy taxable securities as Interest not deducted due to limit. In theany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) investment interest in the year you paid it. You year you dispose of the obligation, or if youmade from any account you own, or from cash, are considered to have paid interest on these choose, in another year in which you have netas made from those proceeds. This applies to accounts only when you actually pay the broker interest income from the obligation, you canany payment made within 30 days before or or when payment becomes available to the bro- deduct the amount of any interest expense youafter the proceeds are received in cash or de- ker through your account. Payment may be- were not allowed to deduct for an earlier yearposited in your account. come available to the broker through your because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-If you received the loan proceeds in cash, account when the broker collects dividends or vided in the earlier discussion under Limit onyou can treat the payment as made on the date interest for your account, or sells securities held
interest deduction for market discount bonds ,you received the cash instead of the date you for you or received from you.
earlier.actually made the payment. You cannot deduct any interest on money
borrowed for personal reasons.Payments on debt may require new alloca- Limit on Deductiontion. As you repay a debt used for more than Limit on interest deduction for market dis-one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. count bonds. The amount you can deduct for Generally, your deduction for investment inter-You must first reduce the amount allocated to interest expense you paid or accrued during the est expense is limited to the amount of your netpersonal purposes by the repayment. You then year to buy or carry a market discount bond may investment income.reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is be limited. This limit does not apply if you accrue You can carry over the amount of investmentfor investment purposes. the market discount and include it in your in- interest that you could not deduct because of
come currently. this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedExample 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay Under this limit, the interest is deductible over is treated as investment interest paid or$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is only to the extent it is more than: accrued in that next year.applied against the amount allocated to per-
You can carry over disallowed investmentsonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- 1. The total interest and OID includible in
interest to the next tax year even if it is more thancated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and gross income for the bond for the year,
your taxable income in the year the interest was$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next plus
paid or accrued.reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
2. The market discount for the number of$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is
days you held the bond during the year.allocated to investment.
Net Investment IncomeFigure the amount in (2) above using the rulesPass-through entities. If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1 Determine the amount of your net investmentfunds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds. income by subtracting your investment ex-corporation, then the interest on those funds
penses (other than interest expense) from yourmust be allocated based on the assets of the Interest not deducted due to limit. In the
investment income.entity. If you contribute to the capital of the year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment income. This generally includes Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions.
your gross income from property held for invest- does not count as investment income. To figure His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and the amount of your child's income that you can also has income from the partnership of $2,000.
royalties). Investment income does not include consider your investment income, start with the Ted figures his net investment income andAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that the limit on his investment interest expense de-not include qualified dividends or net capital gain amount by a percentage that is equal to the duction in the following way:unless you choose to include them. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by
the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract Total investment income ....... . $10,000Choosing to include qualified dividends.
the result from the amount on Form 8814, line Minus: Investment expenses (otherInvestment income generally does not include
than interest) ............... . 3,20012.qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1.
Net investment income ........ . $6,800However, you can choose to include all or part of
Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-your qualified dividends in investment income.
Deductible investment interestable interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-You make this choice by completing Form expense for the year .......... . $6,800manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onIf you choose to include any amount of your The $2,000 of income from the passive activ-Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, andqualified dividends in investment income, you ity is not used in determining Ted's net invest-$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,100 on Formmust reduce your qualified dividends that are ment income. His investment interest deduction8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofYou figure the amount of your child's incomethe same amount. his net investment income.that you can consider your investment income
Choosing to include net capital gain. In- as follows:vestment income generally does not include net
capital gain from disposing of investment prop- Form 4952$4,100 − ($4,100 ×  ($2,000 ÷  $6,000))
erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expensetual funds). However, you can choose to include You include the result, $2,733, on Form 4952,
Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-all or part of your net capital gain in investment line 4a.
ment interest.income. Child's capital gain distributions. If partYou make this choice by completing Form of the amount you report is your child's capital Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 20094952, line 4g, according to its instructions. gain distributions, that part (which is reported on income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thanIf you choose to include any amount of your Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13) qualified dividends) and a net capital gain ofnet capital gain in investment income, you must generally does not count as investment income. $9,000 from the sale of investment property.reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for However, you can choose to include all or part of She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of athe lower capital gains tax rates by the same it in investment income, as explained in Choos- painting given to her by an artist friend. Theamount. ing to include net capital gain, earlier. painting is not a capital asset because Jane'sFor more information about the capital gains Your investment income also includes the basis in the painting is determined by referencerates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, to her friend's basis in the painting. She incurred
the reduced amount figured under Child'sBefore making either choice, consider $12,500 of investment interest expense. Her
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).the overall effect on your tax liability. other investment expenses directly connected
Compare your tax if you make one or
TIP with the production of investment income total
both of these choices with your tax if you do not. Investment expenses. Investment expenses $980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-
are your allowed deductions (other than interest ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form
expense) directly connected with the productionInvestment income of child reported on par- 1040).
of investment income. Investment expensesent's return. Investment income includes the For 2009, Jane chooses to include all of herthat are included as a miscellaneous itemizedpart of your child's interest and dividend income net capital gain in investment income. Her totaldeduction on schedule A (Form 1040) are allow-that you choose to report on your return. If the investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-able deductions after applying the 2% limit thatchild does not have qualified dividends, Alaska dends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 fromapplies to miscellaneous itemized deductions.Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri- the sale of the painting). Her net investmentbutions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form Use the smaller of: income is $12,020 ($13,000 total investment8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter- • The investment expenses included on income − $980 other investment expenses).est and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of Form Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or Jane's Form 4952 is illustrated, later. Her4952.
investment interest expense deduction is limited• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.
Example. Your 8-year-old son has interest to $12,020, the amount of her net investmentSee Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aincome of $2,200, which you choose to report on income. The $480 disallowed investment inter-discussion of the 2% limit.your own return. You enter $2,200 on Form est expense is carried forward to 2010.
8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and Losses from passive activities. Income or12. Also enter $300 on Form 1040, line 21. Your expenses that you used in computing income or Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notinvestment income includes this $300. loss from a passive activity are not included in have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your
Child's qualified dividends. If part of the determining your investment income or invest- return if you meet all of the following tests.
amount you report is your child's qualified divi- ment expenses (including investment interest • Your investment interest expense is notdends, that part (which is reported on Form expense). See Publication 925 for information more than your investment income from1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in- about passive activities. interest and ordinary dividends minus anyvestment income. However, you can choose to
qualified dividends.include all or part of it in investment income, as Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership
explained under Choosing to include qualified that operates a business. However, he does not • You do not have any other deductible in-dividends, earlier. materially participate in the partnership's busi- vestment expenses.
Your investment income also includes the ness. Ted's interest in the partnership is consid- • You have no carryover of investment inter-amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, ered a passive activity. est expense from 2008.the reduced amount figured next under Child's Ted's investment income from interest and
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). dividends (other than qualified dividends) is If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct$10,000. His investment expenses (other thanChild's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. all of your investment interest.interest) are $3,200 after taking into account the  If part of the amount you report is your child's
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  4952 
Department of the Treasury 
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
/H17075 Attach to your tax return.
OMB No. 1545-0191 
2009
Attachment 
Sequence No. 51 
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number 
Part I Total Investment Interest Expense 
1 Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2009 (see instructions) ........ 1 
2 Disallowed investment interest expense from 2008 Form 4952, line 7 ......... 2 
3 Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 2 .............. 3 
Part II Net Investment Income 
4 a Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net 
gain from the disposition of property held for investment) . . .  4a 
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a ......... 4b 
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a ...................... 4c 
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment . . 4d 
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the 
disposition of property held for investment (see instructions)   . 4e 
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d ...................... 4f 
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see 
instructions) ............................ 4g
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g ................. 4h 
5 Investment expenses (see instructions) ................... 5 
6 Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... 6 
Part III Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
7 Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2010. Subtract line 6 from 
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 7 
8 Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions . . 8 
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
• Bonds whose basis has to be determined at least two decimal places when expressed as
a percentage.using the basis of the person who trans-Bond Premium
ferred the bond to you. If you do not know the yield, consult your
Amortization broker or tax advisor. Databases available toSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e). them are likely to show the yield at the date of
If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre- purchase.Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyonemium is part of your basis in the bond. If the who holds them mainly for sale to customers in Step 2: determine the accrual periods.bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to the ordinary course of a trade or business or You can choose the accrual periods to use.amortize the premium. This generally means who would properly include bonds in inventory They may be of any length and may vary inthat each year, over the life of the bond, you use length over the term of the bond, but each ac-at the close of the tax year) cannot claim aa part of the premium to reduce the amount of crual period can be no longer than 1 year anddeduction for amortizable bond premium.interest includible in your income. If you make each scheduled payment of principal or interestSee section 75 of the Internal Revenue Codethis choice, you must reduce your basis in the must occur either on the first or the final day offor the treatment of bond premium by a dealer inbond by the amortization for the year. an accrual period. The computation is simplest iftax-exempt bonds.If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you accrual periods are the same as the intervalsmust amortize the premium. This amortized between interest payment dates.amount is not deductible in determining taxable How To Figure
income. However, each year you must reduce Step 3: determine the bond premium forAmortizationyour basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest the accrual period. To do this, multiply your
otherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theFor bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you
the amortization for the year. accrual period by your yield. Then subtract themust amortize bond premium using a constant
result from the qualified stated interest for theyield method on the basis of the bond's yield toBond premium. Bond premium is the amount period.maturity, determined by using the bond's basisby which your basis in the bond right after you Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-and compounding at the close of each accrualget it is more than the total of all amounts pay- ning of the first accrual period is the same asperiod.able on the bond after you get it (other than your basis. After that, it is your basis decreasedpayments of qualified stated interest). For exam- by the amount of bond premium amortized forConstant yield method. Figure the bond pre-ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 earlier periods and the amount of any paymentmium amortization for each accrual period asgenerally would have a $50 premium if you buy it previously made on the bond other than a pay-follows.for $1,050. ment of qualified stated interest.
Step 1: determine your yield. Your yield isBasis. In general, your basis for figuring
the discount rate that, when used in figuring the Example. On February 1, 2008, you boughtbond premium amortization is the same as your
present value of all remaining payments to be a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has abasis for figuring any loss on the sale of the
made on the bond (including payments of quali- stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atbond. However, you may need to use a different
fied stated interest), produces an amount equal maturity on February 1, 2015, making your pre-basis for:
to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The• Convertible bonds, the date you got the bond. It must be constant bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000
over the term of the bond and must be figured to on February 1 of each year. Your yield is• Bonds you got in a trade, and
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8.07439% compounded annually. You choose Attorney or accounting fees. You can de-How To Report
duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru- Amortization sary to produce or collect taxable income.ary 1 of each year. To find your bond premium
However, in some cases, attorney or accountingamortization for the accrual period ending on Subtract the bond premium amortization from fees are part of the basis of property. See BasisFebruary 1, 2009, you multiply the adjusted ac- your interest income from these bonds. of Investment Property in chapter 4.quisition price at the beginning of the period Report the bond's interest on Schedule B
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract the (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Several lines Automatic investment service and dividend
result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter- reinvestment plans. A bank may offer itsabove line 2, put a subtotal of all interest listed
checking account customers an automatic in-on line 1. Below this subtotal, print ªABP Adjust-est for the period ($10,000), you find that your
vestment service so that, for a charge, eachment,º and the amortization amount. Subtractbond premium amortization for the period is
customer can choose to invest a part of thethis amount from the subtotal, and enter the$1,118.17.
checking account each month in common stock.result on line 2.Special rules. For special rules that apply Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent for
to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, a number of publicly-owned corporations mayBond premium amortization more than inter-
and bonds that provide for alternative payment set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-est. If the amount of your bond premium amor-
schedules or remote or incidental contingen- ice. Through that service, cash dividends aretization for an accrual period is more than the
reinvested in more shares of stock, after thecies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. qualified stated interest for the period, you can
bank deducts a service charge.deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item-
A corporation in which you own stock alsoized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
may have a dividend reinvestment plan. ThisBonds Issued Before 28.
plan lets you choose to use your dividends toSeptember 28, 1985  But your deduction is limited to the amount buy more shares of stock in the corporationby which your total interest inclusions on theFor these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- instead of receiving the dividends in cash.bond in prior accrual periods is more than yourmium using any reasonable method. Reasona- You can deduct the monthly service chargetotal bond premium deductions on the bond in you pay to a bank to participate in an automaticble methods include: prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct investment service. If you participate in a divi-because of this limit can be carried forward to• The straight-line method, and dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anythe next accrual period. service charge subtracted from your cash divi-• The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.
dends before the dividends are used to buyPre-1998 election to amortize bond premium. more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in theStraight-line method. Under this method, the Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond year you pay them.amount of your bond premium amortization is premium before 1998, the above treatment of
Clerical help and office rent. You can deductthe same each month. Divide the number of the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-
office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,quired before 1988.months you held the bond during the year by the
that you pay in connection with your investmentsnumber of months from the beginning of the tax Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986. and collecting the taxable income on them.year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the The amortization of the premium on these bonds
date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub- Cost of replacing missing securities. To re-
the result by the bond premium (reduced by any ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. place your taxable securities that are mislaid,
bond premium amortization claimed in earlier lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postBonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butyears). This gives you your bond premium amor- an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumbefore 1988. The amortization of the premium you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thetization for the year. on these bonds is investment interest expense related incidental expenses.subject to the investment interest limit, unless You may, however, get a refund of part of theyou choose to treat it as an offset to interestRevenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this bond premium if the missing securities are re-income on the bond. method, the amount of your bond premium covered within a specified time. Under certain
amortization increases each month over the life types of insurance policies, you can recover
of the bond. This method is explained in Reve- some of the expenses.
nue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46. If you receive the refund in the tax year you
Expenses of pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-
ence between the expenses paid and theChoosing To Amortize Producing Income amount refunded. If the refund is made in a later
You choose to amortize the premium on taxable tax year, you must include the refund in incomeYou deduct investment expenses (other than in the year you received it, but only to the extentbonds by reporting the amortization for the year interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized that the expenses decreased your tax in the yearon your income tax return for the first tax year for deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be you deducted them.which you want the choice to apply. You should deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryattach a statement to your return that you are Fees to collect income. You can deduct feesand necessary expenses paid or incurred:making this choice under section 171. See How you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar• To produce or collect income, orTo Report Amortization, next. agent to collect investment income, such as
your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your• To manage property held for producing in-This choice is binding for the year you make
dividends on shares of stock.come.it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable
bonds you own in the year you make the choice Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct aThe expenses must be directly related to the
and also to those you acquire in later years. fee you pay to a broker to acquire investmentincome or income-producing property, and the
property, such as stocks or bonds. You mustincome must be taxable to you.You can change your decision to amortize
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basisbond premium only with the written approval of The deduction for most income-producing ex- of Investment Property in chapter 4.the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115, penses is subject to a 2% limit that also applies You cannot deduct any broker's fees, com-Application for Change in Accounting Method. to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc- missions, or option premiums you pay (or thatFor more information on requesting approval, tions. The amount deductible is limited to the were netted out) in connection with the sale ofsee section 5 of the Appendix to Revenue Pro- total of these miscellaneous deductions that is investment property. They can be used only to
cedure 2009-52 in Internal Revenue Bulletin more than 2% of your adjusted gross income. figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting
2008-36. You can find Revenue Procedure For information on how to report expenses of Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more
2008-52 at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09. producing income, see How To Report Invest- information about the treatment of these sale
ment Expenses, later.html. expenses.
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Investment counsel and advice. You can or other distributions of stock, as shown in box securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice 1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state- nection with personal property used in a short
about investments that produce taxable income. ment. If you are a residual interest holder in a sale or amounts paid by others for the use of any
This includes amounts you pay for investment REMIC, you must report as ordinary income on collateral in connection with the short sale. How-
advisory services. Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b and if you deposit cash as collateral for the propertySafe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent 3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder, used in the short sale and the cash does notyou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the box you must include the amount of any expense earn a material return during the period of theto store taxable income-producing stocks, allocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a. sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.bonds, or other investment-related papers and
Publicly-offered mutual funds. Pub- Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxabledocuments. If you also use the box to store
licly-offered mutual funds, generally, are funds income. You may have expenses that are fortax-exempt securities or personal items, you can
that are traded on an established securities ex- both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt
change. These funds do not pass investment not specifically identify what part of the ex-income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to
expenses through to you. Instead, the dividend penses is for each type of income, you canfigure what part you can deduct.
income they report to you in box 1a of Form divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-
State and local transfer taxes. You cannot 1099-DIV is already reduced by your share of tions based on facts and circumstances. You
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay investment expenses. Therefore, you cannot must attach a statement to your return showing
when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these deduct the expenses on your return. how you divided the expenses and stating that
transfer taxes when you buy securities, you Include the amount from box 1a of Form each deduction claimed is not based on
must treat them as part of the cost of the prop- 1099-DIV in your income. tax-exempt income.
erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you One accepted method for dividing expensessell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- is to do it in the same proportion that each typetion in the amount realized. of income is to the total income. If the expenses
Nondeductible relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeTrustee's commissions for revocable trust.
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thisIf you set up a revocable trust and have its Expenses proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatincome distributed to you, you can deduct the
is for the tax-exempt income, divide yourcommission you pay the trustee for managing Some expenses that you incur as an investor tax-exempt income by the total income and mul-the trust to the extent it is to produce or collect are not deductible. tiply your expenses by the result.taxable income or to manage property. How-
ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis- Stockholders' meetings. You cannot deduct Example. You received $6,000 interest;sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay $4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.tax-exempt income or for managing property to attend stockholders' meetings of companies In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-that produces tax-exempt income. in which you have no interest other than owning penses. You cannot specifically identify theIf you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the stock. This is true even if your purpose in attend- amount of each expense item that is for eachcommissions for several years in advance, you ing is to get information that would be useful in income item, so you must divide your expenses.must deduct a part of the commission each year. making further investments. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided byYou cannot deduct the entire amount in the year Investment-related seminar. You cannot de- $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for theyou pay it. duct expenses for attending a convention, semi- tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400
nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.Investment expenses from pass-through en- (80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct
tities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, S $100 (the rest of the expenses) because theySingle-premium life insurance, endowment,corporation, real estate mortgage investment are for the taxable interest.and annuity contracts. You cannot deductconduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered regu- interest on money you borrow to buy or carry a State income taxes. If you itemize your de-lated investment company (mutual fund), you single-premium life insurance, endowment, or ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-can deduct your share of that entity's investment annuity contract. come taxes on interest income that is exemptexpenses. A partnership or S corporation will from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-show your share of these expenses on your as either taxes or investment expenses, statemium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orSchedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fund income taxes on other exempt income.continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductwill indicate your share of these expenses in box
any interest on the loan that is collateralized by5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state- Interest expense and carrying charges onthe annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-ment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis- straddles. You cannot deduct interest andest expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-cussed later. carrying charges that are allocable to personalrent interest rate on the mortgage loan by theIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex- property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-lesser of the amount of the annuity contract usedpenses relating to your residual interest invest- ductible interest and carrying charges are addedas collateral or the amount of the loan.ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), to the basis of the straddle property. However,line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regular Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you this treatment does not apply if:interest investment will appear in box 5 of Form cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to • All the offsetting positions making up the1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or straddle either consist of one or moreReport your share of these investment ex- annuity contract if you plan to systematically qualified covered call options and the op-penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to borrow part or all of the increases in the cash tioned stock or consist of section 1256the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other value of the contract. This rule applies to the contracts (and the straddle is not part of ainvestment expenses. interest on the total amount borrowed to buy or larger straddle), orcarry the contract, not just the interest on theIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expenses
borrowed increases in the cash value. • The straddle is a hedging transaction.in income. Your share of the investment ex-
penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-mutual fund, as described above, are consid- For information about straddles, including defini-penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-ered to be indirect deductions through that tions of the terms used in this discussion, seecome. Nor can you deduct interest on moneypass-through entity. You must include in your chapter 4.you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orgross income an amount equal to the amount of shares in a mutual fund or other regulated in- Interest includes any amount you pay or incurthe expenses allocated to you, whether or not vestment company that distributes only ex- in connection with personal property used in ayou are able to claim a deduction for those empt-interest dividends. short sale. However, you must first apply theexpenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub-
rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendslicly offered mutual fund, you must include on Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing
under Short Sales in chapter 4.your return the full amount of ordinary dividends a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To determine the interest on market discount Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible If you use an accrual method, you generally
bonds and short-term obligations that are part of deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilityamount to the basis of your straddle property.
a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis- for them, rather than when you pay them.
cussed under Limit on interest deduction for Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-
market discount bonds  and Limit on interest est, earlier in this chapter.
deduction for short-term obligations (both under Unpaid expenses owed to related party. IfHow To ReportInterest Expenses, earlier). you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct
interest and other expenses owed to a relatedNondeductible amount. Figure the nonde- Investment Expenses
cash-basis person until payment is made andductible amount of interest and carrying charges
To deduct your investment expenses, you must the amount is includible in the gross income ofon straddle property as follows.
that person. The relationship, for purposes ofitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
1. Add: this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxEnter your deductible investment interest ex-
year for which the interest or expense wouldpense on Schedule A, line 14. Include any de-a. Interest on indebtedness incurred or otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is deniedductible short sale expenses. (See Short Salescontinued to buy or carry the personal under this rule, this rule will continue to applyin chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)property, and even if your relationship with the person ceasesAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedb. All other amounts (including charges to to exist before the amount is includible in thethat form to figure your investment interest ex-insure, store, or transport the personal gross income of that person.pense.property) paid or incurred to carry the This rule generally applies to those relation-
Enter the total amount of your other invest-personal property. ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
ment expenses (other than interest expenses) Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
on Schedule A, line 23. List the type and amount2. Subtract from the amount in (1): nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,
shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-of each expense on the dotted lines next to line
a. Interest (including OID) includible in tions to shareholders.23. (If necessary, you can show the requiredgross income for the year on the per- The postponement of deductions for unpaidinformation on an attached statement.)sonal property, expenses and interest under the related partyFor information on how to report amortizable rule does not apply to original issue discountb. Any income from the personal property bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- (OID), regardless of when payment is made.treated as ordinary income on the dis- tion, earlier in this chapter. This rule also does not apply to loans with be-position of short-term government obli-
low-market interest rates or to certain paymentsgations or as ordinary income under the
for the use of property and services when themarket discount and short-term bond
lender or recipient has to include payments peri-provisions Ð see Discount on Debt In-
odically in income, even if a payment has notWhen To Reportstruments in chapter 1,
been made.
c. The dividends includible in gross in- Investment Expensescome for the year from the personal
property, and If you use the cash method to report income and
expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,d. Any payment on a loan of the personal
except for certain prepaid interest, in the yearproperty for use in a short sale that is
includible in gross income. you pay them.
Page 38 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 39 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stockTopics
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theThis chapter discusses:
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
4. demption is a dividend or other distribution on• What a sale or trade is,
stock.• Basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a• Adjusted basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Sales and
or other distribution depends on the circum-• Figuring gain or loss,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Nontaxable trades,Trades of ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:• Capital gains and losses, and
• The redemption is not essentially• How to report your gain or loss.Investment
equivalent to a dividend Ð see Dividends
and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-Useful ItemsProperty ter 1,
You may want to see: • There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,Publication
Introduction • There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of Assets stock of the corporation owned by theThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
shareholder, or❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsand trades of investment property.
• The redemption is a distribution in partialForm (and Instructions)Investment property. This is property that liquidation of a corporation.
produces investment income. Examples include ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainsstocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Property used in a trade or business is not in- demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Sectionvestment property. maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.1256 Contracts and Straddles
See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds  and Dis-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a nary Gain or Loss, later.❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchangesbroker during the year, you should receive, for In addition, a significant modification of aeach sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro- bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forSee chapter 5  for information about gettingker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-these publications and forms.equivalent statement from the broker. You tion 1.1001-3.should receive the statement by March 1 of the
next year. It will show the gross proceeds from Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a
the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of Form dominant shareholder who retains ownership ofWhat Is a1099-B from the broker. more than half of the corporation's voting shares
Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- is treated as a contribution to capital rather thanSale or Trade?ment received from your broker) to complete as an immediate loss deductible from taxable
Schedule D of Form 1040. For more information, income. The surrendering shareholder must re-Terms you may need to knowsee Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting allocate his or her basis in the surrendered(see Glossary):Capital Gains and Losses, later. shares to the shares he or she retains.
Equity optionNominees. If someone receives gross pro- Trade of investment property for an annuity.ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give Futures contract The transfer of investment property to a corpora-you a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-Marked to marketceeds received on your behalf. tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
If you receive Form 1099-B that includes Nonequity option will make guaranteed annual payments to you
gross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealersee Nominees later under Reporting Capital the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Regulated futures contractGains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the year
of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contractOther property transactions. Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercial
Short sale insurance companies issuing annuities.fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi-
cations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer of• Sale of your main home, discussed in This section explains what is a sale or trade. It property of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, also explains certain transactions and events istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publication
A sale is generally a transfer of property for gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.537, Installment Sales,
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-pay money.
business property, discussed in Publica- tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for othertion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in the
Assets, than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be• Transfers of property at death, covered in a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as aSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyAdministrators, and or loss.for cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- This rule does not apply to the retirement of areplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- debt instrument. See Redemption or retirementrate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. of bonds, earlier.under Nontaxable Trades, later.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Enter into an offsetting notional principal a. The position unconditionally entitles theWorthless Securities
contract relating to the same or substan- holder to receive a specified principal
tially identical property, amount,Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than
those held for sale by a securities dealer) that • Enter into a futures or forward contract to b. The interest payments (or other similarbecame completely worthless during the tax deliver the same or substantially identical amounts) with respect to the positionyear are treated as though they were sold on the property (including a forward contract that are payable at a fixed rate or a variablelast day of the tax year. This affects whether provides for cash settlement), or rate described in Regulations sectionyour capital loss is long-term or short-term. See 1.860G-1(a)(3), and• Acquire the same or substantially identicalHolding Period, later.
property (if the appreciated financial posi- c. The position is not convertible, eitherWorthless securities also include securities
tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional directly or indirectly, into stock of thethat you abandon after March 12, 2008. To
principal contract, or a futures or forward issuer (or any related person).abandon a security, you must permanently sur-
contract).render and relinquish all rights in the security
3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-and receive no consideration in exchange for it.
You are also treated as having made a con- scribed in (2).All the facts and circumstances determine
structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-whether the transaction is properly character-
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.tion if a person related to you enters into aized as an abandonment or other type of trans-
For the constructive sale rules, an interest in antransaction described above with a view towardaction, such as an actual sale or exchange,
actively traded trust is treated as stock unlessavoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forcontribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
substantially all of the value of the property heldthis purpose, a related person is any relatedIf you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-party described under Related Party Transac-payments on a negotiable promissory note that
tion to the definition of an appreciated financialtions, later in this chapter.you issued for stock that became worthless, you
position (explained in (2) above).can deduct these payments as losses in the Exception for nonmarketable securities.years you actually make the payments. Do not You are not treated as having made a construc- Sale of appreciated financial position. Adeduct them in the year the stock became worth- tive sale solely because you entered into a con- transaction treated as a constructive sale of anless. tract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, or appreciated financial position is not treated as a
partnership interest that is not a marketable se-How to report loss. Report worthless securi- constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-
curity if it settles within 1 year of the date youties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, cial position, as long as you continue to hold the
enter into it.whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enter original position. However, if you hold another
ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your loss in appreciated financial position and dispose of theException for certain closed transactions.
parentheses in column (f). original position before closing the transactionDo not treat a transaction as a constructive sale
that resulted in the constructive sale, you areif all of the following are true.Filing a claim for refund. If you do not claim a treated as if, at the same time, you construc-loss for a worthless security on your original 1. You closed the transaction on or before tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-return for the year it becomes worthless, you can the 30th day after the end of your tax year. tion.file a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss.
You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- 2. You held the appreciated financial position
Section 1256 Contractsvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return throughout the 60-day period beginning on
for the year the security became worthless. You the date you closed the transaction. Marked to Market
must file it within 7 years from the date your 3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at any If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end oforiginal return for that year had to be filed, or 2 time during that 60-day period by holding the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever certain other positions. at its fair market value on the last business dayis later. (Claims not due to worthless securities
of the tax year.or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 If a closed transaction is reestablished in a
years from the date a return is filed, or 2 years substantially similar position during the 60-day
from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) period beginning on the date the first transaction
Section 1256 ContractFor more information about filing a claim, see was closed, this exception still applies if the
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- reestablished position is closed before the 30th A section 1256 contract is any:peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. day after the end of your tax year in which the
first transaction was closed and, after that clos- • Regulated futures contract,
ing, (2) and (3) above are true.Constructive Sales • Foreign currency contract,This exception also applies to successiveof Appreciated short sales of an entire appreciated financial • Nonequity option,Financial Positions position. For more information, see Revenue • Dealer equity option, orRuling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue BulletinYou are treated as having made a constructive 2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/ • Dealer securities futures contract.sale when you enter into certain transactions pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf.involving an appreciated financial position (de-
Regulated futures contract. This is a con-fined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or Appreciated financial position. This is any
tract that:certain debt instruments. You must recognize interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debt
gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair instrument (including a futures or forward con- • Provides that amounts that must be de-market value on the date of the constructive tract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing of posited to, or can be withdrawn from, yoursale. This gives you a new holding period for the the interest would result in a gain. margin account depend on daily marketposition that begins on the date of the construc- conditions (a system of marking to mar-Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction, ket), andtion does not include the following.you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by
• Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, athe gain recognized on the constructive sale. 1. Any position from which all of the apprecia- qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedConstructive sale. You are treated as having tion is accounted for under marked to mar- board of exchange is a domestic board ofmade a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- ket rules, including section 1256 contracts trade designated as a contract market bynancial position if you: (described later under Section 1256 Con- the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-tracts Marked to Market).• Enter into a short sale of the same or sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-
substantially identical property, 2. Any position in a debt instrument if: proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or a national securities exchange regis- Equity option. This is any option: rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-
tered with the Securities and Exchange nated or transferred during the tax year. In this• To buy or sell stock, orCommission. case, use the fair market value of each section
• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-
erence to any stock or narrow-based se- fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orForeign currency contract. This is a contract curity index. transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-that: ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-
• Requires delivery of a foreign currency gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.Equity options include options on a group ofthat has positions traded through regu- stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock Loss carryback election. An individual hav-lated futures contracts (or settlement of index. ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (definedwhich depends on the value of that type of
later) for 2009 can elect to carry this loss back 3foreign currency), Dealer securities futures contract. For
years, instead of carrying it over to the next year.any dealer in securities futures contracts or op-• Is traded in the interbank market, and See How To Report, later, for information abouttions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-
reporting this election on your return.• Is entered into at arm's length at a price tures contract (or option on such a contract) that:
determined by reference to the price in the The loss carried back to any year under this• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in theinterbank market. election cannot be more than the net sectioncase of an option, is purchased or granted 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, theby the dealer) in the normal course of theBank forward contracts with maturity dates amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yeardealer's activity of dealing in this type ofthat are longer than the maturities ordinarily cannot increase or produce a net operating losscontract (or option), andavailable for regulated futures contracts are con- for that year.
sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur- • Is traded on a qualified board or exchange The loss is carried to the earliest carryback
rency contract if the above three conditions are (as defined under Regulated futures con- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can
satisfied. tract, earlier). then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur- each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackA securities futures contract that is not a dealerrency transactions. These transactions may re- amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as asecurities futures contract is treated as de-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-scribed later under Securities Futures Con-details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 tracts.tracts.and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-
1.988-3. tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,Marked to Market Rules the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,Nonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearA section 1256 contract that you hold at the end(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- following the loss. (See Capital Losses  underof the tax year will generally be treated as sold atquity options include debt options, commodity Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-its fair market value on the last business day offutures options, currency options, and ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossthe tax year, and you must recognize any gain orbroad-based stock index options. A year, you had an additional short-term capitalloss that results. That gain or loss is taken intobroad-based stock index is based upon the gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256account in figuring your gain or loss when youvalue of a group of diversified stocks or securi- contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearslater dispose of the contract, as shown in theties (such as the Standard and Poor's 500 in- and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%example under 60/40 rule, below.dex). of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatWarrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts for that year.Hedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index.
Net section 1256 contracts loss. This lossCash-settled options. Cash-settled op- 60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys- is the lesser of:tions based on a stock index and either traded tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be • The net capital loss for your tax year de-on or subject to the rules of a qualified board of treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and termined by taking into account only theexchange are nonequity options if the Securities 40% will be treated as a short-term capital gain gains and losses from section 1256 con-and Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long you tracts, orthat the stock index is broad based. actually held the property.
This rule does not apply to options estab- • The capital loss carryover to the next taxlished before the SEC determines that the stock Example. On June 22, 2008, you bought a year determined without this election.index is broad based. regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
cember 31, 2008 (the last business day of your Net section 1256 contracts gain. This gainListed option. This is any option that is
tax year), the fair market value of the contract is the lesser of:traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under • The capital gain net income for the car-your 2008 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract ). A listed option, ryback year determined by taking into ac-and 40% short-term capital gain.however, does not include an option that is a count only gains and losses from sectionOn February 1, 2009, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer. 1256 contracts, orfor $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
gain on your 2008 return, you recognize aDealer equity option. This is any listed option • The capital gain net income for that year.
$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2009that, for an options dealer:
tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%• Is an equity option, Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain forshort-term capital loss. any carryback year without regard to the net• Is bought or granted by that dealer in the Limited partners or entrepreneurs. The section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year ornormal course of the dealer's business ac- 60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op- any later tax year.tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts that
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or• Is listed on the qualified board of ex-
partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts ischange where that dealer is registered.
under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these capital gain or loss subject to the marked to
gains or losses are treated as short term.An ªoptions dealerº is any person registered market rules. However, this does not apply to
with an appropriate national securities ex- contracts held for purposes of hedging property
change as a market maker or specialist in listed Terminations and transfers. The marked to if any loss from the property would be an ordi-
options. market rules also apply if your obligation or nary loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Treatment of underlying property. The limited partner) and who does not actively par- Fair market value
determination of whether an individual's gain or ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Original issue discount (OID)loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain est is not considered held by a limited partner
or loss is made without regard to the fact that the or entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
individual is actively engaged in dealing in or participates (or did so for at least 5 full years) Basis is a way of measuring your investment in
trading section 1256 contracts related to that in the management of the entity, or is the property for tax purposes. You must know the
property. spouse, child (including a legally adopted basis of your property to determine whether youchild), grandchild, or parent of an individual have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-who actively participates in the management of tion.How To Report the entity. Investment property you buy normally has an
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyIf you disposed of regulated futures or foreign Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner in some way other than buying it, such as by giftcurrency contracts in 2009 (or had unrealized or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-profit or loss on these contracts that were open hedging loss you can claim is limited. A ªhedging portant in figuring the basis.at the end of 2008 or 2009), you should receive lossº is the amount by which the allowable de-
Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-
your broker. Cost Basising transaction (determined without regard to
the limit) are more than the income received or The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gains accrued during the tax year from this transac- The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and tion. obligations, or other property or services.Straddles, to report your gains and losses from Any hedging loss that is allocated to you forall section 1256 contracts that are open at the the tax year is limited to your taxable income forend of the year or that were closed out during Unstated interest. If you buy property on athat year from the trade or business in which thethe year. This includes the amount shown in box time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amount est, the basis of your property is your stateding transaction items in determining this taxableof these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form purchase price, minus the amount considered toincome. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your be unstated interest. You generally have un-lowed because of this limit, you can carry it overincome tax return. stated interest if your interest rate is less thanto the next tax year as a deduction resulting from the applicable federal rate. For more informa-If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a a hedging transaction. tion, see Unstated Interest and  Original Issuestraddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it If the hedging transaction relates to property Discount (OID) in Publication 537.may be necessary to show certain adjustments other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-tions for completing Part I. Basis Other Than Costpreneur is an individual.
The limit on hedging losses does not apply toLoss carryback election. To carry back your There are times when you must use a basis
any hedging loss to the extent that it is moreloss under the election procedures described other than cost. In these cases, you may need to
than all your unrecognized gains from hedgingearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- know the property's fair market value or the
transactions at the end of the tax year that aretion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which adjusted basis of the previous owner.
from the trade or business in which the hedgingyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form
transaction occurred. The term ªunrecognized6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. Fair market value. This is the price at which
gainº has the same meaning as defined underFollow the instructions for completing Form the property would change hands between a
Straddles, later.6781 for the loss year to make this election. buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy or
sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
Sale of property used in a hedge. Once you all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,
Hedging Transactions identify personal property as being part of a around the same date, may be helpful in figuring
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its fair market value.The marked to market rules, described earlier, sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac- gain.
tion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow- Property Received for Servicesing conditions are met.
Self-Employment Income If you receive investment property for services,1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- you must include the property's fair market valuemal course of your trade or business pri- Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course in income. The amount you include in incomemarily to manage the risk of: of a commodity or option dealer's trading in then becomes your basis in the property. If the
section 1256 contracts and property related to services were performed for a price that wasa. Price changes or currency fluctuations these contracts are included in net earnings agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedon ordinary property you hold (or will from self-employment. See the Instructions for as the fair market value of the property if there ishold), or Schedule SE (Form 1040). In addition, the rules no evidence to the contrary.
relating to contributions to self-employment re-b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur-
tirement plans apply. For information on retire-rency fluctuations, on your current or Restricted property. If you receive, as pay-ment plan contributions, see Publication 560,future borrowings or ordinary obliga- ment for services, property that is subject toRetirement Plans for Small Business, and Publi-tions. certain restrictions, your basis in the propertycation 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements generally is its fair market value when it be-(IRAs). 2. You clearly identified the transaction as comes substantially vested. Property becomesbeing a hedging transaction before the substantially vested when it is transferable or isclose of the day on which you entered no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,into it. whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
erty in Publication 525 for more information.Basis ofThis hedging transaction exception does not
apply to transactions entered into by or for any
Investment Property Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentsyndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
property at less than fair market value, as pay-poration, or other entity (other than a regular
ment for services, you must include the differ-corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its Terms you may need to know
ence in income. Your basis in the property is thelosses to limited partners or limited entrepre- (see Glossary):
price you pay plus the amount you include inneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who
income.has an interest in an enterprise (but not as a Basis
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value ............ . $101,000No gain or loss. If you use the basis forProperty Received
Minus: Adjusted basis ......... .  40,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and thenin Taxable Trades
Net increase in value of gift ..... . $ 61,000use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is
If you received investment property in trade for a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.
Gift tax paid ............... . $ 21,000other property, the basis of the new property is
Multiplied by .693 ($61,000 ÷its fair market value at the time of the trade Example. You receive a gift of investment $88,000) ................. . .693unless you received the property in a nontaxable property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at Gift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,553trade. the time of the gift. The fair market value at the Plus: Adjusted basis of property to time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the your mother ............... . 40,000Example. You trade A Company stock for B property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor Your basis in the property $ 54,553Company stock having a fair market value of loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and
$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company $9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and Part sale, part gift. If you get property in again on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A $9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourCompany stock is more than $1,200, you have a basis is the larger of the amount you paid for thedeductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B Fair market value equal to or more than do- property or the transferor's adjusted basis in theCompany stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B nor's adjusted basis. If the fair market value property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatCompany stock for $1,300, you will have a gain of the property at the time of the gift was equal to amount the amount of any gift tax paid on theof $100. or more than the donor's adjusted basis just gift, as described in the preceding discussion.
before the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its For figuring loss, your basis is limited to the
sale or other disposition is the donor's adjusted property's fair market value at the time of theProperty Received basis plus or minus any required adjustments to transfer.in Nontaxable Trades basis during the period you hold the property.
Also, you may be allowed to add to the donor'sIf you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec- Gift tax information. For information on gift
adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid,ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate
depending on the date of the gift.property you received in the trade. See Nontax- and Gift Taxes.
able Trades, later. Gift received before 1977. If you received
The basis of property you received in a non- property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the Property Received as Inheritancetaxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally property is the donor's adjusted basis increased
the same as the adjusted basis of the property by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However, If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash your basis cannot be more than the fair market erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-you paid, additional costs you had, and any gain value of the gift at the time it was given to you. praised value on Form 706, United Statesrecognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or
Estate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Taxunlike property you received, any loss recog- Example 1. You were given XYZ Company Return) on:nized, and any liability of yours that was as- stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock
sumed or treated as assumed. • The date of the decedent's death, orhad a fair market value of $21,000. The donor's
adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a • The later alternate valuation date if the
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-Property Received loss is $20,500, the donor's adjusted basis plus ternate valuation.From Your Spouse the amount of gift tax paid.
If no Form 706 was filed, use the appraisedIf property is transferred to you from your spouse value on the date of death for state inheritanceExample 2. The facts are the same as in(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to or transmission taxes. For stocks and bonds, ifExample 1  except that the gift tax paid wasyour divorce), your basis is the same as your no Form 706 was filed and there are no state$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's ad-spouse's or former spouse's adjusted basis just inheritance or transmission taxes, see the Formjusted basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited tobefore the transfer. See Transfers Between 706 instructions for figuring the fair market valuethe fair market value of the stock at the time ofSpouses, later. of the stocks and bonds on the date of thethe gift.
decedent's death.Recordkeeping. The transferor must
Gift received after 1976. If you receivedgive you the records necessary to de-
property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the Appreciated property you gave the dece-termine the adjusted basis and holding
RECORDS
donor's adjusted basis increased by the part of dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-period of the property as of the date of the
the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in erty that you inherited is the decedent's adjustedtransfer.
value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply- basis in the property immediately before death
ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The rather than its fair market value. This applies to
appreciated property that you or your spousenumerator (top part) is the net increase in valueProperty Received as a Gift gave the decedent as a gift during the 1-yearof the gift and the denominator (bottom part) is
period ending on the date of death. Appreciatedthe amount of the gift.To figure your basis in property that you re-
property is any property whose fair market valueceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted The net increase in value of the gift is the fair
on the day you gave it to the decedent was morebasis to the donor just before it was given to you, market value of the gift minus the donor's ad-
than its adjusted basis.its fair market value at the time it was given to justed basis. The amount of the gift is its value
you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-
date it was given to you. More information. See Publication 551, Ba-nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-
sis of Assets, for more information on the basistion that applies to the gift.
of inherited property, including community prop-Fair market value less than donor's adjusted
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a jointExample. In 2009, you received a gift ofbasis. If the fair market value of the property at
tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualifiedproperty from your mother. At the time of the gift,the time of the gift was less than the donor's
joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-the property had a fair market value of $101,000adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for
ness.and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Thegain on its sale or other disposition is the same
amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasas the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus any
required adjustments to basis during the period $88,000 ($101,000 minus the $13,000 annual Adjusted Basis
you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax of
fair market value at the time of the gift plus or Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,$21,000. You figure your basis in the following
minus any required adjustments to basis during exchange, or other disposition of property orway:
the period you hold the property. figure allowable depreciation, depletion, or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amortization, you usually must make certain ad- • Receive a written confirmation of this from is the purchase price plus a share of the broker's
commission.your broker or other agent within a reason-justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-
able time.sis of the property. The result of these
Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici-adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.
pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveIf you sell part of the stock represented by aAdjustments to the basis of stocks and stock from the corporation at a discount, yoursingle certificate directly to the buyer instead ofbonds are explained in the following discussion. basis is the full fair market value of the stock onthrough a broker, you will make an adequateFor information about other adjustments to ba- the dividend payment date. You must includeidentification if you keep a written record of thesis, see Publication 551. the amount of the discount in your income.particular stock that you intend to sell.
Public utilities. If, before 1986, you ex-Bonds. These methods of identificationStocks and Bonds
cluded from income the value of stock you hadalso apply to bonds sold or transferred.
received under a qualified public utility reinvest-The basis of stocks or bonds you own generally Identification not possible. If you buy and ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase, sell securities at various times in varying quanti-such as commissions and recording or transfer ties and you cannot adequately identify the Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other than shares you sell, the basis of the securities you butions made by a corporation of its own stock.by purchase, your basis is usually determined sell is the basis of the securities you acquired Generally, stock dividends are not taxable toby fair market value or the previous owner's first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis- you. However, see Distributions of Stock andadjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basis cussed later, you cannot use the average price Stock Rights under Dividends and Other Corpo-Other Than Cost. per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the rate Distributions in chapter 1 for some excep-The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer- shares. tions. If the stock dividends are not taxable, youtain events that occur after purchase. For exam- must divide your basis for the old stock betweenple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable Example. You bought 100 shares of stock the old and new stock.stock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce of XYZ Corporation in 1995 for $10 a share. In
New and old stock identical. If the newthe basis of your original stock. You must also January 1996 you bought another 200 shares
stock you received as a nontaxable dividend isreduce your basis when you receive nondivi- for $11 a share. In July 1996 you gave your son
identical to the old stock on which the dividenddend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). 50 shares. In December 1998 you bought 100
was declared, divide the adjusted basis of theThese distributions, up to the amount of your shares for $9 a share. In April 2009 you sold 130
old stock by the number of shares of old andshares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-basis, are a nontaxable return of capital. new stock. The result is your basis for eachposed of, so you must use the stock you ac-The IRS partners with companies that share of stock.quired first to figure the basis. The shares ofoffer Schedule D software that can im- stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50port trades from many brokerage firms Example 1. You owned one share of com-
TIP×  $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares ofand accounting software to help you keep track mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora-stock you sold in 2009 as follows:of your adjusted basis in securities. To find out tion distributed two new shares of common
more, go to http://www.irs.gov/efile/topic/index. stock for each share held. You then had three50 shares (50 ×  $10) balance of
html. shares of common stock. Your basis in eachstock bought in 1995 ......... . $ 500
share is $15 ($45 ÷  3).80 shares (80 ×  $11) stock bought in
January 1996 .............. . 880Identifying stock or bonds sold. If you can Example 2. You owned two shares of com-Total basis of stock sold in 2009 $1,380adequately identify the shares of stock or the mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and thebonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other other for $45. The corporation distributed twobasis of the particular shares of stock or bonds. Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis new shares of common stock for each share
of shares in a mutual fund (or other regulatedAdequate identification. You will make an held. You had six shares after the distributionÐ
investment company) or a real estate invest-adequate identification if you show that certifi- three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷  3) and
ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷  3).cates representing shares of stock from a lot that
same way as the basis of other stock.you bought on a certain date or for a certain New and old stock not identical. If theprice were delivered to your broker or other Mutual fund load charges. Your cost basis new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-agent. in a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also dend is not identical to the old stock on which it
known as a load charge. But, in certain cases, was declared, the basis of the new stock isBroker holds stock. If you have left the
you cannot include the entire amount of a load calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisstock certificates with your broker or other
charge in your basis if the charge gives you a of the old stock between the old and the newagent, you will make an adequate identification if
reinvestment right. For more information, see stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachyou:
Publication 564. lot of stock to the total fair market value of both• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.Choosing average basis for mutual fundlar stock to be sold or transferred at the shares. You can choose to use the averagetime of the sale or transfer, and Example. You bought a share of commonbasis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed• Receive a written confirmation of this from shares at various times and prices and left them a share of preferred stock for each share ofyour broker or other agent within a reason- on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or common stock held. At the date of distribution,able time. agent. The methods you can use to figure aver- your common stock had a fair market value ofage basis are explained in Publication 564. $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market
Stock identified this way is the stock sold or Undistributed capital gains. If you had to value of $50. You figure the basis of the old and
transferred even if stock certificates from a dif- include in your income any undistributed capital new stock by dividing your $100 basis between
ferent lot are delivered to the broker or other gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your them. The basis of your common stock is $75
agent. basis in the stock by the difference between the ($150/$200 ×  $100), and the basis of the new
amount you included and the amount of tax paid preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 ×  $100).Single stock certificate. If you bought for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributedstock in different lots at different times and you Stock bought at various times. Figure thecapital gains of mutual funds and REITs  underhold a single stock certificate for this stock, you basis of stock dividends received on stock youCapital Gain Distributions in chapter 1.will make an adequate identification if you: bought at various times and at different prices by
allocating to each lot of stock the share of the• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Automatic investment service. If you partici- stock dividends due to it.lar stock to be sold or transferred when pate in an automatic investment service, your
you deliver the certificate to your broker or basis for each share of stock, including frac- Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi-
other agent, and tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis of
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your new stock is its fair market value on the basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 See Payments in lieu of dividends , later, for
date of distribution. The basis of your old stock information about deducting payments in lieu ofper share. The remaining basis of the old stock
does not change. dividends.is $21.78 per share.
Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at aStock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits in Investment property received in liquidation. premium, the premium is treated as part of yourthe same way as stock dividends if identical In general, if you receive investment property as basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize thestock is distributed on the stock held. a distribution in partial or complete liquidation of premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-a corporation and if you recognize gain or loss duce the basis of the bond by the amortized partStock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire when you acquire the property, your basis in the of the premium each year over the life of thea corporation's stock. It may be exercised, it may property is its fair market value at the time of the bond.be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire. distribution. Although you cannot deduct the premium onStock rights are rarely taxable when you receive
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-them. See Distributions of Stock and Stock S corporation stock. You must increase your termine your adjusted basis in the bond. YouRights under Dividends and Other Corporate basis in stock of an S corporation by your pro must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-Distributions in chapter 1. rata share of the following items. mium you amortized for the period you held theTaxable stock rights. If you receive stock bond.• All income items of the S corporation, in-rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights is See Bond Premium Amortization in chaptercluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-their fair market value at the time of distribution. 3 for more information.rately stated and passed through to you asThe basis of the old stock does not change. a shareholder. Market discount on bonds. If you includeNontaxable stock rights. If you receive • The nonseparately stated income of the S market discount on a bond in income currently,nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex- corporation. increase the basis of your bond by the amount ofpire, they have no basis. market discount you include in your income. SeeIf you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock • The amount of the deduction for depletion Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for morerights and if, at the time of distribution, the stock (other than oil and gas depletion) that is information.rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of more than the basis of the property being
the fair market value of the old stock, you must depleted. Bonds purchased at par value. A bond pur-
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be- chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a You must decrease your basis in stock of an S mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise
ratio of the fair market value of each to the total corporation by your pro rata share of the follow- dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss
fair market value of both at the time of distribu- ing items. by comparing the bond proceeds to the
tion. purchase price of the bond.• Distributions by the S corporation thatIf the fair market value of the stock rights was were not included in your income.less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, you Example. You purchased a bond several
can choose to divide the basis of the old stock • All loss and deduction items of the S cor- years ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold
between the old stock and the stock rights. To poration that are separately stated and the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain
make the choice, attach a statement to your passed through to you. of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for
return for the year in which you received the $9,900, you would have a loss of $100.• Any nonseparately stated loss of the Srights, stating that you choose to divide the basis corporation. Acquisition discount on short-term obliga-of the stock.
tions. If you include acquisition discount on a• Any expense of the S corporation that isBasis of new stock. If you exercise the short-term obligation in your income currently,not deductible in figuring its taxable in-stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost increase the basis of the obligation by thecome and not properly chargeable to aplus the basis of the stock rights exercised. amount of acquisition discount you include incapital account. your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-
Example. You own 100 shares of ABC • The amount of your deduction for deple- gations in chapter 1 for more information.
Company stock, which cost you $22 per share. tion of oil and gas wells to the extent the Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable deduction is not more than your share of ments. Increase the basis of a debt instrumentstock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more the adjusted basis of the wells. by the amount of OID that you include in yourshares at $26 per share. At the time the stock However, your basis in the stock cannot be income. See Original Issue Discount (OID)  inrights were distributed, the stock had a market reduced below zero. chapter 1.value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each
stock right had a market value of $3. The market Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OIDSpecialized small business investment com-value of the stock rights was less than 15% of on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-pany stock or partnership interest. If youthe market value of the stock, but you chose to able. However, when you dispose of abought this stock or interest as replacementdivide the basis of your stock between the stock tax-exempt obligation issued after September 3,property for publicly traded securities you sold atand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights 1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, youa gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock orand the basis of the old stock as follows: must accrue OID on the obligation to determineinterest by the amount of any postponed gain on
its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added tothat sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly100 shares ×  $22 = $2,200, basis of old the basis of the obligation to determine your gainTraded Securities, later.stock or loss.
For information on determining OID on aQualified small business stock. If you100 shares ×  $30 = $3,000, market value of long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-bought this stock as replacement property forold stock sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  orother qualified small business stock you sold at Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whichever10 rights ×  $3 = $30, market value of rights a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OIDplacement stock by the amount of any post- on Long-Term Debt Instruments.($3,000 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $2,178.22, poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofnew basis of old stock Qualified Small Business Stock, later. 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for
acquisition discount on short-term obligations.($30 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $21.78, basis of Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsrights See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  inyou make to a lender in lieu of dividends on chapter 1.stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay toIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring
the lender is a capital expense, and you mustgain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷  10) per right. If Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-
add it to the basis of the stock used to close theyou exercise the rights, the basis of the stock quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon
short sale.you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis- even if neither you nor the buyer is personally 4. There must be a trade of like property. The
pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or trade of real estate for real estate, or per-liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of sonal property for similar personal prop-trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeloan, the amount you realize generally includes
these obligations in the manner described in of an apartment house for a store building,the full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons. or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is aeven if the amount of the note is more than the
Increase your basis in the stripped trade of like property. The trade of a piecefair market value of the property.
tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and of machinery for a store building is not a
nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba- trade of like property. Real property lo-Example. You sell stock that you had
sis by the interest that accrued (but was not cated in the United States and real prop-pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
paid, and was not previously reflected in your erty located outside the United States areYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
basis) before the date you sold the bond or not like property. Also, personal propertypays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in
coupon. In addition, for bonds acquired after used predominantly within the Unitedcash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
June 10, 1987, add to your basis any accrued States and personal property used+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 ±
market discount not previously reflected in ba- predominantly outside the United States$6,000).
sis. are not like property.Payment of cash. If you trade property and
5. The property to be received must be identi-cash for other property, the amount you realize
fied in writing within 45 days after the dateis the fair market value of the property you re-
you transfer the property given up in theceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-How To Figure trade. If you received the replacementtracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis
property before the end of the 45-day pe-of the property you trade in from the amount youGain or Loss riod, you automatically are treated as hav-realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a
ing met the 45-day written noticegain. If the result is a negative number, it is aYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of requirement.loss.property by comparing the amount you realize
6. The property to be received must be re-with the adjusted basis of the property.
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis ceived by the earlier of:
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or for figuring gain that is different from the basis
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the a. The 180th day after the date on whichused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have
property you transfer, the difference is a gain. you transfer the property given up in theneither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
trade, orthe discussion on the basis of property you re-Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost , b. The due date, including extensions, fortransfer is more than the amount you realize, the earlier. your tax return for the year in which thedifference is a loss.
transfer of the property given up occurs.
Amount realized. The amount you realize
from a sale or trade of property is everything you If you trade property with a related party in a
receive for the property. This includes the Nontaxable Trades like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
money you receive plus the fair market value of See Related Party Transactions , later in this
This section discusses trades that generally doany property or services you receive. chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. for more information on exchanges of business
property and the debt instrument does not pro- For more information on nontaxable trades, see property and special rules for exchanges using
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated chapter 1 of Publication 544. qualified intermediaries or involving multiple
interest that you must report as ordinary income properties.
will reduce the amount realized from the sale. Like-Kind Exchanges Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receiveFor more information, see Publication 537.
money or unlike property in addition to the likeIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru- If you trade business or investment property for property, and the preceding six conditions arement to the seller of the property, the amount other business or investment property of a like met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You arerealized is determined by reference to the issue kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theprice of the debt instrument, which may or may any loss until you sell or dispose of the property amount of the money and the fair market valuenot be the fair market value of the debt instru- you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must of the unlike property you receive. You cannotment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g). meet all six of the following conditions. deduct a loss.However, if the debt instrument was previously
1. The property must be business or invest-issued by a third party (one not part of the sale Like property and unlike property trans-
ment property. You must hold both thetransaction), the fair market value of the debt ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-
property you trade and the property youinstrument is used to determine the amount real- tion to the like property, you must recognize gain
receive for productive use in your trade orized. or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
business or for investment. Neither prop- gain or loss is the difference between the ad-Fair market value. Fair market value is the erty may be property used for personal justed basis of the unlike property and its fairprice at which property would change hands purposes, such as your home or family market value.between a buyer and a seller, neither being car.forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable Like property and money transferred. If2. The property must not be held primarily forknowledge of all the relevant facts. conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-sale. The property you trade and the prop- able trade even if you pay money in addition toerty you receive must not be property youExample. You trade A Company stock with the like property.sell to customers, such as merchandise.an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
Basis of property received. You figure yourstock with a fair market value of $10,000, which 3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, basis in property received in a nontaxable oris your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 notes, choses in action, certificates of trust partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba-($10,000 ± $7,000). If you also receive a note or beneficial interest, or other securities or sis Other Than Cost, earlier.for $6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, evidences of indebtedness or interest, in-your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 ± cluding partnership interests. However, Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, or$7,000). see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser- irrigation company stock. For purposes of
voir, or irrigation company stock, later.Debt paid off. A debt against the property, item 3 above, stock does not include shares in a
Also, you can have a nontaxable trade ofor against you, that is paid off as a part of the mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company if
corporate stocks under a different rule, astransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must all of the following conditions are met at the time
discussed later under Corporate Stocks.be included in the amount realized. This is true of the trade.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation same corporation without having a recognized according to the terms of the bond issue, you
company is an organization described in gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two must recognize gain or loss up to the difference
section 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve- stockholders as well as a trade between a stock- between the fair market value of the stock re-
nue Code (determined without regard to holder and the corporation. ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-
the percentage of its income that is col- changed. In some instances, however, such asIf you receive cash for fractional shares, see
lected from its members for the purpose of trades that are part of mergers or other corpo-Fractional shares  under Distributions of stock
meeting losses and expenses). rate reorganizations, you will have no recog-and stock rights in chapter 1.
nized gain or loss if certain requirements are• The shares in the company have been Money or other property received. If in an met. For more information about the tax conse-recognized by the highest court of the otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money quences of converting securities of one corpora-state in which the company was organized or other property in addition to stock, then your tion into common stock of another corporation,or by applicable state statute as constitut- gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to under circumstances such as those just de-ing or representing real property or an in- the amount of the money or other property. Any scribed, consult the respective corporations andterest in real property. loss is not recognized. the terms of the bond issue. This information isIf you received cash for fractional shares,• The trade occurred after May 22, 2008. also available on the prospectus of the bondsee Fractional shares  under Distributions of issue.Stock and Stock Rights in chapter 1.How to report. You must report the trade of
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- Property for stock of a controlled corpora-like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop- tion. If you transfer property to a corporationnized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,
preferred stock with one or more of the followingSales of Business Property, whichever applies. and immediately after the trade you are in con-
features.For information on using Form 4797, see trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not
chapter 4 of Publication 544. recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both• The holder has the right to require the to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-issuer or a related person to redeem or
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theCorporate Stocks purchase the stock.
corporation is an investment company.
• The issuer or a related person is requiredThe following trades of corporate stocks gener- If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro-to redeem or purchase the stock.ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductible ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled
loss. corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-• The issuer or a related person has the
zation, you must recognize gain to the extent theright to redeem the stock, and on the issueCorporate reorganizations. In some in- stock you receive in the exchange is used to paydate, it is more likely than not that the rightstances, a company will give you common stock off your debts.will be exercised.for preferred stock, preferred stock for common For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-• The dividend rate on the stock varies withstock, or stock in one corporation for stock in ration, you or your group of transferors mustreference to interest rates, commodityanother corporation. If this is a result of a own, immediately after the exchange, at leastprices, or similar indices.merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled 80% of the total combined voting power of allcorporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor- For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani- ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- of the outstanding shares of each class of non-zation, you do not recognize gain or loss. nal Revenue Code. voting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you may haveExample 1. On April 18, 2009, KP1 Corpo- Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener- to attach to your return a complete statement ofration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into see Regulations section 1.351-3.$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re- common stock of the same corporation accord-ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange for ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the Money or other property received. If, in anyour KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain or bond or the preferred stock certificate. otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70 porate stock, you also receive money or prop-shares of the new stock is still $3,500. Example. In November, you bought for $1 a erty other than stock, you may have a taxable
right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on gain. However, you are taxed only up to theExample 2. On July 25, 2009, RGB Corpo- payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued amount of money plus the fair market value ofration divests itself of SFH Corporation. You by that corporation. the other property you receive. The rules forhold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of On December 2, you subscribed to the bond, figuring taxable gain in this situation generally$5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as which was issued on December 9. The bond follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangea result of the spin-off. You do not recognize any contained a clause stating that you would re- discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. Ifgain or loss on the transaction. You receive ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common the property you give up includes depreciableinformation from RGB Corporation that your ba- stock on surrender of one bond and the payment property, the taxable gain may have to be re-sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your of $50. ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis in
Later, you presented the bond and $50 and tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossSFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stock
received one share of XYZ Corporation common is recognized.(after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 ± $592).
stock. You did not have a recognized gain or Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-
loss. This is true whether the fair market value ofNote. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-
the stock was more or less than $150 on thecorporation should send you information that tion) received is generally treated as property
date of the conversion.includes details on how to allocate basis be- other than stock.
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa- Basis of stock or other property received.$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Yourtion until the period of limitations expires for the The basis of the stock you receive is generallyholding period for the part based on your owner-year in which you dispose of the stock in a the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-taxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from Increase this amount by any amount that wasber 2. Your holding period for the part based onthe date the return was due or filed, or 2 years treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognizedyour cash investment ($50 basis) begins on thefrom the date the tax was paid, whichever is on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashday after you acquired the share of stock.later. you received and the fair market value of any
other property you received.Stock for stock of the same corporation. Bonds for stock of another corporation.
The basis of any other property you receiveYou can exchange common stock for common Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the ration into common stock of another corporation,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-Insurance Policies
taxable Trades.and Annuities Transfers Between This rule also applies to trades of property
between related parties, defined next underYou will not have a recognized gain or loss if the Spouses
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How-insured or annuitant is the same under both
contracts and you trade: ever, if either you or the related party disposes ofGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
the like property within 2 years after the trade,transfer of property from an individual to (or in• A life insurance contract for another life trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to you both must report any gain or loss not recog-insurance contract or for an endowment or a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition nized on the original trade on your return for theannuity contract, rule does not apply in the following situations. year in which the later disposition occurs.
• An endowment contract for an annuity This rule generally does not apply to:• The recipient spouse or former spouse iscontract or for another endowment con- a nonresident alien. • Dispositions due to the death of either re-tract that provides for regular payments
lated party,beginning at a date not later than the be- • Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
ginning date under the old contract, or be recognized to the extent the amount of • Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 ofthe liabilities assumed by the trust, plus• An annuity contract for another annuity Publication 544), orany liabilities on the property, exceed thecontract. • Trades and later dispositions whose mainadjusted basis of the property.
purpose is not the avoidance of federal• An installment obligation is transferred inYou also may not have to recognize gain or loss income tax.trust. For information on the disposition offrom an exchange of a portion of an annuity an installment obligation, see Publicationcontract for another annuity contract. See Reve- If a property holder's risk of loss on the prop-537, Installment Sales.nue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Procedure erty is substantially diminished during any pe-
2008-24 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008-13. • Certain stock redemptions, which are tax- riod, that period is not counted in determining
Revenue Ruling 2003-76 is available at www.irs. able to a spouse under the tax law, a di- whether the property was disposed of within 2
gov/irb/2003-33_IRB/ar11.html. Revenue Pro- vorce or separation instrument, or a valid years. The property holder's risk of loss is sub-
cedure 2008-24 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/ written agreement, discussed in Regula- stantially diminished by:
2008-13_IRB/ar13.html. tions section 1.1041-2.
• The holding of a put on the property,
Exchanges of contracts not included in this Any transfer of property to a spouse or former • The holding by another person of a right tolist, such as an annuity contract for an endow- spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is acquire the property, orment contract, or an annuity or endowment con- treated by the recipient as a gift and is nottract for a life insurance contract, are taxable. • A short sale or any other transaction.considered a sale or exchange. The recipient's
basis in the property will be the same as the
adjusted basis of the giver immediately before Losses on Sales orDemutualization of Life the transfer. This carryover basis rule applies Trades of PropertyInsurance Companies whether the adjusted basis of the transferred
property is less than, equal to, or greater than You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofA life insurance company may change from a
either its fair market value at the time of transfermutual company to a stock company. This is property, other than a distribution in complete
or any consideration paid by the recipient. Thiscommonly called demutualization. If you were a liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is
rule applies for purposes of determining loss aspolicyholder or annuitant of the mutual com- directly or indirectly between you and the follow-
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transferpany, you may have received either stock in the ing related parties.
in trust increases the basis.stock company or cash in exchange for your • Members of your family. This includes onlyequity interest in the mutual company. A transfer of property is incident to a divorce your brothers and sisters, half-brothersif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the dateIf the demutualization transaction qualifies and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer isas a tax-free reorganization under section ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-related to the ending of the marriage. For more368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).information, see Property Settlements in Publi-or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. • A partnership in which you directly or indi-holding period for the new stock includes the
period you held an equity interest in the mutual rectly own more than 50% of the capital
company as a policyholder or annuitant. interest or the profits interest.
If the demutualization transaction does not • A corporation in which you directly or indi-
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec- Related Party rectly own more than 50% in value of thetion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, you outstanding stock (see Constructive own-Transactionsmust recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold- ership of stock, later).ing period for the stock does not include the
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-period you held an equity interest in the mutual
erty between related parties. ganization that is directly or indirectly con-company.
trolled, in any manner or by any method,If you received cash in exchange for your
by you or by a member of your family,Gain on Sale or Tradeequity interest, you must recognize a capital
whether or not this control is legally en-gain. If you held an equity interest for more than of Depreciable Property
forceable.1 year, your gain is long term.
Your gain from the sale or trade of property to a
related party may be ordinary income, ratherU.S. Treasury In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertythan capital gain, if the property can be depreci- is not deductible if the transaction is directly orNotes or Bonds ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in indirectly between the following related parties.Publication 544 for more information.You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryobligations for other issues, designated by the and beneficiary, of any trust.Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss Like-Kind Exchangesrecognized on the trade. • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the
fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. Generally, if you trade business or investment
trusts, if the same person is the grantor ofTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information property for other business or investment prop-
both trusts.about income from these investments. erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by you must also identify any unrecaptured section
more than 50% in value of the outstanding that individual for again applying either rule 2 or 1250 gain.
stock is directly or indirectly owned by or rule 3 to make another person the constructive The correct classification and identification
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the owner of the stock. helps you figure the limit on capital losses and
trust. the correct tax on capital gains. For informationProperty received from a related party. If about determining whether your capital gain or• A corporation and a partnership if the you sell or trade at a gain property that you loss is short term or long term, see Holdingsame persons own more than 50% in acquired from a related party, you recognize the Period, later. For information about 28% ratevalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- gain only to the extent that it is more than theporation and more than 50% of the capital gain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250loss previously disallowed to the related party.interest, or the profits interest, in the part- gain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-This rule applies only if you are the originalnership. ing Capital Gains and Losses, later.transferee and you acquired the property by
purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply• Two S corporations if the same persons
if the related party's loss was disallowed be- Capital or Ordinaryown more than 50% in value of the out-
cause of the wash sale rules, described laterstanding stock of each corporation. Gain or Lossunder Wash Sales.• Two corporations, one of which is an S If you sell or trade at a loss property that you If you have a taxable gain or a deductible losscorporation, if the same persons own acquired from a related party, you cannot recog- from a transaction, it may be either a capital gainmore than 50% in value of the outstanding nize the loss that was not allowed to the related or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending onstock of each corporation. party. the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
• An executor and a beneficiary of an estate a capital asset (defined next) results in a capitalExample 1. Your brother sells you stock for(except in the case of a sale or trade to gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brothersatisfy a pecuniary bequest). generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on• Two corporations that are members of the the same stock to an unrelated party for a sale or trade of property used in a trade orsame controlled group (under certain con- $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-ditions, however, these losses are not dis- business may be treated as either capital orable gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus theallowed but must be deferred). ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).
some situations, part of your gain or loss may be• Two partnerships if the same persons a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theown, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
nary gain or loss.stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-of the capital interests or the profit inter-
nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusests in both partnerships.
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that was
Capital Assets andnot allowed to your brother.Multiple property sales or trades. If you sell Noncapital Assets
or trade to a related party a number of blocks of
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you For the most part, everything you own and use
must figure the gain or loss separately for each for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentCapital Gainsblock of stock or piece of property. The gain on is a capital asset. Some examples are:
each item may be taxable. However, you cannot and Losses • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot count,reduce gains from the sales of any of these Terms you may need to know
items by losses on the sales of any of the other • A house owned and used by you and your(see Glossary):
items. family,
Call • Household furnishings,Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct
Commodity futureyour loss on the sale of stock through your • A car used for pleasure or commuting,broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related Conversion transaction • Coin or stamp collections,party buys the same stock you had owned. This
Forward contractdoes not apply to a trade between related par- • Gems and jewelry, andties through an exchange that is purely coinci- Limited partner • Gold, silver, or any other metal.dental and is not prearranged. Listed option
Constructive ownership of stock. In deter- Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-Nonequity optionmining whether a person directly or indirectly cept the following noncapital assets. 
Options dealerowns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
1. Property held mainly for sale to customerstion, the following rules apply. Put or property that will physically become aRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by Regulated futures contract part of the merchandise that is for sale toor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust customers. For an exception see CapitalSection 1256 contractis considered owned proportionately by or for its asset treatment for self-created musicalshareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. Straddle works, later.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to own Wash sale 2. Depreciable property used in your trade orthe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by or business, even if fully depreciated.for his or her family. Family includes only broth-
ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, 3. Real property used in your trade or busi-This section discusses the tax treatment of
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ness.gains and losses from different types of invest-
ment transactions.Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic
applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is composition, a letter or memorandum, orCharacter of gain or loss. You need to clas-considered to own the stock that is directly or similar property that is:sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orindirectly owned by or for his or her partner. capital gains or losses. You then need to classify a. Created by your personal efforts,Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock your capital gains and losses as either short
b. Prepared or produced for you (in theconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 is term or long term. If you have long-term gains
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-treated as actually owned by that person. But and losses, you must identify your 28% rate
lar property), orstock constructively owned by an individual gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex- You must make a separate election for each Any gain from market discount is usually
musical composition (or copyright in a musical taxable on disposition or redemption ofample, by gift) entitling you to the basis
work) sold or exchanged during the tax year. tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bondsof the person who created the property
You must make the election on or before the due before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-or for whom it was prepared or pro-
date (including extensions) of the income tax count is capital gain. If you bought the bondsduced.
return for the tax year of the sale or exchange. after April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis-For an exception to this rule, see Capital You must make the election on Schedule D count is ordinary income.asset treatment for self-created musical (Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange as You figure market discount by subtractingworks, later. the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord- the price you paid for the bond from the sum of
ing to the Schedule D and its instructions. the original issue price of the bond and the5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
You can revoke the election if you have IRS amount of accumulated OID from the date ofthe ordinary course of a trade or business
approval. To get IRS approval, you must submit issue that represented interest to any earlierfor services rendered or from the sale of
a request for a letter ruling under the appropriate holders. For more information, see Market Dis-property described in (1).
IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev. count Bonds in chapter 1.6. U.S. Government publications that you re- Proc. 2009-1, 2009-1 I.R.B. 1, available at www. A loss on the sale or other disposition of aceived from the government free or for less irs.gov/irb/2009-01_IRB/ar06.html . Alterna- tax-exempt state or local government bond isthan the normal sales price, or that you tively, you are granted an automatic 6-month deductible as a capital loss.acquired under circumstances entitling you extension from the due date of your income tax Redeemed before maturity. If a state orto the basis of someone who received the return (excluding extensions) to revoke the elec- local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,publications free or for less than the nor- tion, provided you timely file your income tax is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notmal sales price. return, and within this 6-month extension period, taxable to you.you file Form 1040X, Amended Individual In-7. Certain commodities derivative financial in- If a state or local bond issued after June 8,come Tax Return, that treats the sale or ex-struments held by commodities derivatives 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofchange as the sale or exchange of property thatdealers. For more information, see section the OID that is earned while you hold the bond isis not a capital asset.1221 of the Internal Revenue Code. not taxable to you. However, you must report the
unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
action is clearly identified as a hedging Discounted Debt Instruments Example. On July 1, 1998, the date of is-transaction before the close of the day on
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondwhich it was acquired, originated, or en- Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
for $800. The face amount of the bond wastered into. For more information, see the or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timeoriginally issued at a discount or bought at adefinition of hedging transaction earlier,
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentiondiscount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-and the discussion of hedging transactions
of redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasplained in the following discussions.under Commodity Futures, later.
callable at its face amount beginning 10 years
Short-term government obligations. Treat9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or after the issue date.
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-consume in the ordinary course of your The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-trade or business. 11 years (July 1, 2009) for its face amount of
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The
share of the acquisition discount. This treatment OID earned during the time you held the bond,Investment property. Investment property is applies to obligations that have a fixed maturity $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annuala capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or date not more than 1 year from the date of issue. interest also is not taxable. However, you musttrade generally is a capital gain or loss. Acquisition discount is the stated redemption report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. capital gain.
tion.These are capital assets except when they are
Long-term debt instruments issued afterHowever, do not treat these gains as incomeheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julyto the extent you previously included the dis-their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
2, 1982, if a government instrument). If youcount in income. See Discount on Short-Termloss.
sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseObligations in chapter 1 for more information.Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of debt instruments, the part of your gain that is notShort-term nongovernment obligations.these, including stock received as a dividend, more than your ratable share of the OID at theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-are capital assets except when they are held for time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.gations as ordinary income up to your ratablesale by a securities dealer. However, see The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock there was an intention to call the debt instrumenttions that have a fixed maturity date of not moreand Losses on Small Business Investment before maturity, all of your gain that is not morethan 1 year from the date of issue.Company Stock, later. than the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomeHowever, to the extent you previously in- at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxablecluded the discount in income, you do not havePersonal use property. Property held for per- gain also applies to corporate instruments is-to include it in income again. See Discount onsonal use only, rather than for investment, is a sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-Short-Term Obligations  in chapter 1 for morecapital asset, and you must report a gain from its mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andinformation.sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot at all times thereafter.
deduct a loss from selling personal use property. Tax-exempt state and local government
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu- at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April
sical works. You can elect to treat musical acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your 1, 1982, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2009,
compositions and copyrights in musical works part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.
as capital assets when you sell or exchange your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these At the time of original issue, there was no inten-
them if: bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part tion to call the bond before maturity. You have
of the OID. held the bond for 324 full months. Do not count• Your personal efforts created the property, If the bonds were issued after September 3, the additional days that are less than a fullor 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- month. The number of complete months from
• You acquired the property under circum- crease the adjusted basis by your part of the date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30
stances (for example, by gift) entitling you OID to figure gain or loss. For more information years). The fraction 324/360 multiplied by the
to the basis of the person who created the on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to
property or for whom it was prepared or tax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and $270. This is your ratable share of OID for the
produced. Bonds, earlier in this chapter. period you owned the bond. You must treat any
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part of the gain up to $270 as ordinary income. • Issued before July 19, 1984, and Deposit in Insolvent or 
As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated as Bankrupt Financial Institution• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.ordinary income.
If you lose money you have on deposit in a bank,
Long-term debt instruments issued after credit union, or other financial institution thatIn that case, any gain is treated as interest
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may be ableincome up to the amount of your deferred inter-
ernment instrument). If you hold one of these est deduction for the year you dispose of the to deduct your loss in one of three ways.
debt instruments, you must include a part of the bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The • Ordinary loss,OID in your gross income each year that you limit on the interest deduction for market dis-
own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- • Casualty loss, orcount bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under
strument is increased by the amount of OID that When To Deduct Investment Interest.) • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalyou have included in your gross income. See
Report the sale or trade of a market discount loss).Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.
bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didmaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you cannot choose to include market discount in incomeat the time the instrument was originally issued reasonably estimate your loss, you can choosecurrently, enter ªAccrued Market Discountº onthere was an intention to call it before its matur- to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinarythe next line in column (a) and the amount of theity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eitheraccrued market discount as a loss in column (f).extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-Also report the amount of accrued market dis-of OID previously includible in your income. In tion.count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1, and identifyAn intention to call a debt instrument before miscellaneous itemized deduction on Scheduleit as ªAccrued Market Discount.ºmaturity means there is a written or oral agree- A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amountment or understanding not provided for in the Retirement of debt instrument. Any amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you aredebt instrument between the issuer and original that you receive on the retirement of a debt married filing separately) reduced by any ex-holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- instrument is treated in the same way as if you pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- had sold or traded that instrument. subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomements that are part of an issue, the agreement or Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryunderstanding must be between the issuer and of an individual that was issued with OID after loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.the original holders of a substantial amount of March 1, 1984, you generally must include the If you claim a casualty loss, attach Formthe debt instruments in the issue. OID in your income currently, and your gain or 4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.
loss on its sale or retirement is generally capital Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalExample 1. On February 2, 2007, you gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor- plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- of your adjusted gross income.poration's 10-year, 5% bond which has a stated als and all of the following requirements are met.redemption price at maturity of $10,000. On You cannot choose either of these methods
February 4, 2009, you sold the bond for $9,040. • The lender is not in the business of lend- if:
Assume you have included $334 of the OID in ing money. • You own at least 1% of the financial insti-your gross income (including the amount ac- • The amount of the loan, plus the amount tution,crued for 2009) and increased your basis in the of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000bond by that amount. Your basis is now $7,934. • You are an officer of the institution, oror less.If at the time of the original issue there was no • You are related to such an owner or of-intention to call the bond before maturity, your • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- ficer. You are related if you and the ownergain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus cipal purposes of the loan. or officer are ªrelated parties,º as defined$7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.
earlier under Related Party Transactions,If the exception applies, or the obligation was
or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include
niece of the owner or officer.original issue there was an intention to call the the OID in your income currently. When you sell
bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinary or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain
If the actual loss that is finally determined isincome. You figure this as follows: that is not more than your accrued share of the
more than the amount you deducted as an esti-OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the
redemption price at maturity minus bad debt. If the actual loss is less than thesale or redemption is capital loss.
$7,600 issue price) ......... . $2,400 amount deducted as an estimated loss, you
2) Minus: Amount previously included must include in income (in the final determina-
in income ............... . 334 tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-Bearer Obligations3) Maximum amount of ordinary eries  in Publication 525, Taxable andincome ................. . $2,066 You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation Nontaxable Income.
required to be in registered form that is insteadBecause the amount in (3) is more than your held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choosegain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in- sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty losscome. nary income. However, if the issuer was subject or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year theto a tax when the obligation was issued, thenMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- amount of the actual loss is determined andyou can deduct any loss, and any gain mayment has market discount and you chose to deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.qualify for capital gain treatment.include the discount in income as it accrued, Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-
increase your basis in the debt instrument by the Obligations required to be in registered ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi-
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on form. Any obligation must be in registered ness Bad Debts, later.
its disposition. If you did not choose to include form unless:
the discount in income as it accrued, you must • It is issued by a natural person,report gain as ordinary interest income up to the Sale of Annuity
instrument's accrued market discount. See Mar- • It is not of a type offered to the public,
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the • It has a maturity at the date of issue of notgain is capital gain. contract before its maturity date that is based onmore than 1 year, or interest accumulated on the contract is ordinaryHowever, a different rule applies if you dis-
pose of a market discount bond that was: • It was issued before 1983. income.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The rates discussed above are published by Hedging transaction.  A futures contract thatConversion Transactions
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion can contact the IRS to get these rates. See dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
transaction is treated as ordinary income. This chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS. ing transaction if you enter into the contract in
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi- the ordinary course of your business primarily to
nation of any position you held as part of a manage the risk of interest rate or price changesNet investment. To determine your net in-conversion transaction that you entered into af- or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinaryvestment in a conversion transaction, includeter April 30, 1993. property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-the fair market value of any position at the time it
dinary property or obligations are those that can-becomes part of the transaction. This meansA conversion transaction is any transaction
not produce capital gain or loss under anythat your net investment generally will be thethat meets both of these tests.
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-total amount you invested, less any amount you
1. Substantially all of your expected return cise of a futures contract that protects againstreceived for entering into the position (for exam-
from the transaction is due to the time price changes in your business inventory resultsple, a premium you received for writing a call).
value of your net investment. In other in an ordinary gain or loss.
words, the return on your investment is, in Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap- For more information about hedging transac-substance, like interest on a loan. plies when a position with a built-in loss be- tions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,
comes part of a conversion transaction. A see Hedging Transactions under Section 12562. The transaction is one of the following.
built-in loss is any loss that you would have Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
a. A straddle as defined under Straddles, realized if you had disposed of or otherwise If you have multiple transactions in thelater, but including any set of offsetting terminated the position at its fair market value at commodity futures market during thepositions on stock established before the time it became part of the conversion trans- year, the burden of proof is on you to
RECORDSOctober 22, 2004. action. show which transactions are hedging transac-When applying the conversion transactionb. Any transaction in which you acquire tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionsrules to a position with a built-in loss, use theproperty (whether or not actively traded) on your books and records before the end of theposition's fair market value at the time it becameat substantially the same time that you day you entered into the transaction. It may bepart of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofcontract to sell the same property, or helpful to have separate brokerage accounts foror otherwise terminate the position in a transac-substantially identical property, at a your hedging and nonhedging transactions. Fortion in which you recognize gain or loss, youprice set in the contract. specific requirements concerning identificationmust recognize the built-in loss. The conversion of hedging transactions and the underlying item,c. Any other transaction that is marketed transaction rules do not affect whether the items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,or sold as producing capital gains from built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capital see Regulations section 1.1221-2(f).a transaction described in (1). loss.
Netting rule for certain conversion transac- Gains From Certain ConstructiveAmount treated as ordinary income. The tions. Before determining the amount of gain
Ownership Transactionsamount of gain treated as ordinary income is the treated as ordinary income, you can net certain
smaller of: gains and losses from positions of the same If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipconversion transaction. To do this, you have to• The gain recognized on the disposition or transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-other termination of the position, or volving a financial asset (discussed later) andriod that is within a single tax year. You cannot the gain normally would be treated as long-term• The ªapplicable imputed income amount.º net the built-in loss against the gain. capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated
instead as ordinary income. In addition, if anyYou can net gains and losses only if
Applicable imputed income amount. Figure gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isyou identify the conversion transaction
this amount as follows. increased by an interest charge.as an identified netting transaction on
RECORDS
your books and records. Each position of the1. Figure the amount of interest that would conversion transaction must be identified before Constructive ownership transactions. Thehave accrued on your net investment in the end of the day on which the position be- following are constructive ownership transac-the conversion transaction for the period comes part of the conversion transaction. For tions.ending on the earlier of: conversion transactions entered into before
• A notional principal contract in which youFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if thea. The date when you dispose of the posi- have the right to receive all or substantiallyidentification was made by that date.tion, or all of the investment yield on a financial
asset and you are obligated to reimburseb. The date when the transaction stops Options dealers and commodities traders. all or substantially all of any decline inbeing a conversion transaction. These rules do not apply to options dealers and value of the financial asset.commodities traders.To figure this amount, use an interest rate
• A forward or futures contract to acquire aequal to 120% of the ªapplicable rate,º de-
financial asset.fined later. How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and
Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad- • The holding of a call option and writing of2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as dles, to report conversion transactions. See the a put option on a financial asset at sub-ordinary income from any earlier disposi- instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. stantially the same strike price and matur-tion or other termination of a position held
ity date.as part of the same conversion transac-
tion. Commodity Futures This provision does not apply if all the posi-
tions are marked to market. Marked to marketApplicable rate. If the term of the conver- A commodity futures contract is a standardized, rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed insion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate exchange-traded contract for the sale or detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked tois the federal short-term rate in effect under purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a Market, earlier.section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code future date for a fixed price.during the period of the conversion transaction, If the contract is a regulated futures contract, Financial asset. A financial asset, for thiscompounded daily. the rules described earlier under Section 1256 purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the Contracts Marked to Market apply to it. entity. Pass-through entities include partner-
ªapplicable federal rateº determined as if the The termination of a commodity futures con- ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-
conversion transaction were a debt instrument tract generally results in capital gain or loss ment companies, and real estate investment
and compounded semi-annually. unless the contract is a hedging transaction. trusts.
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap- the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec- Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any
tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and itsital gain is treated as ordinary income to the other purpose.
regulations.extent it is more than the net underlying
Example. You transfer property with an ad-long-term capital gain. The net underlying The stock must be issued to the person tak- justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value oflong-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- ing the loss. You must be the original owner $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.tal gain you would have realized if you acquired of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figurethe asset for its fair market value on the date the ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis ofconstructive ownership transaction was opened, to your partnership, you must have been a part- your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youand sold the asset for its fair market value on the ner when the stock was issued and have re- later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, yourdate the transaction was closed. If you do not mained so until the time of the loss. You add $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capitalestablish the amount of net underlying long-term your distributive share of the partnership loss to loss of $750.capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, it any individual section 1244 stock loss you mayis treated as zero. have before applying the ordinary loss limit. Contributions to capital. If the basis of your
Stock distributed by partnership. If your section 1244 stock has increased, through con-More information. For more information
partnership distributes the stock to you, you can- tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treatabout constructive ownership transactions, see
not treat any later loss on that stock as an this increase as applying to stock that is notsection 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.
ordinary loss. section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary
loss on its sale.Stock sold through underwriter. Stock
Losses on Section 1244 sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 Example. You buy 100 shares of section(Small Business) Stock stock unless the underwriter only acted as a 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the originalselling agent for the corporation.You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to
as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, or Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stock capital that increases the total basis of the 100
worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the you receive as a stock dividend qualifies as shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares
loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, section 1244 stock if: for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can
line 10. deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 ×  $10,000/$12,000)• You receive it from a small business cor- as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital poration in which you own stock, and maining $500 is a capital loss.gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.
• The stock you own meets the require-Do not offset gains against losses that are within Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-ments when the stock dividend is distrib-the ordinary loss limit, explained later in this ords sufficient to show your stock quali-uted.discussion, even if the transactions are in stock fies as section 1244 stock. Your
RECORDS
of the same company. Report the gain on records must also distinguish your section 1244If you trade your section 1244 stock for newSchedule D (Form 1040). stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-If you must figure a net operating loss, any ration.tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stock only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-is a business loss. ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the
Losses on Small Businessstock you trade meets the requirements whenOrdinary loss limit. The amount that you can Investment Company Stockthe trade occurs.deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 If you hold section 1244 stock and othereach year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, A small business investment company (SBIC) isstock in the same corporation, not all of the stockeven if only one spouse has this type of loss. If one that is licensed and operated under theyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no Small Business Investment Act of 1958.zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyloss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthat part based on the section 1244 stock youloss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalhold will qualify.capital loss. loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-
ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradeExample. Your basis for 100 shares of XSection 1244 (small business) stock. This is of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset yourcommon stock is $1,000. These shares qualifystock that was issued for money or property gains and losses, even if they are on stock of theas section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock(other than stock and securities) in a domestic same company.dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-small business corporation. During its 5 most mon stock, the basis of which is determined fromrecent tax years before the loss, this corporation How to report. You report this type of ordinarythe 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsomust have derived more than 50% of its gross loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tosection 1244 stock.receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- the information required by the form, you mustIf you also own stock in the corporation thatdends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales include the name and address of the companyis not section 1244 stock when you receive theand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- that issued the stock. If applicable, also includestock dividend, you must divide the shares yoution was in existence for at least 1 year, but less the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-receive as a dividend between the section 1244than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax proximate date it became worthless. Report astock and the other stock. Only the shares fromyears ending before the loss. If the corporation capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock onthe former can be section 1244 stock.was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test Schedule D of Form 1040.
Contributed property. To determine ordinaryapplies to the entire period the corporation was
loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a tradein existence before the day of the loss. However, Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBICfor property, you have to reduce the basis of theif the corporation's deductions (other than the stock with other SBIC stock that you bought onlystock if:net operating loss and dividends received de- for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is
ductions) were more than its gross income dur- a capital loss. See Short Sales , later in this• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theing this period, this 50% test does not apply. chapter, for more information.property, immediately before the trade,
The corporation must have been largely an was more than its fair market value, and
operating company for ordinary loss treatment Holding Period• The basis of the stock is determined byto apply.
the basis of the property.If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, If you sold or traded investment property, you
the stock must be common stock. If issued after must determine your holding period for the prop-Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference
July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common erty. Your holding period determines whetherbetween the adjusted basis of the property and
or preferred. For more information about the any capital gain or loss was a short-term or aits fair market value at the time of the trade. You
requirements of a small business corporation or long-term capital gain or loss.reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest- is considered to have started on the same day Commodity futures. Futures transactions in
ment property more than 1 year, any capital gain the donor's holding period started. any commodity subject to the rules of a board of
or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you If your basis is determined by the fair market trade or commodity exchange are long term if
hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain value of the property, your holding period starts the contract was held for more than 6 months.
or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. on the day after the date of the gift. Your holding period for a commodity re-
To determine how long you held the invest- ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresInherited property. If you inherit investmentment property, begin counting on the date after contract, other than a regulated futures contractproperty, your capital gain or loss on any laterthe day you acquired the property. The day you subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,disposition of that property is treated as adisposed of the property is part of your holding includes your holding period for the futures con-long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-period. tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.gardless of how long you actually held the prop-
erty. Securities futures contract. Your holding pe-Example. If you bought investment property
riod for a security received in satisfaction of aon February 5, 2008, and sold it on February 5, Real property bought. To figure how long securities futures contract, other than one that is2009, your holding period is not more than 1 you have held real property bought under an a section 1256 contract, includes your holdingyear and you have a short-term capital gain or unconditional contract, begin counting on the period for the futures contract if you held theloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2009, your day after you received title to it or on the day contract as a capital asset.holding period is more than 1 year and you have after you took possession of it and assumed the Your holding period for a security received ina long-term capital gain or loss. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever satisfaction of a securities futures contract tohappened first. However, taking delivery or pos-Securities traded on an established market. sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-session of real property under an option agree-For securities traded on an established securi- tract, is determined by the rules that apply toment is not enough to start the holding period.ties market, your holding period begins the day short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.The holding period cannot start until there is anafter the trade date you bought the securities,
actual contract of sale. The holding period of theand ends on the trade date you sold them. Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
seller cannot end before that time. months or less. If you hold stock in a mutualDo not confuse the trade date with the fund (or other regulated investment company) orsettlement date, which is the date by Real property repossessed. If you sell real real estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 monthswhich the stock must be delivered and property but keep a security interest in it, and
CAUTION
! or less and then sell it at a loss (other than underpayment must be made. then later repossess the property under the a periodic liquidation plan), special rules mayterms of the sales contract, your holding period apply.for a later sale includes the period you held theExample. You are a cash method, calendar
Capital gain distributions received. Theproperty before the original sale and the periodyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-
loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-after the repossession. Your holding periodcember 29, 2009. According to the rules of the
dends you received, as explained next) isdoes not include the time between the originalstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery
treated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalsale and the repossession. That is, it does notof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on
of any capital gain distributions you receivedinclude the period during which the first buyerJanuary 4, 2010. You received payment of the
and your share of any undistributed capitalheld the property.sale price on that same day. Report your gain on
gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyour 2009 return, even though you received the Stock dividends. The holding period for stock loss.payment in 2010. The gain is long term or short you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsterm depending on whether you held the stock Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundon the date of distribution.more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on stock. If you received exempt-interest divi-The holding period for new stock you re-December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss, dends on the stock, at least part of your loss isceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onyou would also report it on your 2009 return. disallowed. You can deduct only the amount ofthe same day as the holding period of the old loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in dends.period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or
auction on the basis of yield starts the day after securities in a controlled corporation. Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.the Secretary of the Treasury, through news Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must beNontaxable stock rights. Your holding periodreleases, gives notification of acceptance to treated as a long-term capital loss to the extentfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the samesuccessful bidders. The holding period of U.S. you received, from that stock, qualified divi-day as the holding period of the underlyingTreasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-stock. The holding period for stock acquireding on a subscription basis at a specified yield nary dividends. This is true regardless of howthrough the exercise of stock rights begins onstarts the day after the subscription is submitted. long you actually held the stock. Generally, anthe date the right was exercised. extraordinary dividend is a dividend that equalsAutomatic investment service.  In determin-
or exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferredSection 1256 contracts. Gains or losses oning your holding period for shares bought by the
stock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.section 1256 contracts open at the end of thebank or other agent, full shares are considered
year, or terminated during the year, are treatedbought first and any fractional shares are con-
as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-sidered bought last. Your holding period starts Nonbusiness Bad Debts
less of how long the contracts were held. Seeon the day after the bank's purchase date. If a
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-share was bought over more than one purchase If someone owes you money that you cannot
lier.date, your holding period for that share is a split collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to
holding period. A part of the share is considered deduct the amount owed to you when you figureOption exercised. Your holding period forto have been bought on each date that stock your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-property you acquire when you exercise an op-was bought by the bank with the proceeds of less.tion begins the day after you exercise the option.available funds. There are two kinds of bad debtsÐbusiness
and nonbusiness. A business bad debt, gener-Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment ally, is one that comes from operating your tradetially identical stock or securities you acquire in aproperty in a trade for other investment property or business and is deductible as a business loss.wash sale includes the period you held the oldand your basis for the new property is deter- All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debtsstock or securities.mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the and are deductible as short-term capital losses.old property, your holding period for the new Qualified small business stock. Your hold-property begins on the day following the date ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free Example. An architect made personal loansyou acquired the old property. rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small to several friends who were not clients. She
Property received as a gift. If you receive a business stock, described later under Gains on could not collect on some of these loans. They
gift of property and your basis is determined by Qualified Small Business Stock , includes the are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period period you held the old stock. because the architect was not in the business of
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lending money and the loans do not have any 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, Secondary liability on home mortgage. If
relationship to her business. the buyer of your home assumes your mort-and Claims for Refund.
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-
Business bad debts. For information on busi- payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyerLoan guarantees. If you guarantee a debtness bad debts of an employee, see Publication defaults on the loan and the house is then soldthat becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad529. For information on other business bad for less than the amount outstanding on thedebt deduction for your payments on the debtdebts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535. mortgage, you may have to make up the differ-unless you can show either that your reason for
ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for themaking the guarantee was to protect your in-Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if youvestment or that you entered the guaranteedeductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- cannot collect it from the buyer.transaction with a profit motive. If you make thetally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly
guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-worthless nonbusiness debt. Worthless securities. If you own securitiesceive any consideration in return, your pay- that become totally worthless, you can take aGenuine debt required. A debt must be ments are considered a gift and you cannot take deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seegenuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is a deduction. Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale orgenuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-
Trade, earlier in this chapter.tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted amoney. guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora- bad debt and in a later tax year you recover
tion received. The corporation defaulted on theLoan or gift. For a bad debt, you must show (collect) all or part of it, you may have to include
loan and Henry made full payment. Because hethat there was an intention at the time of the the amount you recover in your gross income.
transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you guaranteed the loan to protect his investment in However, you can exclude from gross income
lend money to a relative or friend with the under- the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness the amount recovered up to the amount of the
standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid- deduction that did not reduce your tax in the yearbad debt deduction.
ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a bad deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.
debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.
How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-debt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela- Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses ontionship between you and the person or organi- their local credit union. John does not pay the
Schedule D (Form 1040).zation that owes you the money. note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the nameWhen minor children borrow from their par- note. However, since he did not enter into the of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-ents to pay for their basic needs, there is no guarantee agreement to protect an investment umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt ingenuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt parentheses in column (f). Use a separate linefor such a loan. deduction. for each bad debt.
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a Deductible in year paid. Unless you have For each bad debt, attach a statement to
bad debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is, rights against the borrower, discussed next, a your return that contains:
you must have already included the amount in payment you make on a loan you guaranteed is • A description of the debt, including theyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam- deductible in the year you make the payment. amount, and the date it became due,ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for
Rights against the borrower. When youcourt-ordered child support not paid to you by • The name of the debtor, and any businessmake payment on a loan that you guaranteed,your former spouse. If you are a cash method or family relationship between you and theyou may have the right to take the place of thetaxpayer (most individuals are), you generally debtor,lender (the right of subrogation). The debt iscannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
• The efforts you made to collect the debt,then owed to you. If you have this right, or somesalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
andother right to demand payment from the bor-and similar items.
rower, you cannot take a bad debt deduction • Why you decided the debt was worthless.When deductible. You can take a bad debt until these rights become totally worthless. For example, you could show that the bor-deduction only in the year the debt becomes rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is Debts owed by political parties. You cannot gal action to collect would probably notdue to determine whether it is worthless. A debt take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any result in payment of any part of the debt.becomes worthless when there is no longer any worthless debt owed to you by:
chance that the amount owed will be paid.
• A political party,It is not necessary to go to court if you can Short Sales
show that a judgment from the court would be • A national, state, or local committee of a
uncollectible. You must only show that you have A short sale occurs when you agree to sellpolitical party, or
taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. property you do not own (or own but do not wish• A committee, association, or organizationBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.that either accepts contributions or spendsdence of the worthlessness of at least a part of • You sell short. You borrow property andmoney to influence elections.an unsecured and unpreferred debt. deliver it to a buyer.If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or • You close the sale. At a later date, youMechanics' and suppliers' liens. Workers
Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. either buy substantially identical propertyand material suppliers may file liens against
and deliver it to the lender or make deliv-property because of debts owed by a builder orFiling a claim for refund. If you do not ery out of property that you held at thecontractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-deduct a bad debt on your original return for the time of the sale. Delivery of property bor-sure and loss of your property, you are entitledyear it becomes worthless, you can file a claim rowed from another lender does not sat-to repayment from the builder or contractor. Iffor a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do isfy this requirement.the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtthis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for
deduction.the year the debt became worthless. You must
file it within 7 years from the date your original You do not realize gain or loss until delivery of
Insolvency of contractor. You can take areturn for that year had to be filed, or 2 years property to close the short sale. You will have a
bad debt deduction for the amount you depositfrom the date you paid the tax, whichever is capital gain or loss if the property used to close
with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless the short sale is a capital asset.
vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.securities generally must be filed within 3 years
If the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradefrom the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the Exception if property becomes worthless.
or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more A different rule applies if the property sold short
tion.information about filing a claim, see Publication becomes substantially worthless. In that case,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must recognize gain as if the short sale were than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short must add the payment to the cost of the stock
closed when the property became substantially sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held sold short.
worthless. the property used to close the sale for 1 year or Exception. If you close the short sale withinless. Certain losses on short sales of stock or 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay inException for constructive sales. Entering securities are also subject to wash sale treat- lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to theinto a short sale may cause you to be treated as ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later. extent the payments are more than the amounthaving made a constructive sale of property. In
Mixed straddles. Under certain elections, that you receive as ordinary income from thethat case, you will have to recognize gain on the
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short lender of the stock for the use of collateral withdate of the constructive sale. For details, see
sale as long term under the special rule. These the short sale. This exception does not apply toConstructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po-
elections are for positions that are part of a payments in place of extraordinary dividends.sitions, earlier.
mixed straddle. See Other elections  under
Extraordinary dividends. If the amount ofMixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor-Example. On May 2, 2009, you bought 100
any dividend you receive on a share of preferredmation about these elections.shares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofOn September 3, 2009, you sold short 100
other stock) of the amount realized on the shortshares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-Reporting Substitute Paymentsmade no other transactions involving Baker
nary dividend.stock for the rest of 2009 and the first 30 days of If any broker transferred your securities for use2010. Your short sale is treated as a construc- in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-tive sale of an appreciated financial position Wash Salesceived certain substitute dividend payments onbecause a sale of your Baker stock on the date your behalf while the short sale was open, that You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesof the short sale would have resulted in a gain. broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or a of stock or securities in a wash sale.You recognize a $600 short-term capital gain similar statement, reporting the amount of these A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradefrom the constructive sale and your new holding payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysperiod in the Baker stock begins on September those substitute payments totaling $10 or more before or after the sale you:3. that are known on the payment's record date to
be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi- 1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-
tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution, ties,Short-Term or Long-Term
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orCapital Gain or Loss 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not curities in a fully taxable trade,treat these substitute payments as dividends orAs a general rule, you determine whether you
interest. Instead, report the substitute payments 3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss
shown on Form 1099-MISC as ªOther incomeº stantially identical stock or securities, oron a short sale by the amount of time you actu-
on line 21 of Form 1040.ally hold the property eventually delivered to the 4. Acquire substantially identical stock forlender to close the short sale. your individual retirement account (IRA) orSubstitute payment. A substitute payment Roth IRA.means a payment in lieu of:Example. Even though you do not own any
stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell • Tax-exempt interest (including OID) that If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-100 shares of it, which you borrow from your has accrued while the short sale was tion you control buys substantially identicalbroker. After 13 months, when the price of the open, and stock, you also have a wash sale.stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace
• A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterCorporation stock and immediately deliver them If your loss was disallowed because of the
the transfer of stock for use in a short saleto your broker to close out the short sale. Your wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the
and before the closing of the short sale.loss is a short-term capital loss because your cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)
holding period for the delivered property is less above). The result is your basis in the new stock
than 1 day. or securities. This adjustment postpones thePayments in lieu of dividends. If you borrow
loss deduction until the disposition of the newstock to make a short sale, you may have toSpecial rules. Special rules may apply to stock or securities. Your holding period for theremit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-gains and losses from short sales of stocks, new stock or securities begins on the same daydends distributed while you maintain your shortsecurities, and commodity and securities futures as the holding period of the stock or securitiesposition. You can deduct these payments only if(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac- sold.you hold the short sale open at least 46 daysquired property substantially identical to prop-
(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinaryerty that sold short. But if the amount of property Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stockdividend as defined below) and you itemize youryou sold short is more than the amount of that for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 anddeductions.substantially identical property, the special rules within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 sharesYou deduct these payments as investmentdo not apply to the gain or loss on the excess. of the same stock for $800. Because you boughtinterest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter- substantially identical stock, you cannot deductGains and holding period. If you held the est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information. your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you addsubstantially identical property for 1 year or less If you close the short sale by the 45th day the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of theon the date of the short sale, or if you acquired after the date of the short sale (1 year or less in new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newthe substantially identical property after the the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can- stock, which is $1,050.short sale and by the date of closing the short not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividendsale, then: that you make to the lender. Instead, you must Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-increase the basis of the stock used to close theRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close poration that has an incentive pay plan. Undershort sale by that amount.the short sale is a short-term capital gain, this plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpo-
To determine how long a short sale is keptand ration's stock as a bonus award. You include the
open, do not include any period during which fair market value of the stock in your grossRule 2. The holding period of the substan- you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a income as additional pay. You later sell thesetially identical property begins on the date contractual obligation to buy substantially identi- shares at a loss. If you receive another bonusof the closing of the short sale or on the cal stock or securities. award of substantially identical stock within 30date of the sale of this property, whichever If your payment is made for a liquidating days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss oncomes first. distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if the sale.
you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-
tion issued on the borrowed stock during yourLosses. If, on the date of the short sale, you Options and futures contracts. The wash
short position, you have a capital expense. Youheld substantially identical property for more sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De- Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of
securities. They do not apply to losses from cember 26, 2008, you bought 25 shares of sub- stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of
sales or trades of commodity futures contracts stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,
and foreign currencies. See Coordination of 7, 2009, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.
Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under bought in September. You have a $1,000 loss You close the short sale on November 17 by
Straddles, later, for information about the tax on the sale. However, because you bought 75 delivering the shares bought on June 2. You
treatment of losses on the disposition of posi- shares of substantially identical stock within 30 cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)
tions in a straddle. days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss because the date of entering into the short sale
($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss (October 6) is considered the date the sale isSecurities futures contract to sell. Losses ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the complete for wash sale purposes and youfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of a 50 shares bought on December 18, 2008, is bought substantially identical stock within 30securities futures contract to sell generally are increased by two-thirds (50 ÷  75) of the $750 days from that date.treated in the same manner as losses from the disallowed loss. The new basis of those sharesclosing of a short sale, discussed later in this is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25 Residual interests in a REMIC. The washsection under Short sales. shares bought on December 26, 2008, is in- sale rules generally will apply to the sale of yourWarrants. The wash sale rules apply if you creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125 residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-sell common stock at a loss and, at the same + $250). vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the periodtime, buy warrants for common stock of the beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-Example 2. You bought 100 shares of Msame corporation. But if you sell warrants at a est and ending 6 months after that sale, youstock on September 24, 2008. On February 3,loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or2009, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that isOn each of the 4 days from February 10-13,only if the warrants and stock are considered comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are2009, you bought 50 shares of substantiallysubstantially identical, as discussed next. discussed in chapter 1.identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000
loss. You must add half the disallowed lossSubstantially identical. In determining How to report. Report a wash sale or trade on($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought onwhether stock or securities are substantially line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),February 10. Add the other half ($500) to theidentical, you must consider all the facts and whichever is appropriate. Show the full amountbasis of the shares bought on February 11.circumstances in your particular case. Ordinar- of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On theily, stocks or securities of one corporation are next line, enter ªWash Saleº in column (a) andLoss and gain on same day. Loss from anot considered substantially identical to stocks the amount of the loss not allowed as a positivewash sale of one block of stock or securitiesor securities of another corporation. However, amount in column (f).cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalthey may be substantially identical in some
blocks sold the same day.cases. For example, in a reorganization, the
stocks and securities of the predecessor and Securities Futures ContractsExample. During 2003, you bought 100successor corporations may be substantially shares of X stock on each of three occasions.identical. A securities futures contract is a contract of saleYou paid $158 a share for the first block of 100Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor- for future delivery of a single security or of ashares, $100 a share for the second block, andporation are not ordinarily considered substan- narrow-based security index.$95 a share for the third block. On December 23,tially identical to the common stock of the same Gain or loss from the contract generally will2009, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 acorporation. However, where the bonds or pre- be treated in a manner similar to gain or lossshare. On January 6, 2010, you bought 250ferred stock are convertible into common stock from transactions in the underlying security. Thisshares of identical X stock. You cannot deductof the same corporation, the relative values, means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, orthe loss of $33 a share on the first block becauseprice changes, and other circumstances may termination of the contract will generally havewithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughtmake these bonds or preferred stock and the the same character as gain or loss from transac-250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youcommon stock substantially identical. For exam- tions in the property to which the contract re-cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofple, preferred stock is substantially identical to the second and third blocks of stock by this loss. lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,the common stock if the preferred stock: exchange, or termination of a contract to sell
Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a property will be considered short term, regard-• Is convertible into common stock, dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a less of how long you hold the contract. These• Has the same voting rights as the com- transaction made in the ordinary course of busi- contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unlessmon stock, ness. they are dealer securities futures contracts).
• Is subject to the same dividend restric- Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to ations, Optionsloss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter
into another short sale of, substantially identical• Trades at prices that do not vary signifi- Options are generally subject to the rules de-stock or securities within a period beginning 30cantly from the conversion ratio, and scribed in this section. If the option is part of adays before the date the short sale is complete• Is unrestricted as to convertibility. straddle, the loss deferral rules covered laterand ending 30 days after that date.
under Straddles may also apply. For specialFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a short
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealersale is considered complete on the date theMore or less stock bought than sold. If the
equity options, see Section 1256 Contractsshort sale is entered into, if:number of shares of substantially identical stock
Marked to Market, earlier.or securities you buy within 30 days before or • On that date, you own stock or securities Gain or loss from the sale or trade of anafter the sale is either more or less than the identical to those sold short (or by that option to buy or sell property that is a capitalnumber of shares you sold, you must determine date you enter into a contract or option to asset in your hands, or would be if you acquiredthe particular shares to which the wash sale acquire that stock or those securities), and it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, orrules apply. You do this by matching the shares
would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss is• You later deliver the stock or securities tobought with an equal number of the shares sold.
ordinary gain or loss.close the short sale.Match the shares bought in the same order that
you bought them, beginning with the first shares
Example 1. You purchased an option to buyOtherwise, a short sale is not consideredbought. The shares or securities so matched are
100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stockcomplete until the property is delivered to closesubject to the wash sale rules.
increases in value and you sell the option forthe sale.
more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalExample 1. You bought 100 shares of M This treatment also applies to losses from
gain because the stock underlying the optionstock on September 24, 2008, for $5,000. On the sale, exchange, or termination of a securities
would have been a capital asset in your hands.December 18, 2008, you bought 50 shares of futures contract to sell.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in How to report. Gain or loss from the closing or specified future date, a stated number of shares
Example 1, except that the stock decreases in expiration of an option that is not a section 1256 of stock at a specified price.
value and you sell the option for less than you contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands, Holders of puts and calls. If you buy a put orpaid for it. Your loss is a capital loss. is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040). a call, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalIf an option you purchased expired, enter the expenditure.Option not exercised. If you have a loss be- expiration date in column (c) and enter ªExpiredº If you sell the put or the call before youcause you did not exercise an option to buy or in column (d). exercise it, the difference between its cost andsell, you are considered to have sold or traded If an option that you wrote expired, enter the the amount you receive for it is either athe option on the date that it expired. expiration date in column (b) and enter ªExpiredº long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
in column (e). pending on how long you held it.Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,
If the option expires, its cost is either ahow you report your gain or loss depends on
long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingwhether it was exercised. Puts and Calls on your holding period, which ends on the expi-If you are not in the business of writing op-
ration date.tions and an option you write on stocks, securi- Puts and calls are options on securities and are If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisties, commodities, or commodity futures is not covered by the rules just discussed for options. of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re- The following are specific applications of these reduce your amount realized on the sale of theceive is a short-term capital gain. rules to holders and writers of options that are underlying stock by the cost of the put whenIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop- bought, sold, or ªclosed outº in transactions on a figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on theerty is exercised, see Writers of puts and calls , national securities exchange, such as the Chi- sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortlater. cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section term depending on your holding period for the1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, forSection 1256 contract options. Gain or loss underlying stock.special rules that may apply to nonequity op-is recognized on the exercise of an option on a tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are Put option as short sale. Buying a put op-section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts also presented in Table 4-1. tion is generally treated as a short sale, and theare defined under Section 1256 Contracts exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-Puts and calls are issued by writers (grant-Marked to Market, earlier. ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. Ifors) to holders for cash premiums. They are
you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.Cash settlement option. A cash settlement
less at the time you buy the put, any gain on theoption is treated as an option to buy or sell A ªput optionº is the right to sell to the writer,
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aproperty. A cash settlement option is any option at any time before a specified future date, a
short-term capital gain. The same is true if youthat on exercise is settled in, or could be settled stated number of shares at a specified price.
buy the underlying stock after you buy the putin, cash or property other than the underlying Conversely, a ªcall optionº is the right to buy
but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Yourproperty. from the writer of the option, at any time before a
holding period for the underlying stock begins on
the earliest of:
Table 4-1. Puts and Calls Keep for Your Records
• The date you dispose of the stock,
• The date you exercise the put,Puts
• The date you sell the put, or
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
• The date the put expires.
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for Writers of puts and calls. If you write (grant)cost of the put. the put. a put or a call, do not include the amount you
receive for writing it in your income at the time ofExpires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
• Your obligation expires,
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you • You buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in thecost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the
case of a call, the underlying stock whenreceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
the option is exercised, orpay and the amount you received for
the put as a short-term capital gain • You engage in a closing transaction.or loss.)
If your obligation expires, the amount you re-
ceived for writing the call or put is short-termCalls
capital gain.
If a put you write is exercised and you buyWhen a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
stock by the amount you received for the put.Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on
Your holding period for the stock begins on thein the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
received for the call. date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
put.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for If a call you write is exercised and you sell
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain. the underlying stock, increase your amount real-
ized on the sale of the stock by the amount you
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you received for the call when figuring your gain or
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termreceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you depending on your holding period of the stock.pay and the amount you received for If you enter into a closing transaction bythe call as a short-term capital gain paying an amount equal to the value of the put oror loss.)
call at the time of the payment, the difference
between the amount you pay and the amount*See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. you receive for the put or call is a short-term
capital gain or loss.
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of non-dealer transactions. 2. The stock is in a corporation formed or trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-
availed of to take positions in personal tion.
1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- property that offset positions taken by any
sued on April 8, 2009, for $4,000. These shareholder.
equity options expired in December 2009, Loss Deferral Rules
without being exercised. If you were a Note. For positions established before Oc- Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-holder (buyer) of the options, you would tober 22, 2004, condition (1) above does not tion of one or more positions only to the extentrecognize a short-term capital loss of apply. Instead, personal property includes stock that the loss is more than any unrecognized gain$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, if condition (2) above applies or the stock was you have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesyou would recognize a short-term capital part of a straddle in which at least one of the are treated as sustained in the next tax year.gain of $4,000. offsetting positions was:
2. Closing transaction. The facts are the Unrecognized gain. This is:• An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-same as in (1), except that on May 8, stantially identical stock or securities, • The amount of gain you would have had2009, the options were sold for $6,000. If on an open position if you had sold it on• A securities futures contract on the stockyou were the holder of the options who the last business day of the tax year at itsor substantially identical stock or securi-sold them, you would recognize a fair market value, andties, orshort-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
were the writer of the options and you • The amount of gain realized on a position• A position on substantially similar or re-bought them back, you would recognize a if, as of the end of the tax year, gain haslated property (other than stock).short-term capital loss of $2,000. been realized, but not recognized.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), Position. A position is an interest in personal Example. On July 1, 2009, you entered intoexcept that the options were exercised on property. A position can be a forward or futures a straddle. On December 16, 2009, you closedMay 27, 2009. The buyer adds the cost of contract, or an option. one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.the options to the basis of the stock bought An interest in a loan that is denominated in a On December 31, 2009, the end of your taxthrough the exercise of the options. The foreign currency is treated as a position in that year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750writer adds the amount received from writ- currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur- in the offsetting open position. On your 2009ing the options to the amount realized from rency for which there is an active interbank mar- return, your deductible loss on the position youselling the stock to figure gain or loss. The ket is considered to be actively-traded personal closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).gain or loss is short term or long term de- property. See also Foreign currency contract You must carry forward to 2010 the unused losspending upon the holding period of the under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar- of $12,750.stock. ket, earlier.
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the Note. If you physically settle a position es-Offsetting position. This is a position thatsame as in (1), except the options were tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of asubstantially reduces any risk of loss you maynonequity options, subject to the rules for straddle by delivering property to which the posi-have from holding another position. However, ifsection 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer tion relates (and you would realize a loss on thata position is part of a straddle that is not anof the options, you would recognize a position if you terminated it), you are treated asidentified straddle (described later), do not treatshort-term capital loss of $1,600, and a having terminated the position for its fair marketit as offsetting to a position that is part of anlong-term capital loss of $2,400. If you value immediately before the settlement and asidentified straddle.were a writer of the options, you would having sold the property used to physically settlePresumed offsetting positions. Two orrecognize a short-term capital gain of the position at its fair market value.more positions will be presumed to be offsetting$1,600, and a long-term capital gain of
if:$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-
Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor- ply to:• The positions are established in the same
mation. personal property (or in a contract for this 1. Positions established after October 21,property), and the value of one or more 2004, comprising an identified straddle,positions varies inversely with the value ofStraddles one or more of the other positions, 2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified
covered call options and the stock to beThis section discusses the loss deferral rules • The positions are in the same personal purchased under the options,that apply to the sale or other disposition of property, even if this property is in a sub-
positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply stantially changed form, and the positions' 3. Hedging transactions, described earlier
to the straddles described under Exceptions, values vary inversely as described in the under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
later. first condition, Market, and
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on • The positions are in debt instruments with 4. Straddles consisting entirely of sectionpersonal property. For example, a straddle may a similar maturity, and the positions' val- 1256 contracts, as described earlier underconsist of a purchased option to buy and a ues vary inversely as described in the first Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Marketpurchased option to sell on the same number of condition, (but see Identified straddle, next).shares of the security, with the same exercise
• The positions are sold or marketed as off-price and period.
Note. For positions established before Oc-setting positions, whether or not the posi-
tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also dotions are called a straddle, spread,Personal property. This is any property of a
not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-butterfly, or any similar name, ortype that is actively traded. It includes stock
dle at the end of the tax year.options and contracts to buy stock, but generally • The aggregate margin requirement for the
does not include stock. Identified straddle. Any straddle (otherpositions is lower than the sum of the mar-
than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) isgin requirements for each position if heldStraddle rules for stock. Although stock is
an identified straddle if all of the following condi-separately.generally excluded from the definition of per-
tions exist.sonal property when applying the straddle rules,
Related persons. To determine if two orit is included in the following two situations. • You clearly identified the straddle on yourmore positions are offsetting, you will be treated records before the close of the day on1. The stock is of a type which is actively as holding any position that your spouse holds which you acquired it.traded and at least one of the offsetting during the same period. If you take into account
positions is a position on that stock or sub- • For straddles acquired after December 29,part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by
2007, you identified the positions in thestantially similar or related property. a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
straddle that are offsetting with respect to • All of the offsetting positions consist of one September call options offered on May 13,
one another (for example, position A off- or more qualified covered call options and 2009, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,
sets position D, and position B offsets po- the stock to be purchased from you under $130, and $135. Because the option has a term
sition C). the options. of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the
second highest strike price that is less than• The straddle is not part of a larger strad- • The straddle is not part of a larger strad- $130.25, the applicable stock price. The calldle. dle. option is a deep-in-the-money option because
its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,If there is a loss from any position in an identi-  But see Special year-end rule , later, for an the option is not a qualified covered call option,fied straddle, you must increase the basis of exception. and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed outeach of the positions that offset the loss position the option or the stock at a loss during the year.in the identified straddle. The increase is the loss A qualified covered call option is any option
multiplied by the following fraction: you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock Capital loss on qualified covered call op-
you acquire in connection with granting the op- tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-
Unrecognized gain (if any) on the tion), but only if all of the following are true. fied covered call option on that stock with a
offsetting position strike price less than the applicable stock price,• The option is traded on a national securi- treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-The total unrecognized gain on all ties exchange or other market approved tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainpositions that offset the loss position by the Secretary of the Treasury. on the sale or exchange of the stock would bein the identified straddle • The option is granted more than 30 days treated as long-term capital gain. The holding
before its expiration date.For this purpose, your unrecognized gain is period of the stock does not include any period
the excess of the fair market value of the posi- during which you are the writer of the option.For covered call options entered into after
tion that is part of an identified straddle at the July 28, 2002, the option is granted not Special year-end rule. The loss deferraltime you incur a loss on another position in the more than 12 months before its expiration rules for straddles apply if all of the following areidentified straddle, over the fair market value of date or satisfies term limitation and quali- true.that position when you identified it as a position fied benchmark requirements published in
in the straddle. • The qualified covered call options arethe Internal Revenue Bulletin.
closed or the stock is disposed of at a lossIf the application of the above rule does not • The option is not a deep-in-the-money op- during any tax year.result in the increase in basis of any offsetting tion.position in the identified straddle, you must in- • Gain on disposition of the stock or gain oncrease the basis of each of the offsetting posi- • You are not an options dealer who granted the options is includible in gross income intions in the straddle in a manner that: the option in connection with your activity a later tax year.of dealing in options.• Is reasonable, • The stock or options were held less than• Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or• Is consistently applied by you, 30 days after the closing of the options orloss. the disposition of the stock.• Is consistent with the purposes of the
identified straddle rules, and  A deep-in-the-money option is an option with
a strike price lower than the lowest qualified How To Report Gains• Results in a total increase in the basis of benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at and Losses (Form 6781)those offsetting positions that is equal to which the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesthe loss. Report each position (whether or not it is part ofare listed in the financial section of many news-
a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedpapers. The LQB is the highest available strikeIf you adopt an allocation method under this gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofprice that is less than the applicable stock price.rule, you must describe that method in your this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.However, the LQB for an option with a term ofbooks and records. Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andmore than 90 days and a strike price of moreThe identified straddle rules also apply to losses on straddles before entering thesethan $50 is the second highest available strikepositions that are or have been a liability or amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aprice that is less than the applicable stock price.obligation to you (for example, a debt obligation copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.The availability of strike prices for equity op-you issued, a written option, or a notional princi-
tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-pal contract you entered into).
termination of the LQB for an option that is notNeither you nor anyone else can take into Coordination of Loss Deferralan equity option with flexible terms.account any loss on a position that is part of an Rules and Wash Sale RulesThe applicable stock price for any stock foridentified straddle to the extent that the loss
which an option has been granted is: Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to anyincreases the basis of any positions that offset
disposition of a position or positions of a strad-the loss position in the identified straddle. 1. The closing price of the stock on the most dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, thenrecent day on which that stock was tradedNote. For positions established before Oc- apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only ifbefore the date on which the option wastober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meet stocks or securities make up a position that isgranted, ortwo additional conditions: part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle
does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.2. The opening price of the stock on the day1. All of the original positions that you identify on which the option was granted, but onlywere acquired on the same day. Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-if that price is greater than 110% of the
sition of shares of stock or securities that makeprice determined in (1).2. All of the positions included in item (1)
up the positions of a straddle if, within a periodwere disposed of on the same day during If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-the tax year, or none of the positions were LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the sition and ending 30 days after that date, youdisposed of by the end of the tax year. applicable stock price. If the applicable stock acquired substantially identical stock or securi-price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asAlso, the losses from positions are deferred until ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to thenot less than an amount that is $10 below theyou dispose of all the positions in the straddle. following tax year, subject to any further applica-applicable stock price.The rule discussed above for increasing the tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsobasis of each of the positions does not apply. apply if you entered into a contract or option toExample. On May 13, 2009, you held XYZ
acquire the stock or securities within the timeQualified covered call options and op- stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call
period described above. See Loss carryover ,tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the option with a strike price of $120. The closing
later, for more information about how to treat theloss deferral rules for straddles if both of the price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,
loss in the following tax year.following are true. 2009, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- gain in the successor long position and offset- hold an offsetting position). This rule does not
apply to any position you held more than 1 yearting short position.curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any
before you established the straddle. But seelosses you sustained in the ordinary course of
Example 3. The facts are the same as in Exceptions, later.your business.
Example 1, except that at year end you have $8
Example. On March 6, 2008, you acquiredof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Example. You are not a dealer in stock or
gold. On January 5, 2009, you entered into antion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingsecurities. On December 1, 2009, you bought
offsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-
lated futures contract). On April 1, 2009, youthe total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forsetting put option. On December 11, 2009, there
disposed of the short gold forward contract at no2009 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainwas $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and
gain or loss. On April 8, 2009, you sold the goldin the successor long position.you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-
at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1ber 16, the value of the put option had declined,
Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed loss year or less before the offsetting short positioneliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On
that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2, was entered into, the holding period for the goldDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock you must carry it over to the next tax year and begins on April 1, 2009, the date the straddleposition that is substantially identical to the XX apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss. ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldstock you sold on December 11. At the end of For example, a loss disallowed in 2008 under will be treated as short-term capital gain.the year there is no unrecognized gain in the put Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2009, unless theoption or in the XX stock. Under these circum- Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale ofsubstantially identical stock or securities (whichstances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2009 one or more positions (the loss position) of acaused the loss to be disallowed in 2008) wereunder Rule 1 because, within a period beginning straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of thedisposed of during 2009. In addition, the carry-30 days before December 11, and ending 30 following are true.over loss will not be allowed in 2009 if Rule 1 ordays after that date, you bought stock substan- Rule 2 disallows it. • You held (directly or indirectly) one ortially identical to the XX stock you sold.
more offsetting positions to the loss posi-Example. The facts are the same as in the tion on the date you entered into the lossRule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo- example under Rule 1 above. On December 30, position.sition of less than all of the positions of a strad- 2010, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss
dle (your loss position) to the extent that any • You would have treated all gain or loss onand there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put
unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year in one or more of the straddle positions asoption. Under these circumstances, you cannot
one or more of the following positions is more long-term capital gain or loss if you haddeduct in 2010 either the $20 loss disallowed in
than the amount of any loss disallowed under sold these positions on the day you en-2009 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-
Rule 1. tered into the loss position.cember 30, 2010, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does
not apply because the substantially identical XX• Successor positions. Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to astock was sold during the year and no substan-
• Offsetting positions to the loss position. loss position that is part of a mixed straddle andtially identical stock or securities were bought
that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedwithin the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does• Offsetting positions to any successor posi- straddle is a straddle:apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gaintion.
in the put option, an offsetting position to the loss • That is not part of a larger straddle,positions.Successor position. A successor position • In which all positions are held as capitalis a position that is or was at any time offsetting Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss assets,to a second position, if both of the following position would have resulted in a capital loss,
• In which at least one (but not all) of theconditions are met. you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on
positions is a section 1256 contract, andthe date it is allowed, even if you would treat the• The second position was offsetting to the gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi- • For which the mixed straddle electionloss position that was sold. nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a (Election A, discussed later) has not been• The successor position is entered into dur- loss position (in the case of section 1256 con- made.ing a period beginning 30 days before, tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term
and ending 30 days after, the sale of the capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andloss position. you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,
40% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingeven if you would treat any gain or loss on any
conditions apply.successor positions as 100% long-term orExample 1. On November 3, 2009, you en- short-term capital gain or loss. • Gain or loss from the sale of one or moretered into offsetting long and short positions in
of the straddle positions that are sectionnon-section 1256 contracts. On November 12, Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad- 1256 contracts would be considered gain2009, you disposed of the long position at a $10 dle losses and wash sales do not apply to the or loss from the sale or exchange of aloss. On November 16, you entered into a new following loss situations. capital asset.long position (successor position) that is offset-
• Loss on the sale of one or more positionsting to the retained short position, but that is not • The sale of no position in the straddle,in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-substantially identical to the long position dis- other than a section 1256 contract, wouldactions are described under Section 1256posed of on November 12. You held both posi- result in a long-term capital gain or loss.Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)tions through year end, at which time there was
• You have not made a straddle-by-straddle$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long • Loss on the sale of a loss position in a identification election (Election B) or mixedposition and no unrecognized gain in the offset- mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- straddle account election (Election C),ting short position. Under these circumstances, dle account (Election C), later.) both discussed later.the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2009
• Loss on the sale of a position that is partbecause there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the
of a straddle consisting only of sectionsuccessor long position. Example. On March 3, 2009, you entered1256 contracts. into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
Example 2. The facts are the same as in 2009, you entered into an offsetting short gold
Example 1, except that at year end you have $4 regulated futures contract. You did not make anHolding Period and
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- election to offset gains and losses from positionsLoss Treatment Rules
tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsetting in a mixed straddle. On August 7, 2009, you
short position. Under these circumstances, the The holding period of a position in a straddle disposed of the long forward contract at a loss.
entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2009 be- generally begins no earlier than the date on Because the gold forward contract was part of a
which the straddle ends (the date you no longercause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized mixed straddle and the disposition of this
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
non-section 1256 position would not result in one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to ªtotal annual account net gain or lossº is deter-
long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on indicate your election choice by checking box A, mined by netting the annual account amounts
the termination of the gold forward contract will B, or C, whichever applies. for all mixed straddle accounts that you had
be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% established.Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-short-term capital loss. The net amounts keep their long-term ortion (Election B). Under this election, you
short-term classification. However, no moremust clearly identify each position that is part ofExceptions. The special holding period and than 50% of the total annual account net gain forthe identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:loss treatment for straddle positions does not
the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalapply to positions that: • The close of the day the identified mixed gain. Any remaining gain is treated as
straddle is established, or• Constitute part of a hedging transaction, short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%
of the total annual account net loss can be• The time the position is disposed of.• Are included in a straddle consisting only
treated as short-term capital loss. Any remainingof section 1256 contracts, or
loss is treated as long-term capital loss.If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle• Are included in a mixed straddle account The election to establish one or more mixedbefore the end of the day on which the straddle(Election C), discussed later. straddle accounts for each tax year must beis established, this identification must be made made by the due date (without extensions) ofby the time you dispose of the position. You are your income tax return for the immediately pre-Mixed Straddle Elections presumed to have properly identified a mixed ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newstraddle if independent verification is used.If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle class of activities during a tax year, you must
and make one of the elections described in the The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under make the election for the new class of activities
following discussions, report your gain or loss as this election depends on which side of the strad- by the later of either:
indicated in those discussions. If you do not dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the net • The due date of your return for the imme-make any of the elections, report your gain or gain or loss from the straddle is due to the diately preceding tax year (without exten-loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated as sions), orthe section 1256 component of the straddle, 60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%
enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or • 60 days after you entered into the firstshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain
your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form mixed straddle in the new class of activi-or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the
6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13 ties.election by checking box B.
(Part II). If the net gain or loss is due to the
You make the election on Form 6781 bynon-section 1256 positions, gain or loss isMixed straddle election (Election A). You checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gaincan elect out of the marked to market rules, come tax return for the immediately precedingor loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify thediscussed under Section 1256 Contracts tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.election.Marked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256 Report the annual account net gain or loss fromcontracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In- For the specific application of the rules of this a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T. In addition, you must attach a statement to Formapply to these contracts. However, if you make
6781 specifically designating the class of activi-Example. On April 1, you entered into athis election for an option on a section 1256
ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed
lished.tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-earlier under Options will apply, subject to the
For the specific application of the rules of thistion to treat this straddle as an identified mixedgain and loss rules for straddles.
election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.You can make this election if: straddle. On April 8, you disposed of the
non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the Interest expense and carrying charges re-• At least one (but not all) of the positions is section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under lating to mixed straddle account positions.a section 1256 contract, and these circumstances, the $600 loss on the You cannot deduct interest and carrying
• Each position forming part of the straddle non-section 1256 position will be offset against charges that are allocable to any positions held
is clearly identified as being part of that the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The in a mixed straddle account. Treat thesestraddle on the day the first section 1256 net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treated charges as an adjustment to the annual accountcontract forming part of the straddle is ac- as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-quired. short-term capital gain because it is due to the ately between the net short-term and the net
section 1256 contract. long-term capital gains or losses.If you make this election, it will apply for all To find the amount of interest and carryingMixed straddle account (Election C). Youlater years as well. It cannot be revoked without may elect to establish one or more accounts for charges that is not deductible and that must bethe consent of the IRS. If you made this election, determining gains and losses from all positions added to the annual account net gain or loss,check box A of Form 6781. Do not report the in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- apply the rules described earlier to the positionssection 1256 component in Part I. rate mixed straddle account for each separate held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest
designated class of activities.Other elections. You can avoid the 60% expense and carrying charges on straddles  in
long-term capital loss treatment required for a chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expenses.Generally, you must determine gain or loss
non-section 1256 loss position that is part of a for each position in a mixed straddle account as
mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose of the close of each business day of the tax year. Sales of Stock to ESOPs
either of the two following elections to offset You offset the net section 1256 contracts or Certain Cooperativesgains and losses for these positions. against the net non-section 1256 positions to
determine the ªdaily account net gain or loss.º If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3• Election B. Make a separate identification
If the daily account amount is due to years to an employee stock ownership planof the positions of each mixed straddle for
non-section 1256 positions, the amount is (ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,which you are electing this treatment (the
treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the you may be able to elect to postpone all or partstraddle-by-straddle identification method).
daily account amount is due to section 1256 of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified• Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac- contracts, the amount is treated as 60% replacement property (certain securities) withincount for a class of activities for which long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or the period that began 3 months before the salegains and losses will be recognized and loss. and ended 12 months after the sale. If you makeoffset on a periodic basis. the election, you must recognize gain on theOn the last business day of the tax year, you
sale only to the extent the proceeds from thedetermine the ªannual account net gain or lossº
for each account by netting the daily account sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-These two elections are alternatives to the
amounts for that account for the tax year. The ment property.mixed straddle election. You can choose only
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must reduce the basis of the replace- Revenue Code on certain dispositions, and Basis of replacement property. You must
ment property by any postponed gain. If you subtract the amount of postponed gain from theprohibited allocations of the stock pur-
dispose of any replacement property, you may basis of your replacement property.chased by the ESOP or cooperative.
have to recognize all of the postponed gain. How to report and postpone gain. ReportGenerally, to qualify for the election the the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 orESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of More information. For details, see section line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isthe outstanding stock of the corporation that 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula- appropriate. To make the choice to postponeissued the qualified securities. Also, the quali- tions section 1.1042-1T. gain, enter ªSSBIC Rolloverº in column (a) of thefied replacement property must have been is- line directly below the line on which you reportedsued by a domestic operating corporation. Rollover of Gain the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed in
column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).How to make the election. You must make From Publicly
Also, attach a schedule showing how youthe election no later than the due date (including Traded Securities figured the postponed gain, the name of theextensions) for filing your tax return for the year
SSBIC in which you purchased common stockin which you sold the stock. If your original return You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain or a partnership interest, the date of thatwas filed on time, you may make the election on gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICan amended return filed no later than 6 months This means that if you buy certain replacement stock or partnership interest.after the due date of your return (excluding ex- property and make the choice described in this You must make the choice to postpone gaintensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to section section, you postpone part or all of your gain. no later than the due date (including extensions)301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return,
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis for filing your tax return for the year in which youand file it at the same address you used for your
of the replacement property as described in Ba- sold the securities. If your original return wasoriginal return.
sis of replacement property , later. This filed on time, you may make the choice on anHow to report and postpone gain. Report postpones your gain until the year you dispose amended return filed no later than 6 monthsthe entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D. after the due date of your return (excluding ex-of the replacement property.To make the choice to postpone gain, enter tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to sectionYou qualify to make this choice if you meetªSection 1042 electionº in column (a) of the line 301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return,all the following tests.directly below the line on which you reported the and file it at the same address you used for yourgain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain • You sell publicly traded securities at a original return.you are postponing or expecting to postpone. gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- Your choice is revocable with the consent ofEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual ties traded on an established securities the IRS.postponed gain is different from the amount you market.report, file an amended return. Gains on Qualified• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.Also attach the following statements.
Small Business Stock• During the 60-day period beginning on the1. A ªstatement of electionº that indicates you
date of the sale, you buy replacementare making an election under section This section discusses two provisions of the law
property. This replacement property must1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and that may apply to gain from the sale or trade of
be either common stock or a partnershipthat includes the following information. qualified small business stock. You may qualify
interest in a specialized small business in- for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.
a. A description of the securities sold, the vestment company (SSBIC). This is any You may be able to exclude part of the gain from
date of the sale, the amount realized on partnership or corporation licensed by the your income.
the sale, and the adjusted basis of the Small Business Administration under sec- Qualified small business stock. This issecurities. tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- stock that meets all the following tests.ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,b. The name of the ESOP or cooperative
1993.to which the qualified securities were 1. It must be stock in a C corporation.
sold. 2. It must have been originally issued after
Amount of gain recognized. If you make thec. For a sale that was part of a single, August 10, 1993.
choice described in this section, you must rec-interrelated transaction under a prear- 3. The corporation must have total gross as-ognize gain only up to the following amount:ranged agreement between taxpayers sets of $50 million or less at all times afterinvolving other sales of qualified securi- • The amount realized on the sale, minus August 9, 1993, and before it issued theties, the names and identifying numbers stock. Its total gross assets immediately af-• The cost of any common stock or partner-of the other taxpayers under the agree- ter it issued the stock must also be $50ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtment and the number of shares sold by million or less.during the 60-day period beginning on thethe other taxpayers. When figuring the corporation's totaldate of sale (and did not previously take gross assets, you must also count the as-2. A notarized ªstatement of purchaseº into account on an earlier sale of publicly sets of any predecessor of the corporation.describing the qualified replacement prop- traded securities). In addition, you must treat all corporationserty, date of purchase, and the cost of the that are members of the same par-property and declaring the property to be ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor-If this amount is less than the amount of yourqualified replacement property for the qual- poration. gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,ified stock you sold. The statement must
subject to the limit described next. If this amounthave been notarized no later than 30 days 4. You must have acquired the stock at its
is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,after the purchase. If you have not yet pur- original issue, directly or through an under-
you must recognize the full amount of your gain.chased the qualified replacement property, writer, in exchange for money or other
you must attach the notarized ªstatement property (not including stock), or as pay forLimit on gain postponed. The amount of
of purchaseº to your income tax return for services provided to the corporation (othergain you can postpone each year is limited to the
the year following the election year (or the than services performed as an underwritersmaller of:election will not be valid). of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and may also meet this test if you acquired it3. A verified written statement of the domes- file a separate return), or from another person who met this test, ortic corporation whose employees are cov- through a conversion or trade of qualified• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are marriedered by the ESOP acquiring the securities, small business stock that you held.and file a separate return), minus theor of any authorized officer of the coopera-
amount of gain you postponed for all ear-tive, consenting to the taxes under sec- 5. The corporation must have met the active
lier years.tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal business test, defined next, and must have
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
been a C corporation during substantially • Any business of operating a hotel, motel, How to report gain. Report the entire gain
restaurant, or similar business. realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 ofall the time you held the stock.
Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-6. Within the period beginning 2 years before ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,Rollover of Gainand ending 2 years after the stock was enter ªSection 1045 Rolloverº in column (a) ofissued, the corporation cannot have the line directly below the line on which youYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalbought more than a de minimis amount of reported the gain. Enter the amount of gaingain from the sale of qualified small businessits stock from you or a related party. postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (instock held more than 6 months. This means that,
parentheses).7. Within the period beginning 1 year before if you buy certain replacement stock and make
You must make the choice to postpone gainand ending 1 year after the stock was is- the choice described in this section, you post-
no later than the due date (including extensions)sued, the corporation cannot have bought pone part or all of your gain.
for filing your tax return for the year in which youmore than a de minimis amount of its stock You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis sold the stock. If your original return was filed onfrom anyone, unless the total value of the of the replacement stock as described in Basis time, you may make the choice on an amendedstock it bought is 5% or less of the total of replacement stock, later. This postpones your return filed no later than 6 months after the duevalue of all its stock. gain until the year you dispose of the replace- date of your return (excluding extensions). Enterment stock.For more information about tests 6 and 7, see ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2º at the top
You can make this choice if you meet all thethe regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- of the amended return, and file it at the same
following tests.nal Revenue Code. address you used for your original return.
• You buy replacement stock during the
Active business test. A corporation meets 60-day period beginning on the date of the
Section 1202 Exclusionthis test for any period of time if, during that sale.
period, both the following are true. • The replacement stock is qualified small You generally can exclude from your income up
• It was an eligible corporation, defined be- business stock. to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of
low. qualified small business stock held by you for• The replacement stock continues to meet more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to• It used at least 80% (by value) of its as- the active business requirement for small 75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009,sets in the active conduct of at least one business stock for at least the first 6 and before January 1, 2011. The exclusion canqualified trade or business, defined below. months after you buy it. be up to 60% for certain empowerment zone
business stock. See Empowerment zone busi-Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized Amount of gain recognized. If you make the ness stock , later.The eligible gain minus yoursmall business investment company (SSBIC) is choice described in this section, you must rec- section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. Seetreated as meeting the active business test. An ognize the capital gain only up to the following Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed amount:to operate under section 301(d) of the Small SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small
• The amount realized on the sale, minusBusiness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on business investment company (SSBIC) stock
May 13, 1993. that you bought as replacement property for• The cost of any qualified small business
publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, youstock you bought during the 60-day periodEligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor- must reduce the basis of the stock by thebeginning on the date of sale (and did notporation other than: amount of any postponed gain on that earlierpreviously take into account on an earlier• A Domestic International Sales Corpora- sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gainsale of qualified small business stock).
tion (DISC) or a former DISC, From Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-
duce your basis by that amount when figuring• A corporation that has made, or whose If this amount is less than the amount of your your section 1202 exclusion.subsidiary has made, an election under capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that
section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, Limit on eligible gain. The amount of yourgain. If this amount equals or is more than the
gain from the stock of any one issuer that isamount of your capital gain, you must recognize• A regulated investment company, eligible for the exclusion in 2009 is limited to thethe full amount of your gain.
• A real estate investment trust (REIT), greater of:
Basis of replacement stock. You must sub-• A real estate mortgage investment conduit • Ten times your basis in all qualified stocktract the amount of postponed gain from the(REMIC), of the issuer that you sold or exchangedbasis of your replacement stock. during the year, or• A financial asset securitization investment
trust (FASIT), or Holding period of replacement stock. Your • $10 million ($5 million for married individu-
holding period for the replacement stock in- als filing separately) minus the amount of• A cooperative. cludes your holding period for the stock sold, gain from the stock of the same issuer that
except for the purpose of applying the 6-month you used to figure your exclusion in earlierQualified trade or business. This is any holding period requirement for choosing to roll years.trade or business other than: over the gain on its sale.
• One involving services performed in the How to report gain. Report the entire gainPass-through entity. A pass-through entity (afields of health, law, engineering, architec- realized from the sale on Schedule D (Formpartnership, S corporation, or mutual fund orture, accounting, actuarial science, per- 1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the lineother regulated investment company) also mayforming arts, consulting, athletics, financial on which you report the gain, enter ªSectionmake the choice to postpone gain. The benefit ofservices, or brokerage services, 1202 exclusionº in column (a) and enter thethe postponed gain applies to your share of the amount of the allowable exclusion in column (f).• One whose principal asset is the reputa- entity's postponed gain if you held an interest in Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you aretion or skill of one or more employees, the entity for the entire period the entity held the completing line 18 of Schedule D, enter as astock.• Any banking, insurance, financing, leas- positive number the amount of the exclusion oning, investing, or similar business, If a pass-through entity sold qualified small line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in thebusiness stock held for more than 6 months and Schedule D instructions. But if you excluded• Any farming business (including the busi- you held an interest in the entity for the entire 60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion.ness of raising or harvesting trees), period the entity held the stock, you also may
• Any business involving the production or choose to postpone gain if you, rather than the More information. For information about ad-
extraction of products for which percent- pass-through entity, buy the replacement stock ditional requirements that may apply, see sec-
age depletion can be claimed, or within the 60-day period. tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Empowerment zone business stock. You Basis of replacement property. You must Passive activity gains and losses. If you
can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet subtract the amount of postponed gain from the have gains or losses from a passive activity, you
all of the following additional requirements. basis of the qualified empowerment zone assets may also have to report them on Form 8582. In
you bought as replacement property. some cases, the loss may be limited under the
1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation that passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
qualifies as an empowerment zone busi- How to report and postpone capital gain. separate instructions for more information about
ness during substantially all of the time you Report the entire gain realized from the sale on reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-
held the stock, and Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other- sive activity.
wise would without regard to the choice to post-2. You acquired the stock after December 21, pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-2000, and before February 18, 2009. enter ªSection 1397B Rolloverº in column (a) of erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-
the line directly below the line on which you ties, through a broker, you should receive Form
Condition (1) will still be met if the corporation reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-
ceased to qualify after the 5-year period that postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-
begins on the date you acquired the stock. How- parentheses). ment to complete Schedule D.
ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu- Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
More information. For more informationsion cannot be more than the gain you would Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
about empowerment zones, see Publicationhave had if you had sold the stock on the date (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi-the corporation ceased to qualify. whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
ties. For more information about this rollover ofFor more information about empowerment vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross
gain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenuezone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In- proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
Code.centives for Distressed Communities. and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
Rollover of Gain line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
If the net sales price is entered in column (d),From Sale of Reporting Capital do not include the commissions and option pre-Empowerment Zone Assets miums in column (e).Gains and LossesYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain Section 1256 contracts and straddles.
gains from the sale of qualified empowerment Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses fromThis section discusses how to report your capitalzone assets. This means that if you buy certain section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).replacement property and make the choice de- tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include aEnter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds,scribed in this section, you postpone part or all of copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.etc., and real estate (if not reported on Formthe recognition of your gain. 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 of Market discount bonds. Report the sale orYou qualify to make this choice if you meet Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include trade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dall the following tests. all these transactions even if you did not receive (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade
a Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-• You hold a qualified empowerment zone results in a gain and you did not choose to
ment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a include market discount in income currently,
tion schedule to report more transactions.gain. enter ªAccrued Market Discountº on the next line
Be sure to add all sales price entries in col- in column (a) and the amount of the accrued• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on market discount as a loss in column (f). Also
line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column• During the 60-day period beginning on the report the amount of accrued market discount as
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.date of the sale, you buy a replacement interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040A or
Then add the following amounts reported to youqualified empowerment zone asset in the 1040), line 1, and identify it as ªAccrued Market
for 2009 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-Ssame zone as the asset sold. Discount.º
(or on substitute statements):
Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora-• Proceeds from transactions involvingAny part of the gain that is ordinary tion in which you own stock has had a change instocks, bonds, and other securities, andincome cannot be postponed and must control or a substantial change in capital struc-be recognized.
CAUTION
! • Gross proceeds from real estate transac- ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or an
tions (other than the sale of your main equivalent statement from the corporation. Use
Qualified empowerment zone asset. This home if you had no taxable gain) not re- the Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement to
means certain stock or partnership interests in ported on another form or schedule. figure the gain to report on Schedule D (Form
an enterprise zone business. It also includes 1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule D
certain tangible property used in an enterprise (Form 1040) as a result of this transaction.If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andzone business. You must have acquired the Report the aggregate amount received10, attach a statement to your return explainingasset after December 21, 2000. shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the grossthe difference.
sales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8Amount of gain recognized. If you make the of Schedule D, whichever applies.Installment sales. You cannot use the install-choice described in this section, you must rec- ment method to report a gain from the sale ofognize gain only up to the following amount: Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold orstock or securities traded on an established se-
traded reportable real estate, you generally• The amount realized on the sale, minus curities market. You must report the entire gain
should receive from the real estate reportingin the year of sale (the year in which the trade• The cost of any qualified empowerment person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realdate occurs).zone asset that you bought during the Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-60-day period beginning on the date of ceeds.At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply tosale (and did not previously take into ac- most income-producing activities. These rules ªReportable real estateº is defined as anycount in rolling over gain on an earlier sale limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the present or future ownership interest in any of theof qualified empowerment zone assets). amount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk following:
If this amount is equal to or more than the rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of • Improved or unimproved land, including airamount of your gain, you must recognize the full an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk space,amount of your gain. If this amount is less than rules apply. For more information, see Publica-
the amount of your gain, you can postpone the tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. • Inherently permanent structures, including
rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of your Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure any residential, commercial, or industrial
replacement property as described next. the amount of loss you can deduct. building,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or
IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi- loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If thetures and common elements, including
nee in 2009, you must file a Form 1099-B or amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show itland, and
Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. in parentheses.• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a You combine your share of short-term capital(as defined in section 216 of the Internal Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,Revenue Code). U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss
nue Service Center by March 1, 2010 (March 31, carryover, with your other short-term capitalA ªreal estate reporting personº could include 2010, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S gains and losses to figure your net short-termthe buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro- capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- ceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Form
ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring 1099-S by February 16, 2010. On Form 1099-B, Long-term gains and losses. A capital gainthe biggest interest in the property. you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The other or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º On erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the ªFiler.º gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedulelow the instructions for Schedule D to report The other owner should be listed as the ªTrans- D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,these transactions, and include them on line 1 or feror.º You do not, however, have to file a Form show it in parentheses.8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex- 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds for You also report the following in Part II ofchanges on Form 8824 instead. your spouse. For more information about the Schedule D:reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-It is unlawful for any real estate reporting
ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns, • Undistributed long-term capital gains fromperson to separately charge you for complying
see the General Instructions for Forms 1099, a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.
1098, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G. ment company) or real estate investment
trust (REIT),Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a Sale of property bought at various times. Ifnominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your • Your share of long-term capital gains oryou sell a block of stock or other property thatname but actually belong to someone else), losses from partnerships, S corporations,you bought at various times, report thereport on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the and fiduciaries,short-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineproceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or • All capital gain distributions from mutuallowing amounts reported to you for 2009 on loss on one line in Part II. Enter ªVariousº in funds and REITs not reported directly onForms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See the line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formments) that you are not reporting on another Comprehensive Example later in this chapter. 1040, andform or schedule included with your return:
Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba- • Long-term capital loss carryovers.1. Proceeds from transactions involving sis any expense of sale such as broker's fees,stocks, bonds, and other securities, and commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and The result after combining these items with
option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac- your other long-term capital gains and losses is
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Scheduletions (other than the sale of your main your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of
D, whichever applies, unless you reported thehome if you are not required to report it). Schedule D).
net sales price amount in column (d).If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of Capital gain distributions only. You do
lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or
explaining the reason for the difference. ing are true.loss on the sale or trade of investment property
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2009 to 2010 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, reduced by any amount on Form 8914, line 6, is less
than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers. 
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............ . 1.
2. Did you file Form 8914 (to claim an exemption amount for housing a Midwestern displaced individual)?
 No. Enter -0-.
 Yes. Enter the amount from your Form 8914, line 6 .................................... . 2.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If the result is less than zero, enclose it in parentheses ................ . 3.
4. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ............................... . 4.
5. Combine lines 3 and 4. If zero or less, enter -0- ......................................... . 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 5 .................................................. . 6.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 7; otherwise, enter -0- on line 7 and go to line 11.
7. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................ . 7.
8. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ................... . 8.
9. Add lines 6 and 8 .............................................................. . 9.
10. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2010. Subtract line 9 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 10.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 11; otherwise, skip lines 11 through 15.
11. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ............................... . 11.
12. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 .................................. . 12.
13. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................... . 13.
14. Add lines 12 and 13 ............................................................ . 14.
15. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2010. Subtract line 14 from line 11. If zero or less, enter -0- .... . 15.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The only amounts you would have to re- You can use your total net loss to reduce your short-term capital losses first, even if you in-
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. curred them after a long-term capital loss. If youport on Schedule D are capital gain distri-
have not reached the limit on the capital lossbutions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net deduction after using the short-term capitalsubstitute statement).
loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than losses, use the long-term capital losses until you• You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you reach the limit.or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute can carry over the unused part to the next year Decedent's capital loss. A capital lossstatement). and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next sustained by a decedent during his or her lastyear. If part of the loss is still unused, you can tax year (or carried over to that year from ancarry it over to later years until it is completelyIf both of the above statements are true, report earlier year) can be deducted only on the finalused up.your capital gain distributions directly on line 13 income tax return filed for the decedent. TheWhen you figure the amount of any capitalof Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also, capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply inloss carryover to the next year, you must takeuse the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-the current year's allowable deduction into ac-Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to duct any of the loss or carry it over to followingcount, whether or not you claimed it and whetherfigure your tax. years.or not you filed a return for the current year.
You can report your capital gain distributions Joint and separate returns. If you and yourWhen you carry over a loss, it remains long
on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form spouse once filed separate returns and are nowterm or short term. A long-term capital loss you
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-1040, if both of the following are true. carry over to the next tax year will reduce that
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and youryear's long-term capital gains before it reduces• None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute spouse once filed a joint return and are nowthat year's short-term capital gains.statements) you received have an amount filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoverin box 2b, 2c, or 2d. Figuring your carryover. The amount of from the joint return can be deducted only on the
your capital loss carryover is the amount of your return of the spouse who actually had the loss.• You do not have to file Form 1040 for any total net loss that is more than the lesser of:other capital gains or losses.
Capital Gain Tax Rates1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for
the year, orTotal net gain or loss. To figure your total net The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain aregain or loss, combine your net short-term capital 2. Your taxable income increased by your al- generally lower than the tax rates that apply togain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term lowable capital loss deduction for the year other income. These lower rates are called thecapital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on and your deduction for personal exemp- maximum capital gain rates.
Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are tions. The term ªnet capital gainº means the
more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. amount by which your net long-term capital gainIf your deductions are more than your grossIf both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of for the year is more than your net short-termincome for the tax year, use your negative tax-Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain capital loss.able income in computing the amount in item (2).Tax Rates, later. For 2009, the maximum capital gain ratesComplete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the are 0%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 forpart of your capital loss for 2009 that you can details.Capital Losses carry over to 2010.
If you figure your tax using the maxi-If your capital losses are more than your capital Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in mum capital gain rate, and the regulargains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. 2009. The sales resulted in a capital loss of tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIPReport the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, $7,000. They had no other capital transactions. the regular tax computation applies.enclosed in parentheses. Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint
2009 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- Example. All of your net capital gain is fromLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the can be carried over to 2010. be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-lesser of: If their capital loss had been $2,000, their able income is $25,000, none of your taxable
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file
They would have no carryover. 28% rate does not apply.a separate return), or
• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of Use short-term losses first. When you fig- Investment interest deducted. If you claim aSchedule D. ure your capital loss carryover, use your deduction for investment interest, you may have
to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.Table 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain
Capital Gain Rate? Keep for Your Records
 you choose to include in investment income
when figuring the limit on your investment inter-
THEN your maximum est deduction. This is done on the Schedule D
IF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-collectibles gain 28% tion about the limit on investment interest, see
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
section 1202 exclusion 28%
28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or loss
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain
from the sale of qualified small business stockother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% minus the section 1202 exclusion.or higher 15%
Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain orother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,than 25% 0% antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-1ªOther gainº means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. erage held more than 1 year.
Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale
of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
trust due to unrealized appreciation of col- Alternative minimum tax. These capital gain Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily
lectibles. rates are also used in figuring alternative mini- makes sure that the total of the amounts re-
mum tax. ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-Gain on qualified small business stock. If ule D is not less than the total of the amountsyou realized a gain from qualified small business shown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromComprehensive Examplestock that you held more than 5 years, you her broker. For 2009, the total of lines 3 and 10generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the samefrom your income. The exclusion can be up to from her job, she has income from stocks and amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009,
other securities. For the 2009 tax year, she had (not shown).and before January 1, 2011. The exclusion can
the following capital gains and losses, which shebe up to 60% for certain empowerment zone Form 6781. On June 2, 2009, Emily had areports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule Dbusiness stock. The eligible gain minus your realized loss from a regulated futures contract ofis shown at the end of this example.section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked to
Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock, earlier market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thein this chapter. Capital gains and losses Ð Schedule D. end of 2009. She had reported an unrealized
Emily sold stock in two different companies that marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2008 taxUnrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally,
she held for less than a year. In June, she sold return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herthis is any part of your capital gain from selling
100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadsection 1250 property (real property) that is due 2009 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxes
bought in February. She had an adjusted basisto depreciation (but not more than your net sec- 8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she received
of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for ation 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the from her broker for these transactions. Box 11
loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000
Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions Computer Co. stock that she bought in June. − $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain in
to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She shows
For more information about section 1250 prop- and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She 40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4 of
erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in Schedule D and 60% ($9,000) as long-term gain
Publication 544. Part I of Schedule D. on line 11 of Schedule D.
Tax computation using maximum capital Emily had three other stock sales that she The Form 1099-B that Emily received from
gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends and reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 Capital loss carryover from 2008. EmilyTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited has a capital loss carryover to 2009 of $800, ofyour tax if you have qualified dividends or net the Car stock from her father. Its fair market which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched- value at the time of his death was $2,500, which is long-term capital loss. She enters theseule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400. amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. SheBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss isSchedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andthe Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-her father actually held the stock. She enters theD instructions to figure your tax if: sheet.loss in column (f) of line 8.• You have to file Schedule D, and She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co. over Worksheet in her 2008 edition of Publica-• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those tion 550 (not shown), so she could properly19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is shares in 1997, for $1,000. She had bought 100 report her loss carryover for the 2009 tax yearmore than zero. more shares in 1999 for $2,200, and an addi- without refiguring it.tional 300 shares in 2002 for $1,500. Her totalSee the Comprehensive Example  later for an
basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300example of how to figure your tax using the
Tax computation. Because Emily has gains($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which sheSchedule D Tax Worksheet.
on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, sheenters in column (f) of line 8.Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to lineIn December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.Worksheet. If you do not have to use the 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 ofstock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18ness stock that she had bought in Septemberabove) and any of the following apply, use the is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box on2004. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work- line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheetgain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form to figure her tax.Because she held the stock more than 5 years,1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She• You received qualified dividends. (See of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofclaims the exclusion on the line below by enter-Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.) Form 1040 through line 43. She enters theing $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also
amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of the• You do not have to file Schedule D and enters the exclusion as a positive amount on line
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theyou received capital gain distributions. 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.
rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax as(See Capital gain distributions only, ear- She received a Form 1099-B (not shown) $2,751. This is less than the tax she would havelier.) from her broker for each of these transactions. figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,086.The entries shown in box 2 of these forms total• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both  $14,100.more than zero.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE D  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Capital Gains and Losses
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075 See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
/H17075 Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less 
(a) Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(e) Cost or other basis 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d) 
1 
2 Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 2 .................. 2 
3 Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in 
column (d) ................ 3 
4 Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 4 
5 Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ..........................  5 
6 Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............. 6 (                                     )
7 Net short-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f) ..... 7 
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year 
(a)  Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(e) Cost or other basis 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d) 
8 
9 Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 9 .................. 9 
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.  Add lines 8 and 9 in 
column (d) ................ 10 
11 Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or 
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 .................. 11 
12 Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 .......................... 12 
13 Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions ............ 13 
14 Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............. 14 (                                     )
15 Net long-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to Part 
III on the back ........................... 15 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Cat. No. 11338H Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
100 sh
Trucking Co. 2-12-09 6-12-09 400 1,150 (750)
25 sh
Computer Co. 6-30-09 7-30-09 2,500 2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
5,450
60 sh
Car Co. INHERITED 2-13-09 2,100 2,500 (400)
500 sh
Furniture Co. VARIOUS 6-30-09 5,000 4,700 300
20 sh
Toy Co. 9-29-04 12-15-09 4,100 1,100 3,000
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
11,200
9,000
500
9,900
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 Page 2 
Part III Summary
16 Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result ................. 16
If line 16 is: 
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then 
go to line 17 below. 
● A  loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22. 
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, 
line 14. Then go to line 22. 
17 Are lines 15 and 16 both gains? 
Yes. Go to line 18. 
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22. 
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the 
instructions ............................ /H1707518 
19 Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions ...................... /H1707519 
20 Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions
for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 
below. 
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 
and 22 below. 
21 If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller 
of: 
● The loss on line 16 or 
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
............. 21 (                                     )
Note.  When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers. 
22 Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions
for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). 
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. 
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 
15,350
/H12011
1,000
/H12011
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40). (However, if you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet on page 38 of the Form 1040 instructions) ............................................ . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b) ............................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense deduction),
line 4g ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* .. . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................... . 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ........ . 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................... . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................... . 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ........................................................ . 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D** .............................. . 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................... . 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................. . 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. ............................................. . 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $33,950 if single or married filing separately; ...... . 15. 30,000
$67,900 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$45,500 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 .............................. . 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ........ . 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 .......................................... . © 18. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip line 19 and go to line 20. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................... . © 19. 8,900
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 20 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 20.
20. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 .............................. . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............... . 21.
22. Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 22.
23. Multiply line 22 by 15% (.15) ............................................................. . 23.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 24 through 29 and go to line 30. Otherwise, go to line 24.
24. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................. . 24.
25. Add lines 10 and 18 ............................. . 25.
26. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................... . 26.
27. Subtract line 26 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ................... . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 28.
29. Multiply line 28 by 25% (.25) ............................................................. . 29.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 30 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 30.
30. Add lines 18, 19, 22, and 28 ................................................. . 30.
31. Subtract line 30 from line 1 .................................................. . 31.
32. Multiply line 31 by 28% (.28) ............................................................. . 32.
33. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ..... . 33. 2,751
34. Add lines 23, 29, 32, and 33 ............................................................. . 34. 2,751
35. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ...... . 35. 4,086
36. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 34 or line 35.
Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, do
not enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in
the Form 1040 instructions) ............................................................. . 36. 2,751
*If applicable, enter instead the small amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
**If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Income Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Form
1040 instructions before completing this line.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain WorksheetÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1 .......................................................... . 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain .. . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............ . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ............................................................... .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- .................... . 6. (-0-)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................ . 7. 1,000.00
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2009
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2008
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2009
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2009
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the securities. The securities held for investment How To Make the 
must be identified as such in your records on the Mark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
day you got them (for example, by holding them
To make the mark-to-market election for 2010,in a separate brokerage account).Traders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 15, 2010. This
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi- How To Report 2009 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-
for an extension of time to file that return. TheTransactions from trading activities result in cap-ties for your own account. To be engaged in
statement must include the following informa-ital gains and losses and must be reported onbusiness as a trader in securities, you must
tion.Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from thesemeet all the following conditions.
transactions are subject to the limit on capital • That you are making an election under• You must seek to profit from daily market losses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenuemovements in the prices of securities and
Code.Mark-to-market election made. If you madenot from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
the mark-to-market election, you should reportpreciation. • The first tax year for which the election is
all gains and losses from trading as ordinary effective.• Your activity must be substantial. gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead
• The trade or business for which you areof as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. In• You must carry on the activity with con-
making the election.that case, securities held at the end of the yeartinuity and regularity.
in your business as a trader are marked to mar-
If you are not required to file a 2009 incomeket by treating them as if they were sold (andThe following facts and circumstances should
tax return, you make the election by placing thereacquired) for fair market value on the lastbe considered in determining if your activity is a
above statement in your books and records nobusiness day of the year. But do not mark tosecurities trading business.
later than March 15, 2010. Attach a copy of themarket any securities you held for investment.• Typical holding periods for securities statement to your 2010 return.Report sales from those securities on Schedulebought and sold. If your method of accounting for 2009 isD, not Form 4797.
inconsistent with the mark-to-market election,• The frequency and dollar amount of your Expenses. Interest expense and other invest- you must change your method of accounting fortrades during the year. ment expenses that an investor would deduct on securities under Revenue Procedure 2008-52Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a• The extent to which you pursue the activity (or its successor) available at www.irs.gov/irb/trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orto produce income for a livelihood. 2008-36_IRB/ar09.html . Revenue ProcedureLoss From Business, if the expenses are from 2008-52 requires you to file Form 3115, Applica-• The amount of time you devote to the ac- the trading business. Commissions and other tion for Change in Accounting Method. Follow itstivity. costs of acquiring or disposing of securities are instructions. Enter ª64º on line 1a of the Formnot deductible but must be used to figure gain or 3115.If your trading activities do not meet the above loss. The limit on investment interest expense, Once you make the election, it will apply todefinition of a business, you are considered an which applies to investors, does not apply to 2010 and all later tax years, unless you getinvestor, and not a trader. It does not matter interest paid or incurred in a trading business. permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect ofwhether you call yourself a trader or a ªday
making the election is described underSelf-employment tax. Gains and losses fromtrader.º
Mark-to-market election made, earlier.selling securities as a trader are not subject to
For more information on this election, seeNote. You may be a trader in some securi- self-employment tax. This is true whether the
Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-ties and have other securities you hold for in- election is made or not. For an exception that
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 atvestment. The special rules discussed here do applies to section 1256 contracts, see
 www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.not apply to the securities held for investment. Self-Employment Income earlier under Section
You must keep detailed records to distinguish 1256 Contracts Marked to Market.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 73

Page 74 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by
more information, see Publication 4134, Low using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)
Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication is Assistant.
5. available at www.irs.gov , by calling • Sign up to receive local and national tax1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your news by email.local IRS office.
• Get information on starting and operatingHow To Get Tax Free tax services. To find out what services a small business.
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free taxHelp
information sources, including publications, Phone. Many services are available byservices, and free tax education and assistance phone. You can get help with unresolved tax issues, programs. It also has an index of over 100order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) youtions, and get information from the IRS in sev- • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-can listen to on your telephone.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best tions. Call 1-800-TAX FORMAccessible versions of IRS published prod-for you, you will have quick and easy access to (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearucts are available on request in a variety oftax help. forms, instructions, and publications, andalternative formats for people with disabilities.
prior-year forms and instructions. YouContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The should receive your order within 10 days.Free help with your return. Free help in pre-Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- paring your return is available nationwide from • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withpendent organization within the IRS whose em- IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed toeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- • Solving problems. You can gethelp low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-ing tax problems that have not been resolved face-to-face help solving tax problemsseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designedthrough normal channels, or who believe that an every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with theirIRS system or procedure is not working as it sistance Centers. An employee can ex-tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronicshould. Here are seven things every taxpayer plain IRS letters, request adjustments tofiling and all volunteers will let you know aboutshould know about TAS: your account, or help you set up a pay-credits and deductions you may be entitled to
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call• TAS is your voice at the IRS.
tance Center for an appointment. To find1-800-829-1040.• Our service is free, confidential, and tai- the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers thelored to meet your needs. tacts or look in the phone book underTax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-
United States Government, Internal Reve-est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or• You may be eligible for TAS help if you
nue Service.visit AARP's website athave tried to resolve your tax problem
www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.through normal IRS channels and have • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessFor more information on these programs, gogotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS to TTY/TDD equipment, callto www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theprocedure just isn't working as it should. 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toupper right-hand corner. order forms and publications.• TAS helps taxpayers whose problems are
Internet. You can access the IRS web-causing financial difficulty or significant • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7cost, including the cost of professional ten to pre-recorded messages coveringdays a week to:representation. This includes businesses
 various tax topics.as well as individuals. • E-file your return. Find out about commer- • Refund information. To check the status ofcial tax preparation and e-file services• TAS employees know the IRS and how to your 2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954available free to eligible taxpayers.navigate it. We will listen to your problem, during business hours or 1-800-829-4477help you understand what needs to be (automated refund information 24 hours a• Check the status of your 2009 refund. Godone to resolve it, and stay with you every day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72to www.irs.gov and click on Where's Mystep of the way until your problem is re- hours after the IRS acknowledges receiptRefund. Wait at least 72 hours after thesolved. of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks afterIRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed
mailing a paper return. If you filed Formreturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a• TAS has at least one local taxpayer advo-
8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11paper return. If you filed Form 8379 withcate in every state, the District of Colum-
weeks if you filed electronically). Haveyour return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifbia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your
your 2009 tax return available so you canyou filed electronically). Have your 2009local advocate, whose number is in your
provide your social security number, yourtax return available so you can providephone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad-
filing status, and the exact whole dollaryour social security number, your filingvocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS,
amount of your refund. Refunds are sentstatus, and the exact whole dollar amountand on our website at www.irs.gov/advo-
out weekly on Fridays. If you check theof your refund.cate. You can also call our toll-free line at
status of your refund and are not given the1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD • Download forms, instructions, and publica- date it will be issued, please wait until the1-800-829-4059. tions. next week before checking back.• You can learn about your rights and re- • Order IRS products online. • Other refund information. To check thesponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our
status of a prior year refund or amended• Research your tax questions online.online tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov.
return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.• Search publications online by topic orLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). keyword.The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program Evaluating the quality of our telephone
serves individuals who have a problem with the services. To ensure IRS representatives give• Use the online Internal Revenue Code,
IRS and whose income is below a certain level. accurate, courteous, and professional answers,Regulations, or other official guidance.
LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most we use several methods to evaluate the quality• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)LITCs can provide representation before the of our telephone services. One method is for apublished in the last few years.IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes, second IRS representative to listen in on or
and other issues for free or a small fee. If an • Figure your withholding allowances using record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
individual's native language is not English, some the withholding calculator online at www. some callers to complete a short survey at the
clinics can provide multilingual information irs.gov/individuals. end of the call.
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Walk-in. Many products and services can call your local Center and leave a • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-
are available on a walk-in basis. tions.message requesting an appointment to re-
solve a tax account issue. A representa-
 • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andtive will call you back within 2 business• Products. You can walk in to many post finding aid.days to schedule an in-person appoint-offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up • Tax law frequently asked questions.ment at your convenience. If you have ancertain forms, instructions, and publica- ongoing, complex tax account problem or • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery a special need, such as a disability, an sponse system.stores, copy centers, city and county gov- appointment can be requested. All otherernment offices, credit unions, and office • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of theissues will be handled without an appoint-supply stores have a collection of products U.S. Code.ment. To find the number of your localavailable to print from a CD or photocopy
office, go to • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxfrom reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the forms.offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-
phone book under United States Govern-enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue • Internal Revenue Bulletins.ment, Internal Revenue Service.Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
• Toll-free and email technical support.able for research purposes.
Mail. You can send your order for • Two releases during the year.• Services. You can walk in to your local forms, instructions, and publications to ± The first release will ship the beginningTaxpayer Assistance Center every busi- the address below. You should receive
 of January 2010.ness day for personal, face-to-face tax a response within 10 days after your request is ± The final release will ship the beginninghelp. An employee can explain IRS letters, received. of March 2010.request adjustments to your tax account,
or help you set up a payment plan. If you
Internal Revenue Service Purchase the DVD from National Technicalneed to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/tions about how the tax law applies to your
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callindividual tax return, or you are more com-
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30fortable talking with someone in person, DVD for tax products. You can order (plus a $6 handling fee).visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Publication 1796, IRS Tax ProductsCenter where you can spread out your DVD, and obtain:
records and talk with an IRS representa-
• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-
essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you lications.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 75

Page 76 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of the Investment interest: The inter- Passive activity: An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable toa. A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnership both of the following are true.b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property • More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option: Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of, • You perform more than 750At-risk rules: Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orthe amount you risk losing in the Marked to market rule: The businesses in which you ma-ducing capital gains from aactivity. treatment of each section 1256 terially participate.transaction described in contract (defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as Portfolio income: Gross incomeyour investment in property for tax if it were sold for its fair market from interest, dividends, annuities,purposes. The basis of property Demand loan: A loan payable in value on the last business day of or royalties that is not derived in theyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is full at any time upon demand by the the year. ordinary course of a trade or busi-used to figure gain or loss on the lender. ness. It includes gains from thesale or disposition of investment Market discount: The stated re- sale or trade of property (other thanproperty. Dividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur- an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by a ity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders out immediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de- Premium: The amount by whichapplicable federal rate, or a term Equity option: Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is • To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. • That is valued directly or indi- bond having market discount ex- the bond after you get it (other thanrectly by reference to any cept:Call: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).• Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1 Private activity bond: A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,Fair market value: The price at that is part of a state or local gov-of shares of stock at a specified • Tax-exempt obligations thatwhich property would change ernment bond issue of which:price.
you bought before May 1,hands between a willing buyer and
1. More than 10% of the pro-1993,Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-
ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant • U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in which facts.
• Certain installment obliga-you actually or constructively re- 2. More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at the Nominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a. Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in trading payable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis- minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),
trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedForward contract: A contract tomarket by the Commodities Fu- option that is not an equity option, b. Derived from payments fordeliver a substantially fixed amounttures Trading Commission. such as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for a futures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.Futures contract: An ex-calling for the sale or purchase of a
change-traded contract to buy orfixed amount of a commodity at a Options dealer: Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thesell a specified commodity or finan-future date for a fixed price. istered with an appropriate national purchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified price securities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See also maker or specialist in listed op-transaction that you entered into property such as a stated numberCommodity future. tions.after April 30, 1993, that meets of shares of stock at a specified
Gift loan: Any below-market loanboth of these tests. price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the The amount by which the stated1. Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest: Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. sue price. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 76 Publication 550 (2009)

Page 77 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop- Restricted stock: Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b. Does not participate in cor-
buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any signif-for services you perform that iserty, with multiple classes of inter-
substantially identical property and icant extent, andnontransferable and is subject to aests held by investors. These
deliver it to the lender.substantial risk of forfeiture.interests may be either regular or c. Has a fixed redemptionresidual. price.Straddle: Generally, a set of off-Section 1256 contract: Any:
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract: A • Regulated futures contract, erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-• Foreign currency contract as demand loan.• Provides that amounts that chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 undermust be deposited to, or may number of shares of the security,Section 1256 Contracts Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-be withdrawn from, your mar- with the same exercise price andMarked to Market, curities at a loss within 30 daysgin account depend on daily period. before or after you buy or acquire in• Nonequity option,market conditions (a system a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock: Stockof marking to market), and • Dealer equity option, or contract or option to buy, substan-that meets the following tests. tially identical stock or securities.• Is traded on, or subject to the • Dealer securities futures con-
rules of, a qualified board of 1. There has been a separationtract.
in ownership between theexchange, such as a domes-
stock and any dividend on thetic board of trade designated Securities futures contract: A stock that has not becomeas a contract market by the contract of sale for future delivery payable.Commodity Futures Trading of a single security or of a nar-
Commission or any board of row-based security index. 2. The stock:trade or exchange approved
by the Secretary of the Trea- Short sale: The sale of property a. Is limited and preferred as
sury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Publication 550 (2009) Page 77

Page 78 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
New York Liberty bonds ... . 13 Certificates of deposit Discount on debtA
Par value ................. . 45 (CDs) .................... . 14 instruments ........... . 13-17Abusive tax shelters  (See Tax
Premiums on ....... . 35, 45, 76 Certificates of deposit ...... . 14Children:shelters)
Private activity ........ . 12, 76 Election to report all interest asAlaska Permanent FundAccounting fees ............ . 36
Redemption or retirement OID .................... . 17dividends ............... . 34Accrual method ..... . 7, 17, 25, of ...................... . 39 Face-amount certificates ... . 14Capital gain distributions ... . 3433, 76 Sold between interest Gain or loss treatment ..... . 50Custodian account for ...... . 3Accuracy-related penalty .... . 5 dates ................... . 11 Inflation-indexed .......... . 15Gifts to .................... . 5Acquisition discount ... . 16, 45 State and local Market discount bonds (SeeInvestment income of .... . 3, 34Adjusted basis ...... . 22, 43, 45 government ............. . 50 Market discount bonds)Qualified dividends ........ . 34Alaska Permanent Fund Stripped ........... . 12, 15, 45 Original issue discount (SeeSavings account with parent asdividends ............ . 23, 34 Tax credit bonds .......... . 12 Original issue discount (OID))trustee ................... . 5
Amortization of bond Tax-exempt ............... . 50 Short-term obligations .... . 16,U.S. savings bond owner ... . 8
premium .............. . 35-36 Traded flat ................. . 6 50Clerical help ................ . 36
U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Stripped bonds andAnnuities: Collateralized debt obligationsbonds) coupons ................ . 15Borrowing on .............. . 37 (CDOs) ................... . 26U.S. Treasury (See U.S.Interest on ................. . 6 Discounted debtComments on publication ... . 2Treasury bills, notes, andLife insurance proceeds used to instruments .............. . 13Commodities traders ....... . 76bonds)buy ..................... . 12 Discounted tax-exemptCommodity futures ..... . 52, 54,Sale of .................... . 51 Brokerage fees ......... . 36, 66 obligations ............... . 4576Single-premium ........... . 37 Build America Bonds ....... . 12 Dividends  (See also FormCommunity property:Trade for .............. . 39, 48 1099-DIV) ......... . 20-25, 76U.S. savings bonds ......... . 8Applicable federal rate ...... . 6 Alaska PermanentC Constructive ownership Fund ............... . 23, 34Appreciated financial Calls and puts .......... . 58, 76 transactions ......... . 49, 52 Exempt-interest ..... . 5, 23, 54positions ................. . 40 Table 4-1 ................. . 58 Constructive receipt ........ . 17 Extraordinary ............. . 56Arbitrage bonds ............ . 12 Capital assets .............. . 49 Constructive sales ......... . 40 Holding period ............ . 20Assistance  (See Tax help) Capital gain Contractors, insolvency Insurance policies ......... . 23At-risk rules ......... . 32, 65, 76 distributions ...... . 21-22, 24, of ........................ . 55 Money market funds ....... . 21Attorneys' fees ............. . 36 34, 54 Nominees ............. . 20, 25ConversionAutomatic investment Capital gain tax Ordinary .................. . 20transactions ......... . 52, 76service ............ . 36, 44, 54 computation ............. . 68 Patronage ................ . 23Convertible stocks and
Payments in lieu of ........ . 56Capital gains and bonds .................... . 47
Qualified ........... . 20, 24, 34losses ................. . 49-54 Cooperatives, sales of stockB Qualified foreignConstructive ownership to ........................ . 62Backup withholding ......... . 3 corporation ............. . 21transactions ............ . 52 Co-owners of U.S. savingsBad debts .............. . 51, 54 Received in January ....... . 20Definition ................. . 49 bonds ..................... . 8Bankrupt financial institutions: Reinvestment plans ... . 21, 36,Empowerment zone Corporate distributions .... . 20Deposit in ................. . 51 44assets .................. . 65 Capital gain ........ . 24, 34, 54Bargain purchases ......... . 42 Reporting requirements ... . 20,Investment property ....... . 50 Constructive .............. . 22Basis ................ . 42-48, 76 23-25Long-term ............ . 56, 66 Dividends (See Dividends) Restricted stock ........... . 24Adjusted ........... . 22, 43, 45 Long-term debt Fractional shares .......... . 23 Sale or trade vs. ........... . 39Cost ...................... . 42 instruments ............. . 50 Liquidating ............ . 22, 25 Scrip ..................... . 23Inherited property ......... . 43 Losses, limit on ........... . 67 Nondividend .......... . 22, 25 Sold stock ................ . 20Passive activities .......... . 65Investment property ....... . 42 Return of capital ........... . 22 Stock ................. . 44, 54Qualified covered callLike-kind exchanges ....... . 46 Stock rights ............... . 22 Underreported ............. . 4options ................. . 60Other than cost ............ . 42 Undistributed capital Veterans' insurance ..... . 5, 23Qualified small businessREITs .................... . 44 gains ................... . 21stock ................... . 63REMIC, residual interest ... . 26 Divorce ................ . 43, 48CorporateReporting requirements ... . 60,Replacement stock ........ . 64 reorganizations .......... . 4764, 65Stocks and bonds ..... . 22, 23, ECost basis .................. . 42Rollover of gain from sale of35, 44
Education Savings BondCoupon bonds ............. . 17securities ............... . 63Bearer obligations ...... . 14, 51 Program .............. . 10-11Short-term ............ . 56, 66Below-market loans .... . 6-7, 76 Interest excluded under .... . 19Tax rates ................. . 67Bonds: D Recordkeeping28% rate gain worksheet,Accrued interest on ........ . 19 Day traders ................. . 73 requirements ............ . 11completed sample .... . 67Amortization of premium ... . 34 Dealer equity options ....... . 41 Employee stock options ..... . 2Table 4-2 ............... . 67Arbitrage .................. . 12 Dealer securities futures Employee stock ownershipCapital loss carryover ..... . 61,Basis ................. . 35, 44 contracts ................. . 41 plans (ESOPs), sales of stock67, 68Build America Bonds ...... . 12 to ........................ . 62Worksheet 4-1 ............ . 66 Debt instruments, retirementCapital asset .............. . 50 of ........................ . 51 Employer identificationCash method ..... . 7, 17, 33, 76Convertible ............... . 47 numbers (EINs) .......... . 27Reporting options for savings Decedents .............. . 43, 67Coupon ................... . 17
bond interest ............. . 8 U.S. savings bond interest, Empowerment zone ........ . 65Enterprise zone facility ..... . 13
reporting of .............. . 9Cash-settled options ....... . 41 Endowment contracts ...... . 37Federally guaranteed ...... . 12
Demand loans .............. . 76Casualty losses ............ . 51 Enterprise zone facilityIdentification .............. . 44
Demutualization ............ . 48 bonds .................... . 13Market discount ... . 13, 33, 45, CDOs (Collateralized debt
51, 65, 76 obligations) .............. . 26 Deposits, loss on ........... . 51 Equity option ........... . 41, 76
Page 78 Publication 550 (2009)

Page 79 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estate income received by Free tax services ........... . 74 Condemnation awards ...... . 6 Liquidating
beneficiary ................ . 3 distributions ......... . 22, 45Deferred interestFrozen deposits .......... . 6, 19
accounts ................ . 5Exempt-interest dividends on Listed options .......... . 41, 76Futures contracts:
Dividends on deposit or sharemutual fund stock ........ . 54 Definition ................. . 76 Loans:
accounts ................ . 5Expenses of producing Regulated ............ . 40, 77 Below-market ......... . 6-7, 76
Frozen deposits ......... . 6, 19income ................... . 36 Securities ............. . 54, 57 Gift and demand ........ . 6, 76
Gift for opening account .... . 6 Guarantees ............... . 55Futures, commodity .... . 52, 54,
Individual retirement Term ................... . 7, 7776F arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 5Wash sales ............... . 56 Local government obligations
Installment saleFace-amount certificates ... . 14 (See State or local government
payments ................ . 6Fair market value ... . 42, 43, 46, obligations)G Insurance dividends ........ . 676 Long-term capital gains andGains on qualified small Money market funds ........ . 5Federal guarantee on losses ................ . 56, 66business stock ........... . 63 Nominee distributions ....... . 5bonds .................... . 12 Long-term debtPrepaid insuranceGains on sales or trades  (SeeFees to buy or sell ......... . 36 instruments .............. . 50premiums ................ . 6also Capital gains andFinancial asset securitization Losses on sales or trades  (SeeReporting .............. . 17-20losses) ............ . 46, 48, 49investment trusts also Capital gains andSeller-financedGifts ............. . 5, 43, 54, 76(FASITs) ................. . 26 losses) ................... . 49mortgage ........... . 17, 19Glossary ................ . 76-77Foreign accounts and Amount calculation ........ . 46Tax refunds ................ . 6Government obligations .... . 16trusts ..................... . 2 Carryback election .... . 41, 42Taxable ........... . 5-6, 11, 12 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldForeign currency Tax-exempt ........... . 12, 17 6 months or less ........ . 54transactions ............. . 41 H U.S. savings bonds, person Passive activities ... . 27, 32, 34Foreign income ............. . 2 Hedging transactions ..... . 41, responsible for tax (Table Related parties ............ . 48Forgone interest ........... . 76 42, 52 1-2) ..................... . 8 Section 1244 (small business)Form: Underreported ............. . 4Help  (See Tax help) stock ................... . 531066 (Schedule Q) ........ . 37 Usurious interest ........... . 6Holding period: Small business investment3115 ...................... . 8 VA insurance dividends ..... . 5Investment property ....... . 53 company stock .......... . 534952 ..................... . 34 Investment clubs ........ . 27-28Replacement stock ........ . 64 Wash sales ............... . 60Form 1040 .............. . 17, 23 Straddles ................. . 61 Investment counsel and
Schedule B ............... . 17 advice .................... . 37
Form 1040, Schedule D .... . 55, MInvestment expenses .... . 32-38I57, 64, 68 Allocated ................. . 26 Marked to market rules .... . 41,Income from sources outsideWorksheet, completed At-risk rules ............... . 32 73, 76U.S. ....................... . 2sample ................. . 71 Deductible ................ . 36 Market discount bonds .... . 13,Income tax treaties (TableForm 1040A ................ . 17 Limits on deductions ....... . 32 15-16, 33, 45, 51, 65, 761-3) ...................... . 21 Nondeductible ............ . 37Form 1040X ................ . 40 Accrued marketIndian tribal government ... . 12 Pass-through entities ...... . 37 discount ................ . 15Form 1041 .................. . 28 Individual retirement Reporting requirements .... . 38 Mark-to-market election .... . 73Form 1065 .................. . 27 arrangements (IRAs): Investment income .......... . 3Schedule K-1 ............. . 27 Maximum rate of capital gainsInterest income ............. . 5 Children ................ . 3, 34 (Table 4-2) ............... . 67Form 1066, Schedule Q ..... . 26 Inflation-indexed debt General Information ........ . 3 Mechanics' and suppliers'Form 1096 ........... . 19, 25, 66 instruments .............. . 15 Net income ............... . 33 liens ..................... . 55Form 1099-B .... . 39, 65, 66, 68 Inherited property: Records to keep ............ . 3 Meetings, expenses ofForm 1099-CAP ............ . 65 Basis ..................... . 43 Reporting of (Table 1-1) .... . 4 attending ................. . 37Form 1099-DIV ... . 3, 20, 23, 25 Holding period ............ . 54 Investment property ........ . 32 Missing children, photographsForm 1099-INT .... . 3, 5, 10, 18, Transfer by inheritance .... . 39 Basis ..................... . 42 of ......................... . 219, 25, 26 Insolvency of Definition ................. . 39 Mixed straddles ........ . 56, 61Form 1099-MISC ........ . 20, 56 contractors .............. . 55 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 50
Money market funds ....... . 21Form 1099-OID ... . 5, 14, 18, 25, Installment sales ........... . 65 Gift, received as ........... . 43
Interest income ............. . 526 Holding period ............ . 53Insurance:
More information  (See Tax help)Liquidation, received in .... . 45Form 1099-S ........... . 65, 66 Borrowing on .............. . 37
Mortgages:Nontaxable trades, receivedDividends, interest on .... . 6, 23Form 1120 .................. . 27
Revenue bonds ........... . 12in ...................... . 43Interest option on .......... . 12Form 2439 .................. . 21 Secondary liability onSales and trades .......... . 39Life insurance companies,Form 3115 ............ . 8, 36, 73 home ................... . 55Services, received for ...... . 42demutualization ......... . 48Form 4684 .................. . 51 Seller-financed ............ . 19Spouse, received from ..... . 43Life, paid to beneficiary .... . 12Form 4797 .............. . 47, 53 Taxable trades, received Municipal bonds  (See also StatePrepaid premiums .......... . 6Form 4952 .................. . 34 in ...................... . 43 or local governmentSingle-premium life ........ . 37
Form 6198 .................. . 65 obligations) ........ . 12, 17, 50Trades .................... . 48
Form 6781 .... . 42, 52, 60, 65, 68 Veterans' dividends, interest Mutual funds .... . 21, 32, 34, 37,
JForm 8275 .................. . 31 on .................... . 5, 23 44, 54
Joint accounts .............. . 5 publicly offered ............ . 37Form 8275-R ............... . 31 Interest expenses:
Joint and separateAllocation of ............... . 32Form 8582 .................. . 27
returns ............... . 31, 67Investment interest .... . 32, 76Form 8614 ................... . 3 NLimit on ................. . 33Form 8815 ........... . 10, 11, 19 New York Liberty bonds .... . 13When to deduct ......... . 33Form 8824 .................. . 47 L Nominee distributions:Margin accounts .......... . 33Form 8832 .................. . 27 Dividends ............. . 20, 25Life insurance companies:Paid in advance ........... . 33Form 8886 .............. . 30, 31 Interest income .......... . 5, 19demutualization ........... . 48Straddles ................. . 37Form SS-4 .................. . 27 Original issue discount ..... . 14Unstated .................. . 42 Like-kind exchanges ... . 46, 48
Form W-8BEN ............... . 4 Nominee, defined .......... . 76Basis of propertyInterest income ............. . 5
Form W-9 ................... . 4 received ................ . 46 Nonbusiness bad debts ... . 51,Annuity contracts ........... . 6
Forward contracts .......... . 76 Reporting requirements .... . 47 54Bonds traded flat ........... . 6
Fractional shares ....... . 23, 54 Certificates of deposits ..... . 5 Limited partners ............ . 76 Noncapital assets .......... . 49
Publication 550 (2009) Page 79

Page 80 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nondeductible investment Stripped .............. . 25, 77 Repossession of real Specialized small business
expenses ................ . 37 property .................. . 54 investment companyPremiums on bonds .... . 35, 45,
stock ................. . 45, 64Nondividend 76 Restricted property ......... . 42
distributions ............. . 22 Spouses:Private activity bonds ..... . 12, Restricted stock ........ . 24, 77
Transfers between (See alsoNonequity options ...... . 41, 76 76 Retirement of debt
Related partyNonqualified preferred Public utility stock instrument ............... . 51
transactions) ........ . 43, 48stock ..................... . 47 reinvestment ............. . 44 Return of capital  (See
State or local governmentNonresident aliens: Publications  (See Tax help) Nondividend distributions)
obligations ............ . 12-13Backup withholding ......... . 4 Puts and calls .......... . 58, 76 Revocable trust, trustee's
Market discount bonds (SeeNontaxable return of Table 4-1 ................. . 58 commissions for ......... . 37
Market discount bonds)capital ................... . 22 Rollover of gain from sale: Private activity bonds ..... . 12,Nontaxable stock rights .... . 54 Empowerment zone 76Q assets .................. . 65Nontaxable trades ...... . 46, 54 Registration requirement ... . 12Qualified dividends ......... . 24 Securities ............. . 63, 64Notes: Taxable interest ........... . 12Qualified small businessIndividuals, bought at Tax-exempt interest ....... . 12stock .............. . 45, 54, 63discount ................ . 51 Stock:SGains on .................. . 63U.S. Treasury (See U.S.
Basis .......... . 22, 23, 44, 64S corporations ......... . 26, 45Treasury bills, notes, and
Capital asset .............. . 50Safe deposit box ........... . 37bonds) R Constructive ownership .... . 49Sales and trades of investment
Real estate investment trusts Convertible ............... . 47property ............... . 39-73
(REITs) ............ . 21, 44, 54 Corporate ................. . 47O Definition ................. . 39
Real estate mortgage Dividends (See Dividends)Office expenses ............ . 36 Savings bonds  (See U.S.
investment conduits Fractional shares ...... . 23, 54Options ................. . 57-58 savings bonds)
(REMICs) ....... . 25-26, 37, 76 Identification .............. . 44Calls and puts ......... . 58, 76 SBIC stock  (See Small businessRegular interest ........... . 25 Installment sales .......... . 65Cash settlement ....... . 41, 58 investment company stock)Residual interest ...... . 26, 57 Nonqualified preferredDealer equity .............. . 41 Scrip dividends ............ . 23Recordkeeping ............. . 53 stock ................... . 47Deep-in-the-money ........ . 60 Section 1202 gain .......... . 64 Options for employees ...... . 2Recordkeeping requirements:Employee stock ............ . 2 Section 1244 stock ......... . 53 Public utility,Education Savings BondEquity ................ . 41, 76 Section 1256 contracts .... . 40, reinvestment ............ . 44Program ................ . 11Gain or loss ........... . 57, 60 54, 58, 65, 77 Redemption of ............ . 39Investment income ......... . 3Holding period ............ . 54 Net gain on ............... . 41 Replacement stock ........ . 64Small business stock ...... . 53Listed ................ . 41, 76 Net loss on ............... . 41 Restricted stock ....... . 24, 77Nonequity ............. . 41, 76 Redemption of stock ....... . 39 Reporting requirements .... . 42Qualified covered call ...... . 60 Rights ............. . 22, 45, 54Redemption or retirement of Securities:Reporting requirements .... . 58 S corporations ............ . 45bonds .................... . 39 Holding period ............ . 53Section 1256 contracts ... . 40, Sales to ESOPs orRegulated futures Installment sales .......... . 6558 cooperatives ............ . 62contract .............. . 40, 77 Lost, stolen, etc., cost ofWash sales ............... . 56 Small business ........ . 45, 54REITs  (See Real estate replacing ............... . 36 Specialized small businessOptions dealer ............. . 76 investment trusts (REITs)) Rollover of gain from investment company .... . 45Ordinary gains and Related party sale ................ . 63, 64 Splits ..................... . 45losses ................ . 49, 51 transactions ...... . 38, 48-49 Traders in ................. . 68 Straddles (See Straddles)Original issue discount Related persons ............ . 59 Worthless ............. . 40, 55 Stripped preferred stock .. . 25,(OID) ....... . 12, 13-15, 45, 76 REMICs  (See Real estate Securities futures 77Adjustment to ............. . 20 mortgage investment conduits contracts ...... . 41, 54, 57, 77 Surrender of .............. . 39Reporting requirements ... . 13, (REMICs)) Self-employment income ... . 42 Trades .................... . 4714 Reorganizations, Self-employment tax ....... . 73 Trust instruments treatedRules ..................... . 14 corporate ................ . 47 Seller-financed as ...................... . 40
Reporting requirements: mortgages ............... . 19 Straddles ................ . 59-62Bad debts ................. . 55P Short sales .............. . 55-56 Defined ................... . 77Bond premium Adjusted basis ............ . 45Passive activities ........... . 76 Holding period ............ . 61amortization ............ . 36 Defined ................... . 77Gains and losses ...... . 27, 32, Interest expense and carryingCapital gains and Expenses of .............. . 3734, 65 charges ................ . 37losses ........... . 60, 64, 65 Extraordinary dividends .... . 56Pass-through entities: Loss deferral rules ......... . 59Dividend income .......... . 23 Puts ...................... . 58Rollover of gain ........... . 64 Mixed ............. . 56, 61, 62Exempt-interest dividends ... . 5 Small business investment Reporting requirements .... . 65Patronage dividends ....... . 23 Interest on U.S. savings company stock .......... . 53 Stripped bonds andPenalties: bonds ................... . 8 Short-term capital gains and coupons .......... . 12, 15, 45Accuracy-related ........ . 5, 31 Investment expenses ...... . 38 losses ................ . 56, 66Backup withholding ......... . 5 Stripped preferred stock .. . 25,Like-kind exchanges ....... . 47 Short-term obligations .... . 16,Civil fraud ................. . 31 77Options ................... . 58 45, 50Early withdrawal ......... . 5, 20 Substitute payments ....... . 56Original issue discount ..... . 14 Interest deduction, limitFailure to pay tax .......... . 31 Suggestions forS corporation income, on ...................... . 33Failure to supply SSN ...... . 3 publication ................ . 2deductions, and Sixty/forty rule ............. . 41Substantial credits .................. . 27understatement ......... . 31 Small business investmentSection 1256 contracts .... . 42Valuation misstatement .... . 31 company stock ....... . 53, 64 TState or local government
Reporting requirements .... . 53Political parties: Tables:obligations .............. . 12
Debts owed by ............ . 55 Small business stock ...... . 45, Capital gains maximum rateStraddles ................. . 65
53, 54, 63Portfolio income ........... . 76 (Table 4-2) .............. . 67Substitute payments ....... . 56
Income tax treaties (TableSocial security number (SSN):Preferred stock: Tax-exempt interest
1-3) .................... . 21Custodial accounts ......... . 3Nonqualified .............. . 47 income ................. . 17
Joint accounts ............. . 3Redeemable at a Trades .................... . 73 Investment income, reporting of
Requirement to give ........ . 3premium ................ . 22 Wash sales ............... . 57 (Table 1-1) ............... . 4
Page 80 Publication 550 (2009)

Page 81 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tables: (Cont.) Interest on ............ . 12, 17 Treasury inflation-indexed Usurious interest ............ . 6
Puts and calls (Table securities ................ . 15Tax-exempt obligations ... . 12,
4-1) .................... . 58 15, 45 Treasury inflation-protected VU.S. savings bonds, person securities (TIPS) ..... . 11, 15Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 74 Veterans' insurance:responsible for tax (Table Treaties, income tax (TableTaxpayer identification Dividends on .............. . 231-2) ..................... . 8 1-3) ...................... . 21numbers (TINs):
Tax credit bonds ........... . 12 Aliens ..................... . 2 Trust income received by WTax help .................... . 74 beneficiary ................ . 3Term loans ............... . 7, 77 Warrants ................... . 57Tax rates: Trustee's commission forTrade or business .......... . 32 Wash sales .......... . 56-57, 77Capital gain and losses .... . 67 revocable trust ........... . 37Traders in securities ....... . 73 Holding period ............ . 54Tax refunds: TTY/TDD information ....... . 74Trades: Loss deferral rules,Interest on ................. . 6 Insurance ................. . 48 straddles ............... . 60Tax shelters ............. . 29-31 Investment property ....... . 39 U Reporting requirements .... . 57Penalties ................. . 30 Like-kind .............. . 46, 48 U.S. savings bonds  (See also Withholding, backup ........ . 3Reporting requirements .... . 30 Nontaxable ........ . 43, 46, 54 Education Savings Bond Worksheets:Rules to curb abuse ....... . 29 Reporting requirements .... . 73 Program) ......... . 6, 7-11, 11 Capital gains, 28% rateTaxable income, expenses Stock ..................... . 47 Reporting interest on ..... . 6, 7 worksheet, completedof ........................ . 37 Taxable ................... . 43 Retirement or profit-sharing sample ................. . 72Taxes: U.S. Treasury notes or plan, distributed from ..... . 9 Capital loss carryover ...... . 66State and local transfer .... . 37 bonds .................. . 48 Worksheet .............. . 19 Worthless securities ... . 40, 55State income .............. . 37 Treasury bills, notes, and bonds Tax, responsible person (Table
Tax-exempt bonds ......... . 50 (See U.S. Treasury bills, notes, 1-2) ..................... . 8 ■
and bonds)Tax-exempt income: U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and
Expenses of .............. . 37 bonds ....... . 6, 11-13, 48, 54
Publication 550 (2009) Page 81

Page 82 of 82 of Publication 550 16:06 -  4-JAN-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2010
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2010
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity,
Hope, and Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay and Government Retiree Credits
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547SP
Page 82 Publication 550 (2009)