Userid: SD_N1RNB schema tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/XML Fileid: D:\Users\n1rnb\documents\2011 Products\527\P527.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 ContentsCat. No. 15052W
What's New .................... . 1Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2Treasury Residential
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Rental Income and Expenses (IfRentalService No Personal Use of Dwelling) .... . 3
Rental Income ................. . 3
Rental Expenses ............... . 3Property
2. Depreciation of Rental Property .... . 6
The Basics ................... . 6
Claiming the Special Depreciation(Including Rental of Allowance ................ . 8
MACRS Depreciation ............ . 8Vacation Homes)
Claiming the Correct Amount of
Depreciation .............. . 11
For use in preparing 3. Reporting Rental Income,
Expenses, and Losses ......... . 12
Which Forms To Use ........... . 122011 Returns
Limits on Rental Losses ......... . 13
At-Risk Rules ............. . 13
Passive Activity Limits ........ . 13
Casualties and Thefts ........... . 14
Illustrated Example ............. . 14
4. Special Situations .............. . 16
Condominiums ............... . 16
Cooperatives ................. . 16
Property Changed to Rental Use ... . 16
Renting Part of Property ......... . 17
Not Rented for Profit ............ . 17
Illustrated Example ............. . 17
5. Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home) ...... . 21
What Is a Day of Personal Use ..... . 21
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home ..... . 21
Figuring Rental Income and
Deductions ............... . 22
Reporting Income and
Deductions ............... . 23
Illustrated Example ............. . 23
Worksheet for Figuring Rental
Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home ........ . 27
6. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 29
Index ......................... . 31
What's New
Qualified joint ventures reporting rental real
estate income. Beginning in 2011, qualified
joint ventures reporting rental real estate income
not subject to self-employment tax must report
that income on Schedule E instead of Schedule
C. See the Instructions for Schedule E (Form
1040).
Special depreciation allowance. For quali-
fied property acquired after December 31, 2010,Get forms and other information
and placed in service before January 1, 2013,faster and easier by: the additional first year depreciation is 100% of
the depreciable basis of the property instead of
Internet IRS.gov 50%. See Publication 946, How To Depreciate
Property, for more information.
Dec 30, 2011

Page 2 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of main home used as rental property.to place an asset in service, in the disaster areaFuture developments. The IRS has created
For information on how to figure and report anyby December 31, 2014 (December 31, 2015 ina page on IRS.gov for information about Publi-
gain or loss from the sale or other disposition ofthe case of nonresidential real property and resi-cation 527, at www.irs.gov/pub527. Information
your main home that you also used as rentaldential rental property). A list of the federallyabout any future developments affecting Publi-
property, see Publication 523, Selling Yourdeclared disaster areas is available at the FEMAcation 527 (such as legislation enacted after we
Home.website at www.fema.gov. For more informa-release it) will be posted on that page.
tion, see chapter 3 in Publication 946.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
Expensing of qualified expenses allowed in your comments about this publication and your
federally declared disaster areas. You can suggestions for future editions.Reminders generally deduct, rather than capitalize, quali- You can write to us at the following address:
fied disaster expenses paid or incurred after Internal Revenue ServiceTax-free exchange of rental property used December 31, 2007. See Publication 535, Busi- Individual and Specialty Forms andfor personal purposes. You may qualify for a ness Expenses, for more information. Publications Branchtax-free exchange (a like-kind or section 1031
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:IDeduction for qualified disaster clean-upexchange) of one piece of rental property you
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526costs in a Midwestern disaster area. Youown for a similar piece of rental property, even if
Washington, DC 20224can deduct, rather than capitalize, 50% of quali-you have used the rental property for personal
fied disaster recovery assistance clean-up costspurposes. You must meet the following criteria.
paid or incurred on or after the applicable disas- We respond to many letters by telephone.• You own the rental property for at least 24 ter date, and before January 1, 2011. Refer to Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-months before the exchange. Publication 4492-B, Information for Affected clude your daytime phone number, including theTaxpayers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas, to• During the 2 years before the exchange area code, in your correspondence.see if your rental property is in a qualifying areayou rent the property to another person at You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov .and for details on the deduction.a fair rental price for 14 days or more. Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. You can also send us comments from• Your personal use of the rental property Photographs of missing children. The Inter-
www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Select ªComment onduring each of the two years before the nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformationexchange does not exceed the greater of National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
about.º14 days or 10% of the number of days the dren. Photographs of missing children selected
Although we cannot respond individually toproperty is rented. by the Center may appear in this publication on
each comment received, we do appreciate yourpages that would otherwise be blank. You canFor information on like-kind exchanges, see feedback and will consider your comments ashelp bring these children home by looking at thePublication 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of we revise our tax products.photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTAssets, chapter 1. (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Additional first-year depreciation for certain www.irs.gov/formspubs/ to download forms and
MACRS property. If, prior to December 31, publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
2010, you placed in service certain longer-lived address below and receive a response within 10
and transportation property with a recovery pe- days after your request is received.Introduction
riod of 20 years or less, you can elect a 50% Internal Revenue ServiceDo you own a second house that you rent out allspecial depreciation allowance (in addition to 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaythe time? Do you own a vacation home that youyour regular MACRS depreciation deduction). Bloomington, IL 61705-6613rent out when you or your family isn't using it?For certain longer-lived and transportation prop-
These are two common types of residentialerty with a recovery period of 20 years or less
rental activities discussed in this publication. In Tax questions. If you have a tax question,acquired after December 31, 2010, and placed
most cases, all rental income must be reported check the information available on IRS.gov orin service before January 1, 2013, your special
on your tax return, but there are differences in call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxdepreciation allowance is 100% unless you
the expenses you are allowed to deduct and in questions sent to either of the above addresses.choose not to take the special depreciation al-
the way the rental activity is reported on yourlowance. See Publication 946 for more informa-
return.tion. Useful Items
First, this publication will look at the You may want to see:Special depreciation allowance for Gulf Op- rental-for-profit activity in which there is no per-
portunity (GO) Zone. You can take a special sonal use of the property. We will look at types of Publicationdepreciation allowance for qualified property lo- income and when each is reported, and at types ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carcated in areas damaged by the hurricanes oc- of expenses and which are deductible. Expensescurring during 2005. To be qualified, the Chapter 2  discusses depreciation as it ap-
property must be located in specified counties or plies to your rental real estate activity Ðwhat ❏ 523 Selling Your Homeparishes, acquired after August 27, 2005, and property can be depreciated and how to figure it. ❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed inplaced in service before January 1, 2012. For Chapter 3 covers the actual reporting of your Service Before 1987more information, see chapter 3 in Publication rental income and deductions, including casual-946. ❏ 535 Business Expensesties and thefts, limitations on losses, and claim-
ing the correct amount of depreciation.Special depreciation allowance for disaster ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Special rental situations are grouped to-assistance property. You can take a special Assets
gether in chapter 4. These include condomini-depreciation allowance for qualified property ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsums, cooperatives, property changed to rentalplaced in service in federally declared disaster
use, renting only part of your property, and aareas in which the disaster occurred after De- ❏ 551 Basis of Assets
not-for-profit rental activity.cember 31, 2007, and before January 1, 2013. ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesFinally, in chapter 5, we will look at the rulesThe qualifying property must be placed in serv-
for rental income and expenses when there isice on or before the last day of the third calendar ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
also personal use of the dwelling unit, such as ayear following the applicable disaster date (the ❏ 4492-A Information for Taxpayersvacation home.fourth calendar year in the case of nonresiden- Affected by the May 7, 2007,tial real property and residential rental property). Kansas Storms and TornadoesFor example, in September 2011 certain areas Sale of rental property. For information on
of the Northeast were declared federal disaster how to figure and report any gain or loss from ❏ 4492-B Information for Affected
areas due to Hurricane Irene. To qualify for the the sale or other disposition of your rental prop- Taxpayers in the Midwestern
special depreciation allowance, you would have erty, see Publication 544. Disaster Areas
Page 2 Publication 527 (2011)

Page 3 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions) for example, by being credited to your bank Include in your rental income the amount the
account.   tenant would have paid for 2 months' rent. You❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization can deduct that same amount as a rental ex-
Accrual method.  If you are an accrual basis❏ 5213 Election To Postpone pense for painting your property.
taxpayer, you generally report income when youDetermination as To Whether the Security deposits. Do not include a securityearn it, rather than when you receive it. YouPresumption Applies That an deposit in your income when you receive it if yougenerally deduct your expenses when you incurActivity Is Engaged in for Profit plan to return it to your tenant at the end of thethem, rather than when you pay them.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations lease. But if you keep part or all of the security
More information. See Publication 538, Ac- deposit during any year because your tenant❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental counting Periods and Methods, for more infor- does not live up to the terms of the lease, includeIncome and Loss mation about when you constructively receive the amount you keep in your income in that year.
income and accrual methods of accounting. If an amount called a security deposit is to beSee Chapter 6 , How To Get Tax Help , for
used as a final payment of rent, it is advanceinformation about getting these publications and
rent. Include it in your income when you receiveTypes of Incomeforms.
it.
The following are common types of rental in-
come.
Other Sources of Rental IncomeAdvance rent. Advance rent is any amount
you receive before the period that it covers. Lease with option to buy. If the rental agree-Include advance rent in your rental income in the ment gives your tenant the right to buy your1. year you receive it regardless of the period cov- rental property, the payments you receive underered or the method of accounting you use. the agreement are generally rental income. If
your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-Example. On March 18, 2011, you signed a erty, the payments you receive for the periodRental Income 10-year lease to rent your property. During after the date of sale are considered part of the2011, you received $9,600 for the first year's selling price.rent and $9,600 as rent for the last year of theand Expenses (If lease. You must include $19,200 in your rental Part interest. If you own a part interest in
income in the first year. rental property, report your percentage of the
No Personal Use rental income from the property.Canceling a lease. If your tenant pays you to
Rental of property also used as your home.cancel a lease, the amount you receive is rent.
of Dwelling) If you rent property that you also use as yourInclude the payment in your income in the year
home and you rent it fewer than 15 days duringyou receive it regardless of your method of ac-
the tax year, do not include the rent you receivecounting.This chapter discusses the various types of
in your income and do not deduct rental ex-rental income and expenses for a residential Expenses paid by tenant. If your tenant pays penses. However, you can deduct on Schedulerental activity with no personal use of the dwell- any of your expenses, those payments are A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, the inter-ing. Generally, each year you will report all in- rental income. Because you are including this est, taxes, and casualty and theft losses that arecome and deduct all out-of-pocket expenses in amount in income, you can also deduct the ex- allowed for nonrental property. See chapter 5,full. The deduction to recover the cost of your penses if they are deductible rental expenses. Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vaca-rental property ÐdepreciationÐis taken over a For more information, see Rental Expenses , tion Home).prescribed number of years, and is discussed in later.chapter 2 Rental Income and Expenses (If No
Personal Use of Dwelling). Example 1. Your tenant pays the water and
sewage bill for your rental property and deductsIf your rental income is from property Rental Expensesthe amount from the normal rent payment.you also use personally or rent to
Under the terms of the lease, your tenant doessomeone at less than a fair rental price,
CAUTION
! In most cases, the expenses of renting yournot have to pay this bill. Include the utility billfirst read the information in chapter 5 Personal property, such as maintenance, insurance,paid by the tenant and any amount received as aUse of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home). taxes, and interest, can be deducted from yourrent payment in your rental income. You can rental income.deduct the utility payment made by your tenant
as a rental expense. Personal use of rental property. If you
sometimes use your rental property for personalRental Income Example 2. While you are out of town, the purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
furnace in your rental property stops working. tween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalIn most cases, you must include in your gross Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs and expense deductions may be limited. See chap-income all amounts you receive as rent. Rental deducts the repair bill from the rent payment. ter 5, Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Includingincome is any payment you receive for the use Include the repair bill paid by the tenant and any Vacation Home).or occupation of property. In addition to amounts amount received as a rent payment in your Part interest. If you own a part interest inyou receive as normal rental payments, there rental income. You can deduct the repair pay- rental property, you can deduct expenses youare other amounts that may be rental income. ment made by your tenant as a rental expense. paid according to your percentage of ownership.
Property or services. If you receive propertyWhen To Report Example. Roger owns a one-half undividedor services as rent, instead of money, include
interest in a rental house. Last year he paid $968the fair market value of the property or servicesWhen you report rental income on your tax re-
for necessary repairs on the property. Roger canin your rental income.turn generally depends on whether you are a
deduct $484 (50% ×  $968) as a rental expense.If the services are provided at an agreedcash basis taxpayer or use an accrual method.
He is entitled to reimbursement for the remain-upon or specified price, that price is the fairMost individual taxpayers use the cash method.
ing half from the co-owner.market value unless there is evidence to the
Cash method. You are a cash basis taxpayer contrary.
if you report income on your return in the year When To Deduct
you actually or constructively receive it, regard- Example. Your tenant is a house painter.
less of when it was earned. You constructively He offers to paint your rental property instead of You generally deduct your rental expenses in
receive income when it is made available to you, paying 2 months' rent. You accept his offer. the year you pay them.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling) Page 3

Page 4 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you use the accrual method, see Publica- and paid interest on, the mortgage, and the allocate your expenses between rental and
tion 538 for more information. other person received the Form 1098, report nonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost
your share of the interest on Schedule E (Form of traveling away from home if the primary pur-
1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your return pose of the trip is to improve the property. Com-Types of Expenses
showing the name and address of the other muting costs are personal expenses and do not
person. On the dotted line next to line 13, enter qualify as deductible travel expenses. The costListed below are the most common rental ex-
ªSee attached.º of improvements is recovered by taking depreci-penses.
ation. For information on travel expenses, seeLegal and other professional fees. You can• Advertising. chapter 1 of Publication 463.deduct, as a rental expense, legal and other• Auto and travel expenses. professional expenses such as tax return prepa- To deduct travel expenses, you must
ration fees you paid to prepare Schedule E, Part keep records that follow the rules in• Cleaning and maintenance.
I. For example, on your 2011 Schedule E you chapter 5 of Publication 463.
RECORDS• Commissions. can deduct fees paid in 2011 to prepare Part I of
your 2010 Schedule E. You can also deduct, as• Depreciation. Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax-
a rental expense, any expense (other than fed- payer, do not deduct uncollected rent. Because• Insurance. eral taxes and penalties) you paid to resolve a you have not included it in your income, it is not
tax underpayment related to your rental activi-• Interest (other). deductible.
ties. If you use an accrual method, report income• Legal and other professional fees. when you earn it. If you are unable to collect theLocal benefit taxes. In most cases, you can-• Local transportation expenses. rent, you may be able to deduct it as a businessnot deduct charges for local benefits that in- bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publication 535 forcrease the value of your property, such as• Management fees. more information about business bad debts.charges for putting in streets, sidewalks, or• Mortgage interest paid to banks, etc. water and sewer systems. These charges are Vacant rental property. If you hold property
nondepreciable capital expenditures and must• Points. for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct
be added to the basis of your property. However, your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-• Rental payments. you can deduct local benefit taxes that are for ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or
maintaining, repairing, or paying interest• Repairs. maintaining the property while the property is
charges for the benefits. vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of• Taxes.
rental income for the period the property is va-Local transportation expenses. You can de-• Utilities. cant.duct your ordinary and necessary local transpor-
tation expenses if you incur them to collect rentalSome of these expenses, as well as other less Vacant while listed for sale. If you sell
income or to manage, conserve, or maintaincommon ones, are discussed below. property you held for rental purposes, you can
your rental property. Costs of commuting are deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses for
personal expenses and do not qualify as deduct-Depreciation. Depreciation is a capital ex- managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-
ible transportation expenses.pense. It is the mechanism for recovering your erty until it is sold. If the property is not held out
Generally, if you use your personal car,cost in an income producing property and must and available for rent while listed for sale, the
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, yoube taken over the expected life of the property. expenses are not deductible rental expenses.
can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-You can begin to depreciate rental property
ods: actual expenses or the standard mileagewhen it is ready and available for rent. See
rate. For 2011, the standard mileage rate forPlaced in Service under When Does Deprecia- Points
each mile of business use is 51 cents per miletion Begin and End in chapter 2.
for miles driven before July 1 and 55.5 cents per The term ªpointsº is often used to describe some
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you mile for miles driven after June 30, 2011. For of the charges paid, or treated as paid, by a
pay an insurance premium for more than one more information, see chapter 4 of Publication borrower to take out a loan or a mortgage.
year in advance, for each year of coverage you 463.  These charges are also called loan origination
can deduct the part of the premium payment that fees, maximum loan charges, or premiumTo deduct car expenses under eitherwill apply to that year. You cannot deduct the charges. Any of these charges (points) that aremethod, you must keep records thattotal premium in the year you pay it. See Publi- solely for the use of money are interest. Be-follow the rules in chapter 5 of Publica-
RECORDScation 535, chapter 6, for information on deducti- cause points are prepaid interest, you generallytion 463. In addition, you must complete Formble premiums. cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid,4562, Part V, and attach it to your tax return. but must deduct the interest over the term of the
Interest expense. You can deduct mortgage loan.Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct yourinterest you pay on your rental property. When The method used to figure the amount ofordinary and necessary expenses for managing,you refinance a rental property for more than the points you can deduct each year follows theconserving, or maintaining rental property fromprevious outstanding balance, the portion of the original issue discount (OID) rules. In this case,the time you make it available for rent.interest allocable to loan proceeds not related to points are equivalent to OID, which is the differ-Rental of equipment. You can deduct therental use generally cannot be deducted as a ence between:rent you pay for equipment that you use forrental expense. Chapter 4 of Publication 535
• The amount borrowed (redemption pricerental purposes. However, in some cases, leaseexplains mortgage interest in detail.
at maturity, or principal) andcontracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage. you cannot deduct these payments. You can • The proceeds (issue price).Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage recover the cost of purchased equipmenton your rental property cannot be deducted as through depreciation. The first step is to determine whether yourinterest. These expenses, which include mort-
total OID (which you may have on bonds orRental of property. You can deduct the rentgage commissions, abstract fees, and recording
other investments in addition to the mortgageyou pay for property that you use for rentalfees, are capital expenses that are part of your
loan), including the OID resulting from thepurposes. If you buy a leasehold for rental pur-basis in the property.
points, is insignificant or de minimis. If the OID isposes, you can deduct an equal part of the costForm 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement. not de minimis, you must use the constant-yieldeach year over the term of the lease.If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest on method to figure how much you can deduct.your rental property to any one person, you Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi-
should receive a Form 1098 or similar statement nary and necessary expenses of traveling away De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it is
showing the interest you paid for the year. If you from home if the primary purpose of the trip is to less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated
and at least one other person (other than your collect rental income or to manage, conserve, or redemption price at maturity (principal amount of
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, maintain your rental property. You must properly the loan) multiplied by the number of full years
Page 4 Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)

Page 5 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from the date of original issue to maturity (term payable in cash or property (other than another points allocable to loan proceeds not related to
of the loan). loan of the issuer) at least annually over the term rental use generally cannot be deducted as a
of the loan at a fixed rate. rental expense. For example, if an individualIf the OID is de minimis, you can choose one
refinanced a loan with a balance of $100,000,of the following ways to figure the amount of
ExampleÐYear 1. The facts are the same the amount of the new loan was $120,000, andpoints you can deduct each year.
as in the previous example. The yield to maturity the taxpayer used $20,000 to purchase a car,• On a constant-yield basis over the term of on Carol's loan is 10.2467%, compounded an- points allocable to the $20,000 would be treatedthe loan. nually. as nondeductible personal interest.
She figured the amount of points (OID) she• On a straight line basis over the term of
could deduct in 2011 as follows.the loan.
Repairs and Improvements• In proportion to stated interest payments. Principal amount of the loan .... . $100,000
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rentalMinus: Points (OID) ......... . ± 1,500• In its entirety at maturity of the loan. property, but you cannot deduct the cost of im-Issue price of the loan ........ . $ 98,500
You make this choice by deducting the OID provements. The cost of improvements is recov-Multiplied by: YTM .......... . ×  .102467
(points) in a manner consistent with the method Total ................... . 10,093 ered by taking depreciation (see chapter 2 ,
chosen on your timely filed tax return for the tax Minus: QSI ............... . ± 10,000 Depreciation of Rental Property).
year in which the loan is issued. Points (OID) deductible in 2011 $ 93
Repairs. A repair keeps your property in good
To figure your deduction in any subsequent operating condition. It does not materially add toExample. Carol Madison took out a year, you start with the adjusted issue price. To the value of your property or substantially pro-$100,000 mortgage loan on January 1, 2011, to get the adjusted issue price, add to the issue long its life. Repainting your property inside orbuy a house she will use as a rental during 2011. price figured in Year 1 any OID previously de- out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-The loan is to be repaid over 30 years. During ducted. Then follow steps (2) and (3) above. ing, and replacing broken windows are exam-2011, Carol paid $10,000 of mortgage interest
ples of repairs.(stated interest) to the lender. When the loan ExampleÐYear 2. Carol figured the de-  If you make repairs as part of an extensivewas made, she paid $1,500 in points to the duction for 2012 as follows. remodeling or restoration of your property, thelender. The points reduced the principal amount
whole job is an improvement.of the loan from $100,000 to $98,500, resulting Issue price ............... . $98,500in $1,500 of OID. Carol determines that the Plus: Points (OID) deducted Improvements. An improvement adds to thepoints (OID) she paid are de minimis based on in 2011 ................ . + 93 value of property, prolongs its useful life, orthe following computation. Adjusted issue price ......... . $98,593 adapts it to new uses. Table 1-1 shows exam-
Multiplied by: YTM .......... . ×  .102467 ples of many improvements.Redemption price at maturity Total ................... . 10,103  If you make an improvement to property, the(principal amount of the loan) .. . $100,000 Minus: QSI ............... . ± 10,000 cost of the improvement must be capitalized.Multiplied by: The term of the Points (OID) deductible in 2012 $ 103 The capitalized cost can generally be depreci-loan in complete years ....... . × 30
ated as if the improvement were separate prop-Multiplied by ............... . × .0025 Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or mort- erty.De minimis amount ......... . $ 7,500 gage ends, you may be able to deduct any
Example. You repair a small section on oneremaining points (OID) in the tax year in whichThe points (OID) she paid ($1,500) are less than
corner of the roof of a rental house. You deductthe loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgagethe de minimis  amount ($7,500). Therefore,
the cost of the repair as a rental expense. How-may end due to a refinancing, prepayment, fore-Carol has de minimis OID and she can choose
ever, if you completely replace the roof, the newclosure, or similar event. However, if the refi-one of the four ways discussed earlier to figure
roof is an improvement because it increases thenancing is with the same lender, the remainingthe amount she can deduct each year. Under
value and lengthens the life of the property. Youpoints (OID) generally are not deductible in thethe straight line method, she can deduct $50
depreciate the cost of the new roof.year in which the refinancing occurs, but may beeach year for 30 years.
deductible over the term of the new mortgage or Separate the costs of repairs and im-Constant-yield method. If the OID is not de loan. provements, and keep accurate rec-minimis , you must use the constant-yield ords. You will need to know the cost ofPoints when loan refinance is more than the
RECORDSmethod to figure how much you can deduct each improvements when you sell or depreciate yourprevious outstanding balance. When youyear. property.refinance a rental property for more than theYou figure your deduction for the first year in previous outstanding balance, the portion of thethe following manner.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. If Table 1-1. Examples of Improvementsyou paid points on the loan, the issue price
generally is the difference between the Caution. Work you do (or have done) on your home that does not add much to either the value orprincipal and the points. the life of the property, but rather keeps the property in good condition, is considered a repair, not
an improvement.2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
maturity (defined below). Additions Miscellaneous Plumbing
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- Bedroom Storm windows, doors Septic system
ments (defined below) from the result in Bathroom New roof Water heater
(2). This is the OID you can deduct in the Deck Central vacuum Soft water system
Garage Wiring upgrades Filtration systemfirst year.
Porch Satellite dish
Patio Security system Interior ImprovementsYield to maturity (YTM). This rate is gener-
Built-in appliancesally shown in the literature you receive from your
Lawn & Grounds Heating & Air Conditioning Kitchen modernizationlender. If you do not have this information, con-
Landscaping Heating system Flooringsult your lender or tax advisor. In general, the Driveway Central air conditioning Wall-to-wall carpetingYTM is the discount rate that, when used in Walkway Furnacecomputing the present value of all principal and Fence Duct work Insulationinterest payments, produces an amount equal to Retaining wall Central humidifier Atticthe principal amount of the loan. Sprinkler system Filtration system Walls, floor
Swimming pool Pipes, duct workQualified stated interest (QSI). In general,
this is the stated interest that is unconditionally
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling) Page 5

Page 6 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You own the property. What Rental Property Can Be Depreciated, you
cannot depreciate the following property.• You use the property in your business or
income-producing activity (such as rental • Property placed in service and disposed of2. property). (or taken out of business use) in the same
year.• The property has a determinable useful
life. • Equipment used to build capital improve-
Depreciation of ments. You must add otherwise allowable• The property is expected to last more than depreciation on the equipment during theone year. period of construction to the basis of yourRental Property improvements.
Property you own. To claim depreciation, For more information, see Publication 946,you usually must be the owner of the property.You recover the cost of income producing prop- chapter 1.You are considered as owning property even if iterty through yearly tax deductions. You do this
is subject to a debt.by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
When Does Depreciationing some of the cost each year on your tax Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent Begin and End?return. for property, you cannot depreciate that prop-
Three basic factors determine how much de- erty. Usually, only the owner can depreciate it. You begin to depreciate your rental propertypreciation you can deduct: (1) your basis in the However, if you make permanent improvements when you place it in service for the production ofproperty, (2) the recovery period for the prop- to leased property, you may be able to depreci- income. You stop depreciating it either whenerty, and (3) the depreciation method used. You ate the improvements. See Additions or im- you have fully recovered your cost or other ba-provements to property , later in this chapter,cannot simply deduct your mortgage or principal sis, or when you retire it from service, whicheverunder Recovery Periods Under GDS.payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures and happens first.
equipment, as an expense. Cooperative apartments. If you are a ten-
You can deduct depreciation only on the part ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
of your property used for rental purposes. De- Placed in Serviceration and rent your cooperative apartment to
preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or others, you can deduct depreciation on your You place property in service in a rental activityloss on a later sale or exchange. stock in the corporation. See chapter 4, Special when it is ready and available for a specific useSituations.You may have to use Form 4562 to figure in that activity. Even if you are not using theand report your depreciation. See Which Forms Property having a determinable useful life. property, it is in service when it is ready andTo Use in chapter 3. Also see Publication 946. To be depreciable, your property must have a available for its specific use.
determinable useful life. This means that it must
Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de- be something that wears out, decays, gets used Example 1. On November 22 of last year,duction is a means of recovering part or all of the up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from you purchased a dishwasher for your rental
cost of certain qualifying property in the year you natural causes. property. The appliance was delivered on De-
place the property in service. This deduction is cember 7, but was not installed and ready for
not allowed for property used in connection with use until January 3 of this year. Because the
residential rental property. See chapter 2 of What Rental Property dishwasher was not ready for use last year, it is
Publication 946. Cannot Be Depreciated? not considered placed in service until this year.
If the appliance had been installed and readyCertain property cannot be depreciated. ThisAlternative minimum tax (AMT). Using a for use when it was delivered in December ofincludes land and certain excepted property.method of accelerated depreciation may affect last year, it would have been considered placed
your being subject to the alternative minimum in service in December, even if it was not actu-Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of land
ally used until this year.tax. Accelerated depreciation allows you to de- because land generally does not wear out, be-
duct more depreciation earlier in the recovery come obsolete, or get used up. But if it does, the
Example 2. On April 6, you purchased aperiod than you could deduct using a straight loss is accounted for upon disposition. The costs
house to use as residential rental property. Youline method (same deduction each year). of clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping
made extensive repairs to the house and had itare usually all part of the cost of land and cannotThe prescribed depreciation methods for ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertisebe depreciated.rental real estate are not accelerated, so the the house for rent in July and actually rented itAlthough you cannot depreciate land, youdepreciation deduction is not adjusted for the beginning September 1. The house is consid-can depreciate certain land preparation costs,AMT. However, accelerated methods are gener- ered placed in service in July when it was readysuch as landscaping costs, incurred in preparingally used for other property connected with and available for rent. You can begin to depreci-land for business use. These costs must be sorental activities (for example, appliances and ate the house in July.closely associated with other depreciable prop-wall-to-wall carpeting). erty that you can determine a life for them alongTo find out if you are subject to the AMT, see Example 3. You moved from your home inwith the life of the associated property.the Instructions for Form 6251, Alternative Mini- July. During August and September you made
mum TaxÐIndividuals. several repairs to the house. On October 1, youExample. You built a new house to use as a
listed the property for rent with a real estaterental and paid for grading, clearing, seeding,
company, which rented it on December 1. Theand planting bushes and trees. Some of the
property is considered placed in service on Oc-bushes and trees were planted right next to the
tober 1, the date when it was available for rent.The Basics house, while others were planted around the
outer border of the lot. If you replace the house, Conversion to business use. If you placeThe following section discusses the information you would have to destroy the bushes and trees property in service in a personal activity, youyou will need to have about the rental property right next to it. These bushes and trees are cannot claim depreciation. However, if youand the decisions to be made before figuring closely associated with the house, so they have change the property's use to business or thea determinable useful life. Therefore, you canyour depreciation deduction. production of income, you can begin to depreci-depreciate them. Add your other land prepara- ate it at the time of the change. You place thetion costs to the basis of your land because theyWhat Rental Property property in service for business or in-have no determinable life and you cannot depre- come-producing use on the date of the change.Can Be Depreciated? ciate them.
You can depreciate your property if it meets all Excepted property. Even if the property Example. You bought a home and used it
the following requirements. meets all the requirements listed earlier under as your personal home several years before you
Page 6 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 7 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
converted it to rental property. Although its spe- your residence that you changed to rental use. expenses you pay are part of your cost basis in
cific use was personal and no depreciation was See Property Owned or Used in 1986 in Publica- the property.
allowable, you placed the home in service when tion 946, chapter 1, for those situations in which Real estate taxes. If you buy real propertyyou began using it as your home. You can begin MACRS is not allowed. and agree to pay real estate taxes on it that wereto claim depreciation in the year you converted it owed by the seller and the seller does not reim-Improvements made after 1986. Treat an im-to rental property because at that time its use burse you, the taxes you pay are treated as partprovement made after 1986 to property youchanged to the production of income. of your basis in the property. You cannot deductplaced in service before 1987 as separate them as taxes paid.depreciable property. As a result, you can de-
If you reimburse the seller for real estatepreciate that improvement as separate propertyIdle Property taxes the seller paid for you, you can usuallyunder MACRS if it is the type of property that
deduct that amount. Do not include that amountContinue to claim a deduction for depreciation otherwise qualifies for MACRS depreciation. For
in your basis in the property.on property used in your rental activity even if it more information about improvements, see Ad-
is temporarily idle (not in use). For example, if ditions or improvements to property, later in this Settlement fees and other costs. The fol-you must make repairs after a tenant moves out, chapter under Recovery Periods Under GDS. lowing settlement fees and closing costs for buy-you still depreciate the rental property during the ing the property are part of your basis in theThis publication discusses MACRS de-time it is not available for rent. property.preciation only. If you need information
about depreciating property placed in • Abstract fees.
CAUTION
!
service before 1987, see Publication 534.Cost or Other Basis • Charges for installing utility services.Fully Recovered
• Legal fees.Basis of DepreciableYou must stop depreciating property when the • Recording fees.Propertytotal of your yearly depreciation deductions
equals your cost or other basis of your property. • Surveys.The basis of property used in a rental activity isFor this purpose, your yearly depreciation de- generally its adjusted basis when you place it in • Transfer taxes.ductions include any depreciation that you were service in that activity. This is its cost or otherallowed to claim, even if you did not claim it. See • Title insurance.basis when you acquired it, adjusted for certainBasis of Depreciable Property, later. items occurring before you place it in service in • Any amounts the seller owes that you
the rental activity. agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-
est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesIf you depreciate your property underRetired From Service for improvements or repairs, and salesMACRS, you may also have to reduce your
commissions.basis by certain deductions and credits with re-You stop depreciating property when you retire it
spect to the property.from service, even if you have not fully recov-
The following are settlement fees and closingered its cost or other basis. You retire property Basis and adjusted basis are explained in
costs you cannot include in your basis in thefrom service when you permanently withdraw it the following discussions.
property.from use in a trade or business or from use in the If you used the property for personalproduction of income because of any of the 1. Fire insurance premiums.purposes before changing it to rentalfollowing events. use, its basis for depreciation is the
CAUTION
! 2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-• You sell or exchange the property. lesser of its adjusted basis or its fair market pancy of the property before closing.value when you change it to rental use. See• You convert the property to personal use.
Basis of Property Changed to Rental Use  in 3. Charges connected with getting or refi-
• You abandon the property. chapter 4. nancing a loan, such as:
• The property is destroyed. a. Points (discount points, loan origination
fees),Cost Basis
Depreciation Methods b. Mortgage insurance premiums,The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.
Generally, you must use the Modified Acceler- The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, in c. Loan assumption fees,
ated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) to depre- debt obligation, in other property, or in services. d. Cost of a credit report, andciate residential rental property placed in service Your cost also includes amounts you pay for:
after 1986. e. Fees for an appraisal required by a• Sales tax charged on the purchase (butIf you placed rental property in service before lender.see Exception below),1987, you are using one of the following meth-
ods. • Freight charges to obtain the property, and Also, do not include amounts placed in es-
crow for the future payment of items such as• ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys- • Installation and testing charges.
taxes and insurance.tem) for property placed in service after
Exception. if you deducted state and local1980 but before 1987. Assumption of a mortgage. If you buygeneral sales taxes as an itemized deduction on property and become liable for an existing mort-• Straight line or declining balance method Schedule A (Form 1040), do not include those gage on the property, your basis is the amountover the useful life of property placed in sales taxes as part of your cost basis. Such you pay for the property plus the amount remain-service before 1981. taxes were deductible before 1987 and after ing to be paid on the mortgage.See MACRS Depreciation, later for more infor- 2003.
mation. Example. You buy a building for $60,000Loans with low or no interest. If you buy cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it.Rental property placed in service before property on any time-payment plan that charges Your basis is $300,000.2011. Continue to use the same method of little or no interest, the basis of your property is
Separating cost of land and buildings. Iffiguring depreciation that you used in the past. your stated purchase price, less the amount
you buy buildings and your cost includes theconsidered to be unstated interest. See Un-
Use of real property changed. Generally, cost of the land on which they stand, you muststated Interest and Original Issue Discount
you must use MACRS to depreciate real prop- divide the cost between the land and the build-(OID) in Publication 537, Installment Sales.
erty that you acquired for personal use before ings to figure the basis for depreciation of the
1987 and changed to business or in- Real property. If you buy real property, such buildings. The part of the cost that you allocate
come-producing use after 1986. This includes as a building and land, certain fees and other to each asset is the ratio of the fair market value
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 7

Page 8 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of that asset to the fair market value of the whole improvement. This includes all direct costs, such • Special depreciation allowance claimed on
property at the time you buy it. as material and labor, but does not include your qualified property.
own labor. It also includes all expenses relatedIf you are not certain of the fair market values • Depreciation you deducted, or could haveto the addition or improvement.of the land and the buildings, you can divide the deducted, on your tax returns under thecost between them based on their assessed For example, if you had an architect draw up method of depreciation you chose. If youvalues for real estate tax purposes. plans for remodeling your property, the archi- did not deduct enough or deducted too
tect's fee is a part of the cost of the remodeling. much in any year, see Depreciation underExample. You buy a house and land for Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up a Decreases to Basis in Publication 551.$200,000. The purchase contract does not fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost
specify how much of the purchase price is for the of the fence. If your rental property was previously used ashouse and how much is for the land. Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad- your main home, you must also decrease theThe latest real estate tax assessment on the ditions or improvements made after you place basis by the following.property was based on an assessed value of the property in service in your rental activity. For • Gain you postponed from the sale of your$160,000, of which $136,000 was for the house information on depreciating additions or im- main home before May 7, 1997, if the re-and $24,000 was for the land. provements, see Additions or improvements to placement home was converted to yourYou can allocate 85% ($136,000 ÷ property, later in this chapter, under Recovery rental property.$160,000) of the purchase price to the house Periods Under GDS.
and 15% ($24,000 ÷  $160,000) of the purchase • District of Columbia first-time homebuyerThe cost of landscaping improvementsprice to the land. credit allowed on the purchase of youris usually treated as an addition to theYour basis in the house is $170,000 (85% of main home after August 4, 1997 andbasis of the land, which is not deprecia-
CAUTION
!$200,000) and your basis in the land is $30,000 before January 1, 2012.ble. However, see What Rental Property Cannot(15% of $200,000). Be Depreciated, earlier. • Amount of qualified principal residence in-
debtedness discharged on or after Janu-Assessments for local improvements. ary 1, 2007.Basis Other Than Cost Assessments for items which tend to increase
the value of property, such as streets and side-You cannot use cost as a basis for property that walks, must be added to the basis of the prop-you received: erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on
• In return for services you performed; the street in front of your house, and assesses Claiming the Special
you and your neighbors for its cost, you must• In an exchange for other property; Depreciationadd the assessment to the basis of your prop-
• As a gift; erty. Also add the cost of legal fees paid to
Allowanceobtain a decrease in an assessment levied• From your spouse, or from your former against property to pay for local improvements.spouse as the result of a divorce; or For 2011, your residential rental property mayYou cannot deduct these items as taxes or de-
qualify for a special depreciation allowance. This• As an inheritance. preciate them.
allowance is figured before you figure your regu- However, you can deduct as taxes, charges lar depreciation deduction. See Publication 946,If you received property in one of these ways, or assessments for maintenance, repairs, or in- chapter 3, for details. Also see the Instructionssee Publication 551 for information on how to terest charges related to the improvements. Do for Form 4562, Line 14.figure your basis. not add them to your basis in the property. If you qualify for, but choose not to take, a
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs. Do not special depreciation allowance, you must attach
add to your basis costs you can deduct as cur- a statement to your return. The details of thisAdjusted Basis
rent expenses. However, there are certain costs election are in Publication 946, chapter 3, and
To figure your property's basis for depreciation, you can choose either to deduct or to capitalize. the Instructions for Form 4562, Line 14.
you may have to make certain adjustments (in- If you capitalize these costs, include them in
creases and decreases) to the basis of the prop- your basis. If you deduct them, do not include
erty for events occurring between the time you them in your basis.
acquired the property and the time you placed it The costs you may choose to deduct or capi- MACRS Depreciationin service for business or the production of in- talize include carrying charges, such as interest
come. The result of these adjustments to the and taxes, that you must pay to own property. Most business and investment property placedbasis is the adjusted basis. in service after 1986 is depreciated usingFor more information about deducting or
MACRS. capitalizing costs and how to make the election,Increases to basis. You must increase the This section explains how to determinesee Carrying Charges in Publication 535, chap-basis of any property by the cost of all items which MACRS depreciation system applies toter 7.properly added to a capital account. These in- your property. It also discusses other informa-clude the following. tion you need to know before you can figureDecreases to basis. You must decrease the
depreciation under MACRS. This information in-• The cost of any additions or improvements basis of your property by any items that repre-
cludes the property's:made before placing your property into sent a return of your cost. These include the
service as a rental that have a useful life following. • Recovery class,of more than 1 year. • Insurance or other payment you receive • Applicable recovery period,• Amounts spent after a casualty to restore as the result of a casualty or theft loss. 
• Convention,the damaged property. • Casualty loss not covered by insurance for
• Placed-in-service date,• The cost of extending utility service lines which you took a deduction.
to the property. • Basis for depreciation, and• Amount(s) you receive for granting an
• Legal fees, such as the cost of defending easement. • Depreciation method.and perfecting title, or settling zoning is- • Residential energy credits you were al-sues. lowed before 1986, or after 2005, if you
Depreciation Systemsadded the cost of the energy items to theAdditions or improvements. Add to the basis of your home. basis of your property the amount an addition or MACRS consists of two systems that determine
improvement actually cost you, including any • Exclusion from income of subsidies for en- how you depreciate your propertyÐthe General
amount you borrowed to make the addition or ergy conservation measures. Depreciation System (GDS) and the Alternative
Page 8 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 9 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation System (ADS). You must use GDS This class also includes appliances, car- rental income includes the fair rental value
of the part you live in. unless your are specifically required by law to peting, furniture, etc., used in a residential
use ADS or you elect to use ADS. rental real estate activity.
Depreciation on automobiles, other prop- The other property classes do not gen-
erally apply to property used in rentalerty used for transportation, computers andExcluded Property activities. These classes are not dis-related peripheral equipment, and property
CAUTION
!
cussed in this publication. See Publication 946of a type generally used for entertainment,You cannot use MACRS for certain personal
for more information.recreation, or amusement is limited. Seeproperty (such as furniture or appliances) placed
chapter 5 of Publication 946.in service in your rental property in 2011 if it had
been previously placed in service before 1987 Recovery Periods • 7-year property. This class includes officewhen MACRS became effective. Under GDSfurniture and equipment (desks, file cabi-In most cases, personal property is excluded nets, etc.). This class also includes any The recovery period of property is the number offrom MACRS if you (or a person related to you) property that does not have a class life years over which you recover its cost or otherowned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant is a and that has not been designated by law basis. The recovery periods are generally longerperson (or someone related to the person) who as being in any other class. under ADS than GDS.owned or used it in 1986. However, the property
The recovery period of property depends onis not excluded if your 2011 deduction under • 15-year property. This class includes
its property class. Under GDS, the recovery pe-MACRS (using a half-year convention) is less roads, fences, and shrubbery (if deprecia-
riod of an asset is generally the same as itsthan the deduction you would have under ble).
property class.ACRS. For more information, see What Method • Residential rental property. This classCan You Use To Depreciate Your Property?  in Class lives and recovery periods for mostincludes any real property that is a rentalPublication 946, chapter 1. assets are listed in Appendix B  of Publicationbuilding or structure (including a mobile 946. See Table 2-1 for recovery periods of prop-home) for which 80% or more of the gross erty commonly used in residential rental activi-rental income for the tax year is fromElecting ADS ties.
dwelling units. It does not include a unit in
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for a hotel, motel, inn, or other establishment Qualified Indian reservation property.
most property. Under ADS, you use the straight where more than half of the units are used Shorter recovery periods are provided under
line method of depreciation. on a transient basis. If you live in any part MACRS for qualified Indian reservation property
The election of ADS for one item in a class of of the building or structure, the gross placed in service on Indian reservations. For
property generally applies to all property in that
class that is placed in service during the tax year
Table 2-1. MACRS Recovery Periods forof the election. However, the election applies on
Property Used in a property-by-property basis for residential
rental property and nonresidential real property. Rental Activities Keep for Your Records
If you choose to use ADS for your residential MACRS Recovery Periodrental property, the election must be made in the
General Alternativefirst year the property is placed in service. Once
Depreciation Depreciationyou make this election, you can never revoke it.
Type of Property System SystemFor property placed in service during 2011,
you make the election to use ADS by entering Computers and their peripheral equipment ............ . 5 years 5 years
the depreciation on Form 4562, Part III, Section Office machinery, such as:
C, line 20c. Typewriters
Calculators
Copiers ................................ . 5 years 6 yearsProperty Classes Under GDS
Automobiles ................................ . 5 years 5 years
Light trucks ................................. . 5 years 5 yearsEach item of property that can be depreciated
Appliances, such as:under MACRS is assigned to a property class,
Stovesdetermined by its class life. The property class
Refrigerators ............................ . 5 years 9 yearsgenerally determines the depreciation method,
Carpets ................................... . 5 years 9 yearsrecovery period, and convention.
Furniture used in rental property ................... . 5 years 9 yearsThe property classes under GDS are: 
Office furniture and equipment, such as:• 3-year property,
Desks
• 5-year property, Files .................................. . 7 years 10 years
Any property that does not have a class life and that has not• 7-year property, been designated by law as being in any other class ... . 7 years 12 years
• 10-year property,
Roads .................................... . 15 years 20 years
• 15-year property, Shrubbery .................................. . 15 years 20 years
Fences .................................... . 15 years 20 years• 20-year property,
Residential rental property (buildings or structures)• Nonresidential real property, and
and structural components such as furnaces,• Residential rental property. waterpipes, venting, etc. ..................... . 27.5 years 40 years
Additions and improvements, such as a new roof ........ . The same recovery period asUnder MACRS, property that you placed in
that of the property to whichservice during 2011 in your rental activities gen-
the addition or improvement iserally falls into one of the following classes. made, determined as if the
• 5-year property. This class includes com- property were placed in
puters and peripheral equipment, office ma- service at the same time as
the addition or improvement.chinery (typewriters, calculators, copiers,
etc.), automobiles, and light trucks.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 9

Page 10 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more information, see chapter 4 of Publication year is $1,300. The $800 basis of the refrigerator on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter ªS/L.º
946. placed in service during the last 3 months of his Once you make this election, you cannot
tax year exceeds $520 (40% ×  $1,300). Tom change to another method.Additions or improvements to property. must use the mid-quarter convention instead ofTreat additions or improvements you make to the half-year convention for all three items.your depreciable rental property as separate MACRS Percentage Tablesproperty items for depreciation purposes. Half-year convention.  The half-year conven-The property class and recovery period of You can use the percentages in Table 2-2, later,tion is used if neither the mid-quarter conventionthe addition or improvement is the one that to compute annual depreciation under MACRS.nor the mid-month convention applies. Underwould apply to the original property if you had The tables show the percentages for the first fewthis convention, you treat all property placed inplaced it in service at the same time as the years or until the change to the straight lineservice, or disposed of, during a tax year asaddition or improvement. method is made. See Appendix A of Publicationplaced in service, or disposed of, at the midpointThe recovery period for an addition or im- 946 for complete tables. The percentages inof that tax year.provement to property begins on the later of: Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c make the changeIf this convention applies, you deduct a half
from declining balance to straight line in the yearyear of depreciation for the first year and the last• The date the addition or improvement is
that straight line will give a larger deduction.year that you depreciate the property. You de-placed in service, or
duct a full year of depreciation for any other year If you elect to use the straight line method for• The date the property to which the addi- during the recovery period. 5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% decliningtion or improvement was made is placed balance method for 5- or 7-year property, usein service. the tables in Appendix A of Publication 946.Figuring Your Depreciation
DeductionExample. You own a residential rental How to use the percentage tables. You must
house that you have been renting since 1986 apply the table rates to your property's unad-You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-and depreciating under ACRS. You built an ad- justed basis (defined below) each year of theduction in one of two ways. The deduction isdition onto the house and placed it in service in recovery period.substantially the same both ways. You can ei-2011. You must use MACRS for the addition. ther: Once you begin using a percentage table toUnder GDS, the addition is depreciated as resi- figure depreciation, you must continue to use it• Actually compute the deduction using thedential rental property over 27.5 years. for the entire recovery period unless there is andepreciation method and convention that adjustment to the basis of your property for aapply over the recovery period of the prop-Conventions reason other than:erty, or
A convention is a method established under 1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or• Use the percentage from the MACRS per-
MACRS to set the beginning and end of the centage tables, shown later. 2. An addition or improvement that is depreci-recovery period. The convention you use deter- ated as a separate item of property.mines the number of months for which you can In this publication we will use the percentage
claim depreciation in the year you place property If there is an adjustment for any reason othertables. For instructions on how to compute the
in service and in the year you dispose of the than (1) or (2), for example, because of a de-deduction, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.
property. ductible casualty loss, you can no longer use the
table. For the year of the adjustment and for theResidential rental property. You must useMid-month convention.  A mid-month con- remaining recovery period, figure depreciationthe straight line method and a mid-month con-vention is used for all residential rental property using the property's adjusted basis at the end ofvention for residential rental property. In the firstand nonresidential real property. Under this con- the year and the appropriate depreciationyear that you claim depreciation for residentialvention, you treat all property placed in service, method, as explained earlier under Figuringrental property, you can claim depreciation onlyor disposed of, during any month as placed in for the number of months the property is in use, Your Depreciation Deduction. See Figuring theservice, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that and you must use the mid-month convention Deduction Without Using the Tables in Publica-month. (explained under Conventions, earlier). tion 946, chapter 4.
Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter con- Unadjusted basis. This is the same basis5-, 7-, or 15-year property. For property in thevention must be used if the mid-month conven- you would use to figure gain on a sale (see Basis5- or 7-year class, use the 200% declining bal-tion does not apply and the total depreciable of Depreciable Property earlier), but without re-ance method and a half-year convention. How-basis of MACRS property placed in service in ducing your original basis by any MACRS de-ever, in limited cases you must use thethe last 3 months of a tax year (excluding non- preciation taken in earlier years.mid-quarter convention, if it applies. For prop-residential real property, residential rental prop-
However, you do reduce your original basiserty in the 15-year class, use the 150% decliningerty, and property placed in service and
by other amounts claimed on the property, in-balance method and a half-year convention.disposed of in the same year) is more than 40%
cluding:You can also choose to use the 150% declin-of the total basis of all such property you place in
ing balance method for property in the 5- orservice during the year. • Any amortization,7-year class. The choice to use the 150%Under this convention, you treat all property
• Any section 179 deduction, andmethod for one item in a class of property ap-placed in service, or disposed of, during any
plies to all property in that class that is placed inquarter of a tax year as placed in service, or • Any special depreciation allowance.service during the tax year of the election. Youdisposed of, at the midpoint of the quarter.
For more information, see Publication 946,make this election on Form 4562. In Part III,
chapter 4.column (f), enter ª150 DB.º Once you make thisExample. During the tax year, Tom Martin
election, you cannot change to another method.purchased the following items to use in his rental
Tables 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c. The percent-If you use either the 200% or 150% decliningproperty. He elects not to claim the special de-
ages in these tables take into account thebalance method, you figure your deduction us-preciation allowance discussed earlier.
half-year and mid-quarter conventions. Use Ta-ing the straight line method in the first tax year• A dishwasher for $400 that he placed in ble 2-2a for 5-year property, Table 2-2b forthat the straight line method gives you an equalservice in January. 7-year property, and Table 2-2c for 15-yearor larger deduction.
property. Use the percentage in the second col-You can also choose to use the straight line• Used furniture for $100 that he placed in
umn (half-year convention) unless you are re-method with a half-year or mid-quarter conven-service in September.
quired to use the mid-quarter conventiontion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to• A refrigerator for $800 that he placed in (explained earlier). If you must use theuse the straight line method for one item in aservice in October. mid-quarter convention, use the column thatclass of property applies to all property in that
corresponds to the calendar year quarter inTom uses the calendar year as his tax year. The class that is placed in service during the tax year
which you placed the property in service.total basis of all property placed in service that of the election. You elect the straight line method
Page 10 Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

Page 11 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
40% of the total basis of all property placed in
service during the year ($1,600 ×  .40 = $640),
you are required to use the mid-quarter conven-
tion to figure depreciation on both the stove and
refrigerator.
Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-
ice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
umn of Table 2-2a and find the depreciation
percentage for Year 1 is 5%. Your depreciation
deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 ×
.05).
Because you placed the stove in service in
June, you use the second quarter column of
Table 2-2a and find the depreciation percentage
for Year 1 is 25%. For that year, your deprecia-
tion deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 ×  .25).
Table 2-2d.  Use this table when you are using
the GDS 27.5 year option for residential rental
property. Find the row for the month that you
placed the property in service. Use the percent-
ages listed for that month to figure your depreci-
ation deduction. The mid-month convention is
taken into account in the percentages shown in
the table. Continue to use the same row (month)
under the column for the appropriate year.
Example. You purchased a single family
rental house for $185,000 and placed it in serv-
ice on February 8. The sales contract showed
that the building cost $160,000 and the land cost
$25,000. Your basis for depreciation is its origi-
nal cost, $160,000. This is the first year of serv-
ice for your residential rental property and you
decide to use GDS which has a recovery period
of 27.5 years. Using Table 2-2d, you find that the
percentage for property placed in service in Feb-
ruary of Year 1 is 3.182%. That year's deprecia-
tion deduction is $5,091 ($160,000 ×  .03182).
Figuring MACRS
Depreciation Under ADS
Table 2-1, earlier, shows the ADS recovery peri-
ods for property used in rental activities.
See Appendix B in Publication 946 for other
property. If your property is not listed in Appen-
dix B , it is considered to have no class life.
Under ADS, personal property with no class life
is depreciated using a recovery period of 12
years.
Use the mid-month convention for residential
rental property and nonresidential real property.
For all other property, use the half-year or
mid-quarter convention, as appropriate. 
See Publication 946 for ADS depreciation
tables.
Claiming the Correct
Table 2-2. Optional MACRS GDS Percentage Tables
a. MACRS 5-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
b. MACRS 7-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
c. MACRS 15-Year Property (150% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
d. Residential Rental Property-GDS  (27.5-year S/L with mid-month convention)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
7 5.90 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90
8 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90 5.90
7 8.93 8.75 8.87 8.86 8.73
Amount of
DepreciationExample 1. You purchased a stove and re- For Year 2, the depreciation percentage is
frigerator and placed them in service in June. 32%. That year's depreciation deduction will be
You should claim the correct amount of depreci-Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis in $192 ($600 ×  .32) for the stove and $320
ation each tax year. If you did not claim all thethe refrigerator is $1,000. Both are 5-year prop- ($1,000 ×  .32) for the refrigerator.
depreciation you were entitled to deduct, youerty. Using the half-year convention column in
must still reduce your basis in the property byExample 2. Assume the same facts as inTable 2-2a, the depreciation percentage for
the full amount of depreciation that you couldExample 1 , except you buy the refrigerator inYear 1 is 20%. For that year your depreciation
have deducted. For more information, see De-October instead of June. Since the refrigeratordeduction is $120 ($600 ×  .20) for the stove and
preciation under Decreases to Basis in Publica-was placed in service in the last 3 months of the$200 ($1,000 ×  .20) for the refrigerator.
tion 551.tax year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property Page 11

Page 12 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report incomeIf you deducted an incorrect amount of de-
or loss from partnerships, S corporations, es-preciation for property in any year, you may be
tates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X,
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of3.Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If
Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule Eyou are not allowed to make the correction on an
you used to enter your rental activity on page 1.amended return, you can change your account-
Also, include the amount from line 26 (Part I) ining method to claim the correct amount of depre- the ªTotal income or (loss)º on line 41 (Part V).ciation. Reporting 
Filing an amended return. You can file an Form 4562. You must complete and attach
amended return to correct the amount of depre- Form 4562 for rental activities only if you areRental Income,ciation claimed for any property in any of the claiming:
following situations. • Depreciation, including the special depre-Expenses, and ciation allowance, on property placed in• You claimed the incorrect amount be-
service during 2011;cause of a mathematical error made in
any year. Losses • Depreciation on listed property (such as a
car), regardless of when it was placed in• You claimed the incorrect amount be-
service; orFiguring the net income or loss for a residentialcause of a posting error made in any year.
rental activity may involve more than just listing • Any other car expenses, including the• You have not adopted a method of ac- the income and deductions on Schedule E standard mileage rate or lease expenses.counting for property placed in service by (Form 1040). First, there are those activities
you in tax years ending after December Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownwhich do not qualify to use Schedule E.
29, 2003. worksheet. You do not have to attach theseThen there are the limitations which may computations to your return, but you shouldneed to be applied if you have a net loss on• You claimed the incorrect amount on prop- keep them in your records for future reference.Schedule E. There are two: (1) the limitationerty placed in service by you in tax years
based on the amount of investment you have at See Publication 946 for information on prepar-ending before December 30, 2003.
risk in your rental activity, and (2) the special ing Form 4562.
limits imposed on passive activities.Generally, you adopt a method of accounting
You may also have a loss (or gain) related tofor depreciation by using a permissible method Schedule C (Form 1040),
your rental property from a casualty or theft. Thisof determining depreciation when you file your Profit or Loss Fromis considered separately from the income andfirst tax return for the property used in your rental Businessexpense information on Schedule E.activity. This also occurs when you use the
same impermissible method of determining de- Generally, Schedule C is used when you pro-
preciation (for example, using the wrong vide substantial services in conjunction with the
MACRS recovery period) in two or more consec- property or the rental is part of a trade or busi-
utively filed tax returns. ness as a real estate dealer.Which Forms To Use
If an amended return is allowed, you must The basic form for reporting residential rental Providing substantial services. If you pro-file it by the later of the following dates. income and expenses is Schedule E (Form vide substantial services that are primarily for
1040). However, do not use that schedule to your tenant's convenience, such as regular• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
report a not-for-profit activity. See Not Rented cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, younal return for the year in which you did not
for Profit , in chapter 4. There are also other report your rental income and expenses ondeduct the correct amount. A return filed
rental situations in which forms other than Schedule C, Profit or Loss From Business, orbefore an unextended due date is consid-
Schedule E would be used. Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From Business. Useered filed on that due date.
Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income,
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for if your rental activity is a partnership (including aSchedule E (Form 1040)that year. partnership with your spouse unless it is a quali-
fied joint venture). Substantial services do notIf you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and
include the furnishing of heat and light, cleaningprovide basic services such as heat and light,Changing your accounting method. To of public areas, trash collection, etc. For infor-trash collection, etc., you normally report yourchange your accounting method, you generally mation, see Publication 334, Tax Guide forrental income and expenses on Schedule E,must file Form 3115, Application for Change in Small Business. Also, you may have to payPart I.Accounting Method, to get the consent of the self-employment tax on your rental income us-List your total income, expenses, and depre-IRS. In some instances, that consent is auto- ing Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employmentciation for each rental property. Be sure to entermatic. For more information, see Changing Your Tax. For a discussion of ªsubstantial services,ºthe number of fair rental and personal use daysAccounting Method in Publication 946, see Real Estate Rents in Publication 334, chap-on line 2.chapter 1. ter 5.If you have more than three rental or royalty
properties, complete and attach as many Qualified joint venture. If you and yourSchedules E as are needed to list the properties. spouse each materially participate (see MaterialComplete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How- participation, later) as the only members of aever, fill in lines 23 through 26 on only one jointly owned and operated real estate business,Schedule E. and you file a joint return for the tax year, you
On Schedule E, page 1, line 18, enter the can make a joint election to be treated as a
depreciation you are claiming for each property. qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.
To find out if you need to attach Form 4562, see This election, in most cases, will not increase the
Form 4562, later. total tax owed on the joint return, but it does give
each of you credit for social security earnings onIf you have a loss from your rental real estate
which retirement benefits are based and foractivity, you also may need to complete one or
Medicare coverage.both of the following forms.
If you make this election, you must report• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. See rental real estate income on Schedule E. YouAt-Risk Rules, later. Also see Publication will not be required to file Form 1065 for any year925. the election is in effect. Rental real estate in-
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- come generally is not included in net earnings
tions. See Passive Activity Limits, later. from self-employment subject to
Page 12 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

Page 13 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
self-employment tax and generally is subject to Deductions or losses from passive activities See the instructions for Schedule E for infor-
the passive loss limitation rules. are limited. You generally cannot offset income, mation about making this choice.
If you and your spouse filed a Form 1065 for other than passive income, with losses from
the year prior to the election, the partnership passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes on Material participation. Generally, you materi-
terminates at the end of the tax year immediately income, other than passive income, with credits ally participated in an activity for the tax year if
preceding the year the election takes effect. resulting from passive activities. Any excess you were involved in its operations on a regular,
For more information on qualified joint ven- loss or credit is carried forward to the next tax continuous, and substantial basis during the
tures, go to IRS.gov. Enter ªqualified joint ven- year. Two exceptions to the rules for figuring year. For details, see Publication 925 or the
tureº in the search box and select ªElection for passive activity limits are discussed on this Instructions for Schedule C.
Husband and Wife Unincorporated Busi- page. Participating spouse. If you are married,nesses.º For a detailed discussion of these rules, see determine whether you materially participated inPublication 925. an activity by also counting any participation in
the activity by your spouse during the year. DoReal estate professionals. If you are a real
this even if your spouse owns no interest in theestate professional, complete line 43 of Sched-Limits on activity or files a separate return for the year.ule E.
You qualify as a real estate professional forRental Losses
Form 8582. You may have to complete Formthe tax year if you meet both of the following
8582 to figure the amount of any passive activityrequirements.If you have a loss from your rental real estate
loss for the current tax year for all activities andactivity, two sets of rules may limit the amount of • More than half of the personal services the amount of the passive activity loss allowedloss you can deduct. You must consider these you perform in all trades or businesses on your tax return. See Form 8582 not required,rules in the order shown below. Both are dis- during the tax year are performed in real later in this chapter, to determine if you mustcussed in this section. property trades or businesses in which complete Form 8582.you materially participate.1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if If you are required to complete Form 8582there is investment in your rental real es- • You perform more than 750 hours of serv- and are also subject to the at-risk rules, includetate activity for which you are not at risk. ices during the tax year in real property the amount from Form 6198, line 21 (deductibleThis applies only if the real property was trades or businesses in which you materi- loss) in column (b) of Form 8582, Worksheet 1placed in service after 1986. ally participate. or 3, as required.
2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental For purposes of meeting these qualifications,
real estate activities are considered pas- each interest in rental real estate is a separate Exception for Personal Use ofsive activities and losses are not deducti- activity, unless you elect to treat all your inter- Dwelling Unitble unless you have income from other ests in rental real estate as one activity.
passive activities to offset them. However, If you used the rental property as a home duringDo not count personal services you performthere are exceptions. the year, any income, deductions, gain, or lossas an employee in real property trades or busi-
allocable to such use shall not be taken intonesses unless you are a 5% owner of your
account for purposes of the passive activity lossemployer. You are a 5% owner if you own (or areAt-Risk Rules
limitation. Instead, follow the rules explained inconsidered to own) more than 5% of your em-
You may be subject to the at-risk rules if you chapter 5 , Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-ployer's outstanding stock, or capital or profits
have: cluding Vacation Home).interest.
Do not count your spouse's personal serv-• A loss from an activity carried on as a ices to determine whether you met the require-trade or business or for the production of Exception for Rental Real Estatements listed above. However, you can countincome, and With Active Participationyour spouse's participation in an activity in de-
• Amounts invested in the activity for which termining if you materially participated. If you or your spouse actively participated in ayou are not fully at risk. Real property trades or businesses. A passive rental real estate activity, you can de-
real property trade or business is a trade or duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity fromLosses from holding real property (other than
business that does any of the following with real your nonpassive income. This special allowancemineral property) placed in service before 1987
property. is an exception to the general rule disallowingare not subject to the at-risk rules.
losses in excess of income from passive activi-In most cases, any loss from an activity sub- • Develops or redevelops it. ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from theject to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the • Constructs or reconstructs it. activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofextent of the total amount you have at risk in the
nonpassive income after taking into account anyactivity at the end of the tax year. You are con- • Acquires it. losses allowed under this exception.sidered at risk in an activity to the extent of cash • Converts it.and the adjusted basis of other property you
Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 incontributed to the activity and certain amounts • Rents or leases it. wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limitedborrowed for use in the activity. Any loss that is • Operates or manages it. partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss from adisallowed because of the at-risk limits is treated
rental real estate activity in which she activelyas a deduction from the same activity in the next • Brokers it. participated. $2,000 of Jane's $3,500 loss off-tax year. See Publication 925 for a discussion of
sets her passive income. The remaining $1,500the at-risk rules. Choice to treat all interests as one activity. loss can be deducted from her $40,000 wages.Form 6198. If you are subject to the at-risk If you were a real estate professional and had
The special allowance is not availablerules, file Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, with more than one rental real estate interest during
if you were married, lived with youryour tax return. the year, you can choose to treat all the interests
spouse at any time during the year,as one activity. You can make this choice for any
CAUTION
!
and are filing a separate return.year that you qualify as a real estate profes-Passive Activity Limits
Active participation. You actively partici-sional. If you forgo making the choice for one
pated in a rental real estate activity if you (andyear, you can still make it for a later year.In most cases, all rental real estate activities
your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental(except those meeting the exception for real If you make the choice, it is binding for the
property and you made management decisionsestate professionals , later) are passive activi- tax year you make it and for any later year that
or arranged for others to provide services (suchties. For this purpose, a rental activity is an you are a real estate professional. This is true
as repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense.activity from which you receive income mainly even if you are not a real estate professional in
Management decisions that may count as activefor the use of tangible property, rather than for any intervening year. (For that year, the excep-
participation include approving new tenants, de-services. For a discussion of activities that are tion for real estate professionals will not apply in
ciding on rental terms, approving expenditures,not considered rental activities, see Rental Ac- determining whether your activity is subject to
and other similar decisions.tivities in Publication 925. the passive activity rules.)
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses Page 13

Page 14 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Mike is single and had the follow- 8. The deduction allowed for a portion of years for property located in disaster areas. The
ing income and losses during the tax year: cost of the replacement property must be equalself-employment tax,
to or more than the net insurance or other pay-Salary .................. . $42,300 9. The deduction allowed for interest paid on ment you received.Dividends ............... . 300 student loans,
Interest ................. . 1,400 10. The deduction for qualified tuition and re- More information. For information on busi-Rental loss ............... . (4,000)
lated fees, and ness and nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,The rental loss was from the rental of a see Publication 547.11. The domestic production activities deduc-house Mike owned. Mike had advertised and
tion (see the Instructions for Form 8903,rented the house to the current tenant himself. How to report.    If you had a casualty or theftDomestic Production Activities Deduction).He also collected the rents, which usually came that involved property used in your rental activ-by mail. All repairs were either made or con- ity, figure the net gain or loss in Section B oftracted out by Mike. Form 8582 not required. Do not complete Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Follow theAlthough the rental loss is from a passive Form 8582 if you meet all of the following condi- Instructions for Form 4684 for where to carryactivity, because Mike actively participated in tions. your net gain or loss.the rental property management he can use the
• Your only passive activities were rentalentire $4,000 loss to offset his other income.
real estate activities in which you actively
Maximum special allowance. The maximum participated.
special allowance is: Illustrated Example• Your overall net loss from these activities
• $25,000 for single individuals and married is $25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if mar- In February 2006, Marie Pfister bought a rentalindividuals filing a joint return for the tax ried filing separately). house for $135,000 (house $120,000 and landyear,
• If married filing separately, you lived apart $15,000) and immediately began renting it out.• $12,500 for married individuals who file from your spouse all year. In 2011, she rented it all 12 months for a monthlyseparate returns for the tax year and lived rental fee of $1,125. In addition to her rental• You have no prior year unallowed lossesapart from their spouses at all times during income of $13,500 (12 x $1,125), Marie had thefrom these activities.the tax year, and following expenses.
• You have no current or prior year unal-• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by Mortgage interest ............. . $8,000lowed credits from passive activities.the special allowance for which the surviv- Fire insurance (1-year policy) ..... . 250
ing spouse qualified. Miscellaneous repairs .......... . 400• Your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000
Real estate taxes imposed and paid 500or less if married filing separately and youIf your modified adjusted gross income Maintenance ................ . 200lived apart from your spouse all year).(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if
Marie depreciates the residential rental prop-• You do not hold any interest in a rentalmarried filing separately), you can deduct your
erty under MACRS GDS. This means using thereal estate activity as a limited partner orloss up to the amount specified above. If your
straight line method over a recovery period ofas a beneficiary of an estate or a trust.MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than
27.5 years.$50,000 if married filing separately), your spe-
If you meet all of the conditions listed above, She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciationcial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference
percentage. Because she placed the property inyour rental real estate activities are not limitedbetween $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing sep-
service in February 2006, she continues to useby the passive activity rules and you do not havearately) and your MAGI.
that row of Table 2-2d. For year 6, the rate isto complete Form 8582. On lines 23a throughGenerally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more
3.636%.23g of your Schedule E, enter the applicable($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-
amounts. Marie figures her net rental income or loss forrately), there is no special allowance.
the house as follows:Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).
Total rental income received This is your adjusted gross income from Form
($1,125 ×  12) ............... . $13,5001040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, line
Casualties and Thefts Minus: Expenses38, or Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresident Alien
Mortgage interest ...... . $8,000Income Tax Return, line 37, figured without tak-
Fire insurance ........ . 250As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have aing into account: Miscellaneous repairs ... . 400loss related to your rental property. You may be
Real estate taxes ...... . 5001. The taxable amount of social security or able to deduct the loss on your income tax re-
Maintenance ......... . 200equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement bene- turn. Total expenses ............. . ±9,350fits,
Balance ................... . 4,150Casualty. This is the damage, destruction, or2. The deductible contributions to traditional Minus: Depreciation ($120,000 xloss of property resulting from an identifiableindividual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 3.636%) ................. . −4,363event that is sudden, unexpected, or unusual.section 501(c)(18) pension plans, Net rental loss for house ....... . $213Such events include a storm, fire, or earthquake.
3. The exclusion from income of interest from
Theft. This is defined as the unlawful takingSeries EE and I U.S. savings bonds used
Marie had a net loss for the year. Becauseand removing of your money or property with theto pay higher educational expenses,
she actively participated in her passive rentalintent to deprive you of it.4. The exclusion of amounts received under real estate activity and her loss was less than
an employer's adoption assistance pro- $25,000, she can deduct the loss on her return.Gain from casualty or theft. It is also possi-gram, Marie also meets all of the requirements for notble to have a gain from a casualty or theft if you
having to file Form 8582. She uses Schedule E,receive money, including insurance, that is more5. Any passive activity income or loss in-
Part I, to report her rental income and expenses.than your adjusted basis in the property. Gener-cluded on Form 8582,
She enters her income, expenses, and depreci-ally, you must report this gain. However, under6. Any rental real estate loss allowed to real ation for the house in the column for Property Acertain circumstances, you may defer paying taxestate professionals, and enters her loss on line 22. Marie's Scheduleby choosing to postpone reporting the gain. To
E is shown next. Form 4562 is not required. Seedo this, you generally must buy replacement7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded
Publication 946 for information on how to pre-property within 2 years after the close of the firstpartnership (see Publicly Traded Partner-
pare Form 4562.tax year in which any part of your gain is real-ships (PTPs) in the Instructions for Form
ized. Generally, the replacement period is 58582),
Page 14 Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

Page 15 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss  
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, 
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  /uni25B6 See separate instructions. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
A Did you make any payments in 2011 that would require you to /f_ile Form(s) 1099? (see instructions) Yes No
B If “Yes,” did you or will you /f_ile all required Forms 1099? Yes No
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ (see instructions). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
Caution. For each rental property listed on line 1, check the box in the last column only if you owned that property as a member of a 
quali/f_ied joint venture (QJV) reporting income not subject to self-employment tax.
1 Physical address of each property–street, city, state, zip Type–from list 
below
A
B
C
2 For each rental real 
estate property listed, 
report the number of 
days rented at fair rental 
value and days with 
personal use. See 
instructions. 
Fair Rental 
Days
Personal 
Use Days QJV
A
B
C
Type of Property:
1  Single Family Residence
2  Multi-Family Residence
3  Vacation/Short-Term Rental
4  Commercial
5  Land
6  Royalties
7  Self-Rental
8  Other (describe)
Income: Properties 
        A B C 
3a Merchant card and third party payments. For 2011, enter -0- 3a
b Payments not reported to you on line 3a . . . . . 3b
4 Total not including amounts on line 3a that are not 
income (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . 4
Expenses:                 
5 Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
6 Auto and travel (see instructions) . . . . . . . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . . . . . . . . 7 
8 Commissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 
9 Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees . . . . . . . 10 
11 Management fees . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to banks,  etc. (see instructions) 12 
13 Other interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
14 Repairs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 
15 Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
16 Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
17 Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 
18 Depreciation expense or depletion . . . . . . . 18
19 Other (list)  /uni25B6 19
20 Total expenses. Add lines 5 through 19 . . . . . 20
21 Subtract line 20 from line 4. If result is a  (loss), see 
instructions to /f_ind out if  you must /f_ile Form 6198 .  21
22 Deductible rental real estate loss after limitation, if any, 
on Form 8582 (see instructions) . . . . . . .
22 ( ) ( ) ( )
23a Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all rental properties . . . .  23a
b Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all royalty properties . . . . 23b
c Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all rental properties . . . . 23c
d Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all royalty properties . . . . 23d
e Total of all amounts reported on line 12 for all properties . . . . . . 23e
f Total of all amounts reported on line 18 for all properties . . . . . . 23f
g Total of all amounts reported on line 20 for all properties . . . . . . 23g
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 21. Do not include any losses . . . . . . . 24
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 21 and rental real estate losses from line 22. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here. 
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 
17, or Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . . . 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2011 
Marie Pfister 444-00-8888
/H12011
/H12011
444 Maple Ave, Anywhere, WI 55555 1 365 0
13,500
8,000
400
500
13,713
(213)
8,000
4,363
13,713
13,500
200
250
4,363
213
13,500
213
(213)
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses Page 15

Page 16 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Multiply your cost per share by the total the property was used or held for rental pur-
poses.number of outstanding shares.
You cannot deduct depreciation or insuranceb. Add to the amount figured in (a) any4. for the part of the year the property was held formortgage debt on the property on the personal use. However, you can include thedate you bought the stock. home mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in-
surance premiums, and real estate tax ex-c. Subtract from the amount figured in (b)
Special penses for the part of the year the property wasany mortgage debt that is not for the
held for personal use as an itemized deductiondepreciable real property, such as the
on Schedule A (Form 1040).   part for the land.Situations
Example. Your tax year is the calendar2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) any
This chapter discusses some rental real estate year. You moved from your home in May anddepreciation for space owned by the cor-
activities that are subject to additional rules. started renting it out on June 1. You can deductporation that can be rented but cannot be
as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlylived in by tenant-stockholders.
expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
3. Divide the number of your shares of stock Starting with June, you can deduct as rental
by the total number of shares outstanding, expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-Condominiums including any shares held by the corpora- ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
tion. When figuring depreciation, treat the prop-A condominium is most often a dwelling unit in a
erty as placed in service on June 1.multi-unit building, but can also take other forms, 4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage
you figured in (3). This is your depreciationsuch as a townhouse or garden apartment.
on the stock. Basis of PropertyIf you own a condominium, you also own a
share of the common elements, such as land, Changed to Rental UseYour depreciation deduction for the year
lobbies, elevators, and service areas. You and cannot be more than the part of your adjusted When you change property you held for per-the other condominium owners may pay dues or basis (defined in chapter 2) in the stock of the sonal use to rental use (for example, you rentassessments to a special corporation that is corporation that is allocable to your rental prop- your former home), the basis for depreciationorganized to take care of the common elements. erty. will be the lesser of fair market value or adjustedSpecial rules apply if you rent your condo- basis on the date of conversion.minium to others. You can deduct as rental ex- Payments added to capital account. Pay-
penses all the expenses discussed in chapters 1 ments earmarked for a capital asset or improve- Fair market value. This is the price at which
and 2. In addition, you can deduct any dues or ment, or otherwise charged to the corporation's the property would change hands between a
assessments paid for maintenance of the com- capital account are added to the basis of your willing buyer and a willing seller, neither having
mon elements. stock in the corporation. For example, you can- to buy or sell, and both having reasonable
not deduct a payment used to pave a community knowledge of all the relevant facts. Sales ofYou cannot deduct special assessments you
parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the principal similar property, on or about the same date, maypay to a condominium management corporation
of the corporation's mortgage. be helpful in figuring the fair market value of thefor improvements. However, you may be able to
property.Treat as a capital cost the amount you wererecover your share of the cost of any improve-
assessed for capital items. This cannot be morement by taking depreciation. Figuring the basis. The basis for deprecia-than the amount by which your payments to the tion is the lesser of:corporation exceeded your share of the corpora-
tion's mortgage interest and real estate taxes. • The fair market value of the property on
the date you changed it to rental use, orYour share of interest and taxes is theCooperatives
amount the corporation elected to allocate to • Your adjusted basis on the date of the
you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses forIf you live in a cooperative, you do not own your changeÐthat is, your original cost or
your apartment. Otherwise, figure your share inapartment. Instead, a corporation owns the other basis of the property, plus the cost of
the following manner. apartments and you are a tenant-stockholder in permanent additions or improvements
the cooperative housing corporation. If you rent since you acquired it, minus deductions for1. Divide the number of your shares of stockyour apartment to others, you usually can de- any casualty or theft losses claimed onby the total number of shares outstanding,duct, as a rental expense, all the maintenance earlier years' income tax returns and otherincluding any shares held by the corpora-fees you pay to the cooperative housing corpo- decreases to basis. For other increasestion. and decreases to basis, see Adjusted Ba-ration.
2. Multiply the corporation's deductible inter- sis in chapter 2.In addition to the maintenance fees paid to
est by the number you figured in (1). Thisthe cooperative housing corporation, you can
is your share of the interest.deduct your direct payments for repairs, upkeep, Example. Several years ago you built your
and other rental expenses, including interest home for $140,000 on a lot that cost you3. Multiply the corporation's deductible taxes
paid on a loan used to buy your stock in the $14,000. Before changing the property to rentalby the number you figured in (1). This is
corporation. use this year, you added $28,000 of permanentyour share of the taxes.
improvements to the house and claimed a
$3,500 casualty loss deduction for damage toDepreciation
the house. Part of the improvements qualified
You will be depreciating your stock in the corpo- for a $500 residential energy credit, which you
Property Changed claimed on your 2006 tax return. Because landration rather than the apartment itself. Figure
is not depreciable, you can only include the costyour depreciation deduction as follows.
to Rental Use of the house when figuring the basis for depreci-
1. Figure the depreciation for all the deprecia- ation.
If you change your home or other property (or able real property owned by the corporation. The adjusted basis of the house at the time
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the(Depreciation methods are discussed in of the change in its use was $164,000 ($140,000
beginning of your tax year, you must dividechapter 2 of this publication and Publica- + $28,000 − $3,500 − $500).
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,tion 946.) If you bought your cooperative On the date of the change in use, your prop-
between rental use and personal use.stock after its first offering, figure the erty had a fair market value of $168,000, of
depreciable basis of this property as fol- You can deduct as rental expenses only the which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000
part of the expense that is for the part of the yearlows. was for the house.
Page 16 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 17 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The basis for depreciation on the house is nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex- Where to report. Report your not-for-profit
penses for electricity, or painting the outside of rental income on Form 1040 or 1040NR, line 21.the fair market value on the date of the change
the house.  For example, if you are filing Form 1040, you($147,000), because it is less than your adjusted
There is no change in the types of expenses can include your mortgage interest and anybasis ($164,000).
deductible for the personal-use part of your qualified mortgage insurance premiums (if you
property. Generally, these expenses may be use the property as your main home or second
deducted only if you itemize your deductions on home), real estate taxes, and casualty losses onCooperatives
Schedule A. the appropriate lines of Schedule A if you item-
If you change your cooperative apartment to You cannot deduct any part of the cost of the ize your deductions.
rental use, figure your allowable depreciation as first phone line even if your tenants have unlim- Claim your other rental expenses, subject to
explained earlier. (Depreciation methods are ited use of it. the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication
discussed in chapter 2  of this publication and You do not have to divide the expenses that 535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions on
Publication 946.) The basis of all the deprecia- belong only to the rental part of your property. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or Schedule A
For example, if you paint a room that you rent, or (Form 1040NR), line 9. You can deduct theseble real property owned by the cooperative
if you pay premiums for liability insurance in expenses only if they, together with certain otherhousing corporation is the smaller of the follow-
connection with renting a room in your home, miscellaneous itemized deductions, total moreing amounts.
your entire cost is a rental expense. If you install than 2% of your adjusted gross income.• The fair market value of the property on a second phone line strictly for your tenant's Presumption of profit. If your rental incomethe date you change your apartment to use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti- is more than your rental expenses for at least 3rental use. This is considered to be the ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre- years out of a period of 5 consecutive years, yousame as the corporation's adjusted basis ciation on the part of the house used for rental are presumed to be renting your property tominus straight line depreciation, unless purposes as well as on the furniture and equip- make a profit.this value is unrealistic. ment you use for rental purposes.
Postponing decision. If you are starting• The corporation's adjusted basis in the How to divide expenses. If an expense is for your rental activity and do not have 3 yearsproperty on that date. Do not subtract de- both rental use and personal use, such as mort- showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-preciation when figuring the corporation's gage interest or heat for the entire house, you sumption made after you have the 5 years ofadjusted basis. must divide the expense between rental use and experience required by the test. You maypersonal use. You can use any reasonable choose to postpone the decision of whether theIf you bought the stock after its first offering, method for dividing the expense. It may be rea- rental is for profit by filing Form 5213. You mustthe corporation's adjusted basis in the property sonable to divide the cost of some items (for file Form 5213 within 3 years after the due dateexample, water) based on the number of peopleis the amount figured in (1) under Depreciation of your return (determined without extensions)using them. The two most common methods for(under Cooperatives, near the beginning of this for the year in which you first carried on thedividing an expense are (1) the number of roomschapter). The fair market value of the property is activity or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv-in your home, and (2) the square footage of yourconsidered to be the same as the corporation's ing written notice from the Internal Revenuehome.adjusted basis figured in this way minus straight Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib-
line depreciation, unless the value is unrealistic. utable to the activity.Example. You rent a room in your house.
More information. For more informationThe room is 12 ×  15 feet, or 180 square feet.Figuring the Depreciation about the rules for an activity not engaged in forYour entire house has 1,800 square feet of floor
Deduction profit, see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 ofspace. You can deduct as a rental expense 10%
Publication 535.of any expense that must be divided betweenTo figure the deduction, use the depreciation rental use and personal use. If your heating billsystem in effect when you convert your resi- for the year for the entire house was $600, $60dence to rental use. Generally, that will be ($600 ×  .10) is a rental expense. The balance,
MACRS for any conversion after 1986. Treat the $540, is a personal expense that you cannot Illustrated ExampleÐproperty as placed in service on the conversion deduct.
date. Property Changed toDuplex. A common situation is the duplex
where you live in one unit and rent out the other.Example. Your converted residence (see Rental UseCertain expenses apply to the entire property,previous example) was available for rent on Au-
such as mortgage interest and real estate taxes,gust 1. Using Table 2-2d (see chapter 2 ), the In January, Eileen Johnson bought a condomin-and must be split to determine rental and per-percentage for Year 1 beginning in August is ium apartment to live in. Instead of selling thesonal expenses.1.364% and the depreciation deduction for Year house she had been living in, she decided to
1 is $2,005 ($147,000 ×  .01364). change it to rental property. Eileen selected aExample. You own a duplex and live in one tenant and started renting the house on Febru-half, renting the other half. Both units are ap- ary 1. Eileen charges $750 a month for rent andproximately the same size. Last year, you paid a collects it herself. Eileen also received a $750total of $10,000 mortgage interest and $2,000 security deposit from her tenant. Because sheRenting Part of real estate taxes for the entire property. You can plans to return it to her tenant at the end of thededuct $5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000 lease, she does not include it in her income. HerProperty real estate taxes on Schedule E, and if you rental expenses for the year are as follows.itemize your deductions, you can deduct theIf you rent part of your property, you must divide Mortgage interest .......... . $1,800other $5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000 realcertain expenses between the part of the prop- Fire insurance (1-year policy) .. . 100estate taxes on Schedule A.erty used for rental purposes and the part of the Miscellaneous repairs (after
property used for personal purposes, as though renting) ............... . 297
Real estate taxes imposed andyou actually had two separate pieces of prop-
paid .................. . 1,200erty. Not Rented for Profit
You can deduct the expenses related to the Eileen must divide the real estate taxes,
part of the property used for rental purposes, If you do not rent your property to make a profit, mortgage interest, and fire insurance between
such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort- you can deduct your rental expenses only up to the personal use of the property and the rental
gage insurance premiums, and real estate the amount of your rental income. You cannot use of the property. She can deduct
taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Form deduct a loss or carry forward to the next year eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex-
1040). You can also deduct as rental expenses any rental expenses that are more than your penses. She can include the balance of the
a portion of other expenses that normally are rental income for the year. allowable taxes and mortgage interest on
Chapter 4 Special Situations Page 17

Page 18 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage interest ($1,800 ×Schedule A if she itemizes. She cannot deduct As specified for residential rental property,
11/12) ............... . $1,650the balance of the fire insurance because it is a Eileen must use the straight line method of de-
Fire insurance ($100 ×  11/12) 92personal expense. preciation over the GDS or ADS recovery pe- Miscellaneous repairs .... . 297Eileen bought this house in 1984 for riod. She chooses the GDS recovery period of Real estate taxes ($1,200 ×$35,000. Her property tax was based on as- 27.5 years. 11/12) ............... . 1,100sessed values of $10,000 for the land and Total expenses .............. . 3,139She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation$25,000 for the house. Before changing it to Balance .................... . $5,111percentage. Since she placed the property inrental property, Eileen added several improve- service in February, the percentage is 3.182%. Minus: Depreciationments to the house. She figures her adjusted House ($39,000 ×  .03182) . . $1,241On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasherbasis as follows: Dishwasher ($425 ×  .20) .. . 85for the rental property at a cost of $425. The Furnace ($4,000 ×  .02273) . . 91Improvements Cost dishwasher is personal property used in a rental Total depreciation ............ . 1,417House ................. . $25,000 real estate activity, which has a 5-year recovery Net rental income for house $3,694Remodeled kitchen ........ . 4,200 period. She uses Table 2-2a to find the percent-Recreation room .......... . 5,800 age for Year 1 under ªHalf-year conventionºNew roof ............... . 1,600 (20%) to figure her depreciation deduction.Patio and deck ........... . 2,400 Eileen uses Schedule E, Part I, to report her
On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have a rental income and expenses. She enters herAdjusted basis .......... . $39,000 furnace installed in the house. The furnace is income, expenses, and depreciation for theOn February 1, when Eileen changed her residential rental property. Because she placed house in the column for Property A. Since allhouse to rental property, the property had a fair the property in service in May, the percentage property was placed in service this year, Eileenmarket value of $152,000. Of this amount, from Table 2-2d is 2.273%. must use Form 4562 to figure the depreciation.$35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for Eileen figures her net rental income or loss Eileen's Schedule E and Form 4562 are shownthe house. for the house as follows: next. See the Instructions for Form 4562 forBecause Eileen's adjusted basis is less than more information on preparing the form.Total rental income received the fair market value on the date of the change, ($750 ×  11) ................ . $8,250Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-
Minus: Expensestion.
Page 18 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 19 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss  
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, 
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  /uni25B6 See separate instructions. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
A Did you make any payments in 2011 that would require you to /f_ile Form(s) 1099? (see instructions) Yes No
B If “Yes,” did you or will you /f_ile all required Forms 1099? Yes No
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ (see instructions). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
Caution. For each rental property listed on line 1, check the box in the last column only if you owned that property as a member of a 
quali/f_ied joint venture (QJV) reporting income not subject to self-employment tax.
1 Physical address of each property–street, city, state, zip Type–from list 
below
A
B
C
2 For each rental real 
estate property listed, 
report the number of 
days rented at fair rental 
value and days with 
personal use. See 
instructions. 
Fair Rental 
Days
Personal 
Use Days QJV
A
B
C
Type of Property:
1  Single Family Residence
2  Multi-Family Residence
3  Vacation/Short-Term Rental
4  Commercial
5  Land
6  Royalties
7  Self-Rental
8  Other (describe)
Income: Properties 
        A B C 
3a Merchant card and third party payments. For 2011, enter -0- 3a
b Payments not reported to you on line 3a . . . . . 3b
4 Total not including amounts on line 3a that are not 
income (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . 4
Expenses:                 
5 Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
6 Auto and travel (see instructions) . . . . . . . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . . . . . . . . 7 
8 Commissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 
9 Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees . . . . . . . 10 
11 Management fees . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to banks,  etc. (see instructions) 12 
13 Other interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
14 Repairs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 
15 Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
16 Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
17 Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 
18 Depreciation expense or depletion . . . . . . . 18
19 Other (list)  /uni25B6 19
20 Total expenses. Add lines 5 through 19 . . . . . 20
21 Subtract line 20 from line 4. If result is a  (loss), see 
instructions to /f_ind out if  you must /f_ile Form 6198 .  21
22 Deductible rental real estate loss after limitation, if any, 
on Form 8582 (see instructions) . . . . . . .
22 ( ) ( ) ( )
23a Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all rental properties . . . .  23a
b Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all royalty properties . . . . 23b
c Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all rental properties . . . . 23c
d Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all royalty properties . . . . 23d
e Total of all amounts reported on line 12 for all properties . . . . . . 23e
f Total of all amounts reported on line 18 for all properties . . . . . . 23f
g Total of all amounts reported on line 20 for all properties . . . . . . 23g
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 21. Do not include any losses . . . . . . . 24
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 21 and rental real estate losses from line 22. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here. 
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 
17, or Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . . . 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2011 
Eileen Johnson 123-00-4567
/H12011
/H12011
123 Main Street, Hometown, MN 56200 1 334 31
8,250
8,250
92
1,650
297
1,100
1,417
4,556
3,694
8,250
1,650
1,417
4,556
3,694
3,694
Chapter 4 Special Situations Page 19

Page 20 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 4562
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service    (99)
Depreciation and Amortization  
(Including Information on Listed Property)
/uni25B6 See separate instructions. /uni25B6 Attach to your tax return.
OMB No. 1545-0172
2011
Attachment            
Sequence No. 179
Name(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates Identifying number
Part I Election To Expense Certain Property Under Section 179  
Note: If you have any listed property, complete Part V before you complete Part I.
1 Maximum amount (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2 Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . 2
3 Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation (see instructions) . . . . . . 3
4 Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- . . . . . . . . . . 4
5 Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married /f_iling 
separately, see instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
6 (a)  Description of property (b)  Cost (business use only) (c)  Elected cost
7 Listed property. Enter the amount from line 29 . . . . . . . . . 7
8 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7 . . . . . . 8
9 Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
10 Carryover of disallowed deduction from line 13 of your 2010 Form 4562 . . . . . . . . . . . 10
11 Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)  11
12 Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 11 . . . . . 12
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2012. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12   /uni25B613
Note:  Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property. Instead, use Part V.
Part II Special Depreciation Allowance and Other Depreciation (Do not  include listed property.)  (See instructions.)
14 Special depreciation allowance for quali/f_ied property (other than listed property) placed in service 
during the tax year (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
15 Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
16 Other depreciation (including ACRS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Part III MACRS Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See instructions.)
Section A
17 MACRS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 2011 . . . . . . . 17
18 If you are electing to group any assets placed in service during the tax year into one or more general 
asset accounts, check here . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  /uni25B6
Section B—Assets Placed in Service During 2011 Tax Year Using the General Depreciation System
  
(a) Classi/f_ication of property
(b)  Month and year 
 placed in  
service
(c)  Basis for depreciation 
 (business/investment use  
only—see instructions)
(d)  Recovery 
period (e)  Convention (f)  Method (g)  Depreciation deduction
19a 3-year property
b 5-year property
c 7-year property
d 10-year property
e 15-year property
f 20-year property
g 25-year property
h Residential rental 
property   
i Nonresidential real 
property
   
Section C—Assets Placed in Service During 2011 Tax Year Using the Alternative Depreciation System
20a Class life
b 12-year
c 40-year
Part IV Summary  (See instructions.)
21 Listed property. Enter amount from line 28 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
22 Total.  Add amounts from line 12, lines 14 through 17, lines 19 and 20 in column (g), and line 21. Enter here 
and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations—see instructions . . . . . 22
23 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year, enter the
portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs . . . . . . . 23
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see separate instructions. Cat. No. 12906N    Form 4562 (2011)
Eileen Johnson Rental House 123-00-4567
425
2/2011
5/2011
39,000
4,000
5 years
25 yrs.
27.5 yrs.
27.5 yrs.
39 yrs.
12 yrs.
40 yrs.
MM
MM
MM
MM
MM
S/L
S/L
S/L
S/L
S/L
S/L
S/L
S/L
HY 200% DB 85
1,241
91
1,417
Page 20 Chapter 4 Special Situations

Page 21 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home and pays a fair rental price (defined Example 5. You rent an apartment to your
later). Family includes only your spouse, mother at less than a fair rental price. You are
brothers and sisters, half-brothers and using the apartment for personal purposes on
5. half-sisters, ancestors (parents, grand- the days that your mother rents it because you
parents, etc.), and lineal descendants (chil- rent it for less than a fair rental price.
dren, grandchildren, etc.).
Days Used for Repairs and3. Anyone under an arrangement that letsPersonal Use of
you use some other dwelling unit. Maintenance
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.Dwelling Unit Any day that you spend working substantially full
time repairing and maintaining (not improving)
Main home. If the other person or member of your property is not counted as a day of personal(Including the family in (1) or (2) above has more than one use. Do not count such a day as a day of per-
home, his or her main home is ordinarily the one sonal use even if family members use the prop-
he or she lived in most of the time. erty for recreational purposes on the same day.Vacation Home)
Shared equity financing agreement. This is Example. Corey owns a cabin in the moun-an agreement under which two or more personsIn chapter 1, we looked at the rules for residen- tains that he rents for most of the year. Heacquire undivided interests for more than 50tial rental activities where the rental dwelling unit spends a week at the cabin with family mem-years in an entire dwelling unit, including thewas separate from where you lived. In this chap- bers. Corey works on maintenance of the cabinland, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-ter, we are looking at rental activities where the 3 or 4 hours each day during the week andtled to occupy the unit as his or her main homesame dwelling unit is used both as your home spends the rest of the time fishing, hiking, andupon payment of rent to the other co-owner or(or is considered to be your home) and as a relaxing. Corey's family members, however,owners.rental. This might be a vacation home or your work substantially full time on the cabin eachmain home, a recreational vehicle or a boat. In day during the week. The main purpose of beingDonation of use of the property. You use athis case, expenses must be divided between at the cabin that week is to do maintenancedwelling unit for personal purposes if:rental use and personal use, and you will not be work. Therefore, the use of the cabin during theable to deduct rental expenses that are more • You donate the use of the unit to a charita- week by Corey and his family will not be consid-than your rental income for that dwelling unit. ble organization, ered personal use by Corey. 
• The organization sells the use of the unitDwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes a at a fund-raising event, andhouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home,
boat, vacation home, or similar property. It also • The ªpurchaserº uses the unit. Dwelling Unit Used asincludes all structures or other property belong-
ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has basic Examples. The following examples show how a Homeliving accommodations, such as sleeping space, to determine if you have days of personal use.a toilet, and cooking facilities. The tax treatment of rental income and ex-A dwelling unit does not include property (or Example 1. You and your neighbor are penses for a dwelling unit that you also use forpart of the property) used solely as a hotel, co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last personal purposes depends on whether you usemotel, inn, or similar establishment. Property is year, you rented the unit to vacationers when- it as a home. (See Figuring Rental Income andused solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar ever possible. The unit was not used as a main Deductions, later).establishment if it is regularly available for occu- home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit You use a dwelling unit as a home during thepancy by paying customers and is not used by for 2 weeks last year; you did not use it at all. tax year if you use it for personal purposes morean owner as a home during the year. Because your neighbor has an interest in the than the greater of:
unit, both of you are considered to have used theExample. You rent a room in your home 1. 14 days, orunit for personal purposes during those 2that is always available for short-term occu- weeks. 2. 10% of the total days it is rented to otherspancy by paying customers. You do not use the
at a fair rental price.room yourself and you allow only paying cus- Example 2. You and your neighbors aretomers to use the room. This room is used solely See What Is a Day of Personal Use, earlier.co-owners of a house under a shared equityas a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-financing agreement. Your neighbors live in theand is not a dwelling unit. poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,house and pay you a fair rental price.
do not count that day as a day of rental use inEven though your neighbors have an interest
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day ofin the house, the days your neighbors live there
personal use in applying both (1) and (2) aboveare not counted as days of personal use by you.
What Is a Day of (see Example 3 under Fair rental price , next).This is because your neighbors rent the house
However, this rule does not apply when dividingas their main home under a shared equity fi-
Personal Use? expenses between rental and personal use (seenancing agreement.
Dividing Expenses, later, for details).  
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any Example 3. You own a rental property that
day that the unit is used by any of the following Fair rental price. A fair rental price for youryou rent to your son. Your son does not own any
persons. property generally is the amount of rent that ainterest in this property. He uses it as his main
person who is not related to you would be willinghome and pays you a fair rental price.1. You or any other person who owns an in- to pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rentalYour son's use of the property is not personalterest in it, unless you rent it to another price if it is substantially less than the rentsuse by you because your son is using it as hisowner as his or her main home under a charged for other properties that are similar tomain home, he owns no interest in the property,shared equity financing agreement (de- your property in your area.and he is paying you a fair rental price.fined later). However, see Exception for Ask yourself the following questions whenUse as Main Home Before or After Renting Example 4. You rent your beach house to comparing another property with yours.under Dwelling Unit Used As a Home, Rosa. Rosa rents her cabin in the mountains tolater. • Is it used for the same purpose?you. You each pay a fair rental price.
2. A member of your family or a member of You are using your beach house for personal • Is it approximately the same size?
the family of any other person who owns purposes on the days that Rosa uses it because • Is it in approximately the same condition?an interest in it, unless the family member your house is used by Rosa under an arrange-
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main ment that allows you to use her cabin. • Does it have similar furnishings?
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 21

Page 22 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is it in a similar location? Exception for Use as Main Home Dividing Expenses
Before or After RentingIf any of the answers are no, the properties If you use a dwelling unit for both rental andprobably are not similar. For purposes of determining whether a dwelling personal purposes, divide your expenses be-
unit was used as a home, you may not have to tween the rental use and the personal use basedExamples. The following examples show how on the number of days used for each purpose.count days you used the property as your mainto determine whether you used your rental prop-
When dividing your expenses, follow thesehome before or after renting it or offering it forerty as a home. rules.rent as days of personal use. Do not count them
as days of personal use if:Example 1. You converted the basement of • Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
your home into an apartment with a bedroom, a rental price is a day of rental use even if• You rented or tried to rent the property for
bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the you used the unit for personal purposes12 or more consecutive months.basement apartment at a fair rental price to that day. (This rule does not apply when
• You rented or tried to rent the property for determining whether you used the unit ascollege students during the regular school year.
a period of less than 12 consecutive a home.)You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273
months and the period ended becausedays). You figured 10% of the total days rented • Any day that the unit is available for rentyou sold or exchanged the property.to others at a fair rental price is 27 days. but not actually rented is not a day of
During June (30 days), your brothers stayed rental use.However, this special rule does not apply when
with you and lived in the basement apartment dividing expenses between rental and personal
rent free. use. See Property Changed to Rental Use  in Example. Your beach cottage was avail-Your basement apartment was used as a chapter 4. able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92
home because you used it for personal pur- days). Your family used the cottage during the
poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth- Example 1. On February 28, 2010, you last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unable
ers is considered personal use. Your personal moved out of the house you had lived in for 6 to find a renter for the first week in August (7
use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days). The person who rented the cottage foryears because you accepted a job in another
days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27 July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2town. You rented your house at a fair rental price
days). days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.from March 15, 2010, to May 14, 2011 (14
The cottage was not used at all before May 17 ormonths). On June 1, 2011, you moved back intoExample 2. You rented the guest bedroom after August 31.your old house.in your home at a fair rental price during the local You figure the part of the cottage expensesThe days you used the house as your maincollege's homecoming, commencement, and to treat as rental expenses as follows.
home from January 1 to February 28, 2010, andfootball weekends (a total of 27 days). Your • The cottage was used for rental a total offrom June 1 to December 31, 2011, are notsister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail-counted as days of personal use. Therefore, youlast 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10% able for rent but not rented (7 days) arewould use the rules in chapter 1 when figuringof the total days rented to others at a fair rental not days of rental use. The July weekendyour rental income and expenses.price is 3 days. (2 days) you used it is rental use because
The room was used as a home because you you received a fair rental price for theExample 2. On January 31, you moved outused it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is weekend.of the condominium where you had lived for 3more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the • You used the cottage for personal pur-years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental price27 days it was rented (3 days). poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks inbeginning on February 1. You were unable to
May).Example 3. You own a condominium apart- rent it until April.
ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental • The total use of the cottage was 99 daysThe days you used the condominium as your
price for a total of 170 days during the year. For (14 days personal use + 85 days rentalmain home from January 1 to January 31 are not12 of these days, the tenant was not able to use use).counted as days of personal use when deter-the apartment and allowed you to use it even • Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofmining whether you used it as a home.though you did not refund any of the rent. Your the cottage expenses.family actually used the apartment for 10 of
those days. Therefore, the apartment is treated When determining whether you used the cot-
as having been rented for 160 (170 ± 10) days. tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youFiguring RentalYou figured 10% of the total days rented to used it is personal use even though you re-
others at a fair rental price is 16 days. Your ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-Income andfamily also used the apartment for 7 other days fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83
during the year. days of rental use for this purpose. Because youDeductions used the cottage for personal purposes moreYou used the apartment as a home because
than 14 days and more than 10% of the days ofyou used it for personal purposes for 17 days. If you use a dwelling unit as a home during the rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If youThat is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% year, how you figure your rental income and have a net loss, you may not be able to deductof the 160 days it was rented (16 days). deductions depends on how many days the unit all of the rental expenses. See Limit on Deduc-
was rented at a fair rental price. tions, next.Exceptions to Use as a Home
Discussed below are exceptions to the rules for Limit on DeductionsRented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell-
personal use of a rented dwelling unit. ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more
The rental activity discussed in this chapter Ðduring the year, include all your rental income in using the same dwelling unit for both rental andyour income. See Reporting Income and Deduc- personal purposes Ðis not a passive activity.Exception for Minimal Rental Use tions, later. If you had a net profit from the rental Instead, the limitation is based on the rental
property for the year (that is, if your rental in-If you use the dwelling unit as a home and you income from this activity.
come is more than the total of your rental ex-rent it fewer than 15 days during the year, that If your rental expenses are more than your
penses, including depreciation), deduct all ofperiod is not treated as rental activity. Do not rental income, you cannot use the excess ex-
your rental expenses. However, if you had a netinclude any of the rent in your income and do not penses to offset income from other sources. The
loss, your deduction for certain rental expensesdeduct any of the rental expenses. See Dwelling excess can be carried forward to the next year
Unit Used as a Home, earlier. is limited. and treated as rental expenses for the same
Page 22 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 23 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property. Any expenses carried forward to the Deductions not allowed due to the limitations enter 42 days (31 days in July + 11 days in
next year will be subject to any limits that apply of the rental income for the property are carried December).
for that year. You can deduct the expenses over to subsequent years and may be used Line C. Total days of rental use equals 142carried over to a year only up to the amount of when the property has sufficient income to cover (184 − 42).your rental income for that year, even if you do the expenses.
not use the property as your home for that year. Line D. Their days of personal use totaled
Rented at least 15 days and personal use testTo figure your deductible rental expenses 52 (10 days in June + 31 days in July + 11 days
is not met. If your personal use of your prop-and any carryover to next year, use Worksheet in December). They must include in their per-
erty is less than the greater of:5-1 at the end of this chapter. sonal use any use by family and friends.
• 14 days, or Line E. Total use of the property equals 194
days (142 + 52).• 10% of total days rented to others at fair
rental price.Reporting Income and Line F. Rental use of the property is 73%
(142 ÷  194) of its total use for the year. InYour property is rental property and your rental
Deductions completing this worksheet, they will multiply anyexpenses, which are proportional to the portion
of rental use, will be reported on Schedule E of their expenses that apply to both personal andWhen you use a dwelling unit both as a home (Form 1040). Your rental losses for this property rental use by 73% (.73).and a rental unit, you must first determine if the this year are subject to passive loss limitations.
property qualifies as rental property. If it is rental See Passive Activity Limits, earlier.
property, how much it is used as a rental com- Part II. Allowable Rental ExpensesThe personal portion of expenses, includingpared to how much it is used as personal will
qualified mortgage interest, property taxes, anddetermine where the rental property's income Line 1. The Donovans enter $6,000 (20
qualified casualty loss (if any), will be reportedand expenses should be reported on your re- weeks ×  $300 per week), the total amount of rentas normally allowed on Schedule A (Formturn. they received for the year.1040). The personal portion of the remaining
Lines 2a ±2e. They enter $5,631 ($7,714Property rented less than 15 days. If a prop- rental expenses are not deductible because
erty is rented less than 15 days, it's primary mortgage interest ×  .73) on line 2a and $219they are personal expenses.
function is not considered to be rental and it ($300 real estate taxes ×  .73) on line 2b. On lineSee Worksheet 5-1, later.
should not be reported on Schedule E (Form 2d they enter the full $150 spent on advertising
1040). You are not required to report the rental because it is a direct rental expense that does
income and rental expenses from this activity. not have to be divided. On line 2e, they enter
The expenses, including qualified mortgage in- $6,000 ($5,631 + $219 + $150).Illustrated Example
terest, property taxes, and any qualified casualty Next, they enter the amounts from line 2aloss will be reported as normally allowed on On June 1, Tim and Emily Donovan bought a ($5,631), line 2b ($219), and line 2d ($150) onSchedule A (Form 1040). See the instructions vacation condominium to use as rental property. the appropriate lines of Schedule E (see thefor Schedule A for more information on deduct- They began advertising in June that the property illustrated form).ing these expenses. would be available for rent beginning July 1. The
Line 3. Because $6,000 minus $6,000 isDonovans used the property for 10 days duringRented at least 15 days and personal use test zero, the Donovans enter -0- on line 3. ThisJune. They didn't have any tenants in July, sois met. If your personal use of your property is shows that no additional rental expenses can befamily and friends used it for the 15 days theymore than the greater of: deducted on Schedule E this year. They need toweren't using the property themselves. On Au-
complete the rest of the worksheet to see what• 14 days, or gust 3, they began renting it for $300 per week
expenses can be carried over and deducted the(a fair rental price) and rented it continuously• 10% of total days rented to others at fair following year if they have enough rental in-through December 20. They had no tenants forrental price. come.the rest of December, so the Donovans used the
Your property is rental property, but your ex- property for the rest of the year. Lines 4a ±4e. The Donovans enter $380penses this year will be limited to the amount of They had the following costs associated with (($400 repairs + $120 insurance) ×  .73) on linesyour rental income for this property. You will the vacation property for the 7 months they 4a and 4d. They enter -0- on line 4e (the smallerreport your income on Schedule E (Form 1040). owned it. of $0 and $380).
You will allocate your expenses based on the Mortgage interest ....... . $7,714 They do not make an entry on Schedule E for
number of personal days as compared to the Real estate taxes ....... . 300 the direct expenses entered on line 4a becauseRepairs ............. . 400number of rental days. all of their rental income has been offset by theFire insurance ......... . 120The personal portion of expenses, including expenses listed on lines 2a ±2d. But see LinesAdvertising ........... . 150qualified mortgage interest, property taxes, and 7a±7b below.qualified casualty loss (if any), will be reported The property was ready and available for Line 5.  They enter -0- on line 5.as normally allowed on Schedule A (Form rental use on July 1, so it was considered placed1040). in service at that time. They figured $1,200 de- Lines 6a ±6e.  The Donovans enter $876The rental portion of the expenses will be preciation for the 6 months it was available for (($1,200 depreciation from 7/1 through 12/31) ×reported on Schedule E (Form 1040) in the fol- rent. .73) on lines 6b and 6d. Their entry on line 6e islowing order. -0-, the smaller of $0 and $876.
Completing Worksheet 5-1 They do not make an entry on Schedule E for1. Advertising and other fees directly related
the depreciation listed on line 6b, again becauseto obtaining tenants for this rental property.
The Donovans answer ªYesº to each of the all of their rental income has been offset. See2. The rental portion of qualified home mort- questions at the top of Worksheet 5-1 and con- Lines 7a±7b below.gage interest, property taxes, and qualified tinue to Part I.
casualty loss (if any).
Part III. Carryover of Unallowed3. Rental operating expenses for this prop-
Part I. Rental Use Percentageerty up to the amount of the rental income Expenses to Next Year
for this property (minus 1 and 2). Line A. The property was available for rent Lines 7a ±7b. The Donovans enter $3804. Depreciation for this property up to the beginning July 1, so they enter the total number ($380 − $0) on line 7a. On line 7b, they enteramount of the rental income for this prop- of days (184) from July 1 through December 31. $876 ($876 − $0). This means that they haveerty (minus 1, 2, and 3). operating expenses of $380 and depreciation ofLine B. They had no tenants during the
See Worksheet 5-1, later. month of July or from December 21 ±31. They $876 to carry over to next year.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 23

Page 24 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The Donovans do not have any other rentalSchedule E (Form 1040) Line 18. No entry is made because no de- or royalty property, so they enter zero on line 26.preciation deduction is allowed this year. They also enter zero on line 17 of Form 1040.The Donovans have entered the rental portion of
Line 20. This is the total of lines 5 throughtheir deductible expenses from Worksheet 5-1
19.on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form
1040), as follows. Line 21. The Donovans have net income of
zero from this rental property.Line 5 .............. . $  150
Line 12 ............. . 5,631
Line 16 ............. . 219
Page 24 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 25 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as
a HomeÐIllustrated Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A. 184
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B. 42
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C. 142
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D. 52
E. Total use of the property. Add lines C and D ............................... . E. 194
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F. .73
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1. 6,000
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a. 5,631
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b. 219
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d. 150
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e. 6,000
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3. 0
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a. 380
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2010 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d. 380
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e. 0
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5. 0
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ....................... . b. 876
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2010 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d. 876
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e. 0
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a. 380
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b. 876
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 25

Page 26 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE E  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Supplemental Income and Loss  
(From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, 
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/uni25B6 Attach to Form 1040, 1040NR, or Form 1041.  /uni25B6 See separate instructions. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2011
Attachment   
Sequence No. 13
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
A Did you make any payments in 2011 that would require you to /f_ile Form(s) 1099? (see instructions) Yes No
B If “Yes,” did you or will you /f_ile all required Forms 1099? Yes No
Part I Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties  Note.  If you are in the business of renting personal property, use  
Schedule C or C-EZ (see instructions). If you are an individual, report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 40. 
Caution. For each rental property listed on line 1, check the box in the last column only if you owned that property as a member of a 
quali/f_ied joint venture (QJV) reporting income not subject to self-employment tax.
1 Physical address of each property–street, city, state, zip Type–from list 
below
A
B
C
2 For each rental real 
estate property listed, 
report the number of 
days rented at fair rental 
value and days with 
personal use. See 
instructions. 
Fair Rental 
Days
Personal 
Use Days QJV
A
B
C
Type of Property:
1  Single Family Residence
2  Multi-Family Residence
3  Vacation/Short-Term Rental
4  Commercial
5  Land
6  Royalties
7  Self-Rental
8  Other (describe)
Income: Properties 
        A B C 
3a Merchant card and third party payments. For 2011, enter -0- 3a
b Payments not reported to you on line 3a . . . . . 3b
4 Total not including amounts on line 3a that are not 
income (see instructions) . . . . . . . . . . 4
Expenses:                 
5 Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
6 Auto and travel (see instructions) . . . . . . . 6 
7 Cleaning and maintenance . . . . . . . . . 7 
8 Commissions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 
9 Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 
10 Legal and other professional fees . . . . . . . 10 
11 Management fees . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
12 Mortgage interest paid to banks,  etc. (see instructions) 12 
13 Other interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
14 Repairs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 
15 Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
16 Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 
17 Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 
18 Depreciation expense or depletion . . . . . . . 18
19 Other (list)  /uni25B6 19
20 Total expenses. Add lines 5 through 19 . . . . . 20
21 Subtract line 20 from line 4. If result is a  (loss), see 
instructions to /f_ind out if  you must /f_ile Form 6198 .  21
22 Deductible rental real estate loss after limitation, if any, 
on Form 8582 (see instructions) . . . . . . .
22 ( ) ( ) ( )
23a Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all rental properties . . . .  23a
b Total of all amounts reported on line 3a for all royalty properties . . . . 23b
c Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all rental properties . . . . 23c
d Total of all amounts reported on line 4 for all royalty properties . . . . 23d
e Total of all amounts reported on line 12 for all properties . . . . . . 23e
f Total of all amounts reported on line 18 for all properties . . . . . . 23f
g Total of all amounts reported on line 20 for all properties . . . . . . 23g
24 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 21. Do not include any losses . . . . . . . 24
25 Losses.  Add royalty losses from line 21 and rental real estate losses from line 22. Enter total losses here 25 ( )
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here. 
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 40 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 
17, or Form 1040NR, line 18. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 41 on page 2 . . . . 26 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2011 
Tim and Emily Donavan 666-00-7777
/H12011
/H12011
333 Oak Ave, Somewhere, GA 66666 142 52
6,000
5,631
0
150
5,631
0
6,000
219
6,000
6,000
6,000
Page 26 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 27 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as
a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A.
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B.
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C.
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D.
E. Total use of the property. Add lines C and D ............................... . E.
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F. .
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1.
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a.
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b.
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d.
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e.
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3.
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a.
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2010 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e.
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5.
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ....................... . b.
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2010 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e.
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a.
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home) Page 27

Page 28 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a ±2c, 4a±4b, and 6a±6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (as if you were itemizing your
deductions) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college
tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A, if you
had not rented the unit. See the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 38)
without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct the part of the qualified mortgage
insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount from
Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If
any of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster, see the Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 19, enter 10% of
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of
the result from Form 4684, line 21, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion
on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used
for rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage
insurance premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit 
(as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ............................... .
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...................................... .
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ........................... .
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet .... .
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish among
the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
Page 28 Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Page 29 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Figure your withholding allowances using Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure IRS representatives givethe withholding calculator online at www.
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,irs.gov/individuals.
6. we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by of our telephone services. One method is for a
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) second IRS representative to listen in on or
Assistant available online at www.irs.gov/ record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
individuals.How To Get Tax some callers to complete a short survey at the
end of the call.• Sign up to receive local and national tax
news by email.Help Walk-in. Many products and services
are available on a walk-in basis.• Get information on starting and operating
a small business.
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
• Products. You can walk in to many postorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
Phone. Many services are available by offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uptions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
phone. certain forms, instructions, and publica-eral ways. By selecting the method that is best
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
for you, you will have quick and easy access to
stores, copy centers, city and county gov-tax help. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- ernment offices, credit unions, and officetions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM supply stores have a collection of products(1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearFree help with your return. Free help in pre- available to print from a CD or photocopyforms, instructions, and publications, andparing your return is available nationwide from from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
prior-year forms and instructions. YouIRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-
should receive your order within 10 days.Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
help low-moderate income taxpayers and the Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withTax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is able for research purposes.your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.designed to assist taxpayers age 60 and older • Services. You can walk in to your local• Solving problems. You can getwith their tax returns. Most VITA and TCE sites Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-face-to-face help solving tax problemsoffer free electronic filing and all volunteers will ness day for personal, face-to-face taxevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-let you know about credits and deductions you help. An employee can explain IRS letters,sistance Centers. An employee can ex-may be entitled to claim. To find the nearest request adjustments to your tax account,plain IRS letters, request adjustments toVITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call or help you set up a payment plan. If youyour account, or help you set up a pay-1-800-906-9887 or 1-800-829-1040. need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the tions about how the tax law applies to yourtance Center for an appointment. To findTax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- individual tax return, or you are more com-
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or fortable talking with someone in person,
tacts or look in the phone book undervisit AARP's website at visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
United States Government, Internal Reve- Center where you can spread out yourwww.aarp.org/money/taxaide.
nue Service. records and talk with an IRS representa-For more information on these programs, go
tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, youupper right-hand corner. to TTY/TDD equipment, call can call your local Center and leave a1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toInternet. You can access the IRS web- message requesting an appointment to re-order forms and publications.site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days solve a tax account issue. A representa-
a week to:
 tive will call you back within 2 business• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
days to schedule an in-person appoint-ten to pre-recorded messages covering• Check the status of your 2011 refund. Go
ment at your convenience. If you have anvarious tax topics.to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re-
ongoing, complex tax account problem orfund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS • Refund information. You can check the a special need, such as a disability, anacknowledges receipt of your e-filed re- status of your refund on the new IRS appointment can be requested. All otherturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper phone app . Download the free IRS2Go issues will be handled without an appoint-return. If you filed Form 8379 with your app by visiting the iTunes app store or the ment. To find the number of your localreturn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you Android Marketplace. IRS2Go is a new office, go to filed electronically). Have your 2011 tax way to provide you with information and www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in thereturn available so you can provide your tools. To check the status of your refund phone book under United States Govern-social security number, your filing status, by phone, call 1-800-829-4477 (automated ment, Internal Revenue Service.and the exact whole dollar amount of your refund information 24 hours a day, 7 daysrefund. a week). Wait at least 72 hours after the Mail. You can send your order for
• E-file your return. Find out about commer- IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed forms, instructions, and publications to
cial tax preparation and e-file services return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a the address below. You should receive
available free to eligible taxpayers. a response within 10 days after your request ispaper return. If you filed Form 8379 with
received.your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if• Download forms, including talking tax
you filed electronically). Have your 2011forms, instructions, and publications. Internal Revenue Servicetax return available so you can provide
• Order IRS products online. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayyour social security number, your filing
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613status, and the exact whole dollar amount• Research your tax questions online.
of your refund. If you check the status of• Search publications online by topic or Taxpayer Advocate Service. The Taxpayeryour refund and are not given the date itkeyword. Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the IRS.will be issued, please wait until the next Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, week before checking back. treated fairly, and that you know and understandregulations, or other official guidance. • Other refund information. To check the your rights. We offer free help to guide you
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) status of a prior-year refund or amended through the often-confusing process of resolving
published in the last few years. return refund, call 1-800-829-1040. tax problems that you haven't been able to solve
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help Page 29

Page 30 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).on your own. Remember, the worst thing you DVD for tax products. You can order
can do is nothing at all. Publication 1796, IRS Tax ProductsLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde-
TAS can help if you can't resolve your prob- DVD, and obtain:pendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi-
lem with the IRS and: viduals whose income is below a certain level • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-
and who need to resolve a tax problem. These• Your problem is causing financial difficul- lications.
clinics provide professional representationties for you, your family, or your business. • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-before the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax• You face (or your business is facing) an tions.collection disputes, and other issues for free orimmediate threat of adverse action. • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andfor a small fee. Some clinics can provide infor-
• You have tried repeatedly to contact the finding aid.mation about taxpayer rights and responsibili-
IRS but no one has responded, or the IRS ties in many different languages for individuals • Tax law frequently asked questions.has not responded to you by the date who speak English as a second language. Forpromised. • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-more information and to find a clinic near you, sponse system.see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advocate orIf you qualify for our help, we'll do everything
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of theIRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayerwe can to get your problem resolved. You will be
U.S. Code.Clinic List. This publication is also available byassigned to one advocate who will be with you at
calling 1-800-829-3676 or at your local IRS of-every turn. We have offices in every state, the • Links to other Internet based Tax Re-
District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Although fice. search materials.
TAS is independent within the IRS, our advo-
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxcates know how to work with the IRS to get your Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS forms.problems resolved. And our services are always Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRSfree. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.services and resources. Learn about free taxAs a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS
information from the IRS, including publications, • Toll-free and email technical support.must abide by in its dealings with you. Our tax
services, and education and assistance pro-toolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov can • Two releases during the year.grams. The publication also has an index of overhelp you understand these rights. ± The first release will ship the beginningIf you think TAS might be able to help you, 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) of January 2012.call your local advocate, whose number is in you can listen to on the telephone. The majority ± The final release will ship the beginningyour phone book and on our website at www.irs. of the information and services listed in this of March 2012.gov/advocate. You can also call our toll-free publication are available to you free of charge. Ifnumber at 1-877-777-4778. there is a fee associated with a resource or Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalTAS also handles large-scale or systemic service, it is listed in the publication. Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/problems that affect many taxpayers. If you cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or callAccessible versions of IRS published prod-know of one of these broad issues, please report
1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30ucts are available on request in a variety ofit to us through our Systemic Advocacy Manage-
(plus a $6 handling fee).alternative formats for people with disabilities.ment System at www.irs.gov/advocate.
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help

Page 31 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Cost basis ................. . 7 Change of accounting Form 8582:A
method ................. . 12 Passive activity losses .... . 13,Decreases to ............... . 8Accelerated Cost Recovery
14Change of property to rentalDeductions:System (ACRS)  (See also
use ..................... . 16 Free tax services ........... . 29Capitalization of costsModified Accelerated Cost
Claiming correct amountvs. .................... . 8Recovery System
of ...................... . 11(MACRS)) ................. . 8 Not greater than basis .... . 7 GDeclining balance method .. . 7Effective date .............. . 7 Fair market value .......... . 16 Gains and losses:Disaster assistance ......... . 2Accounting methods: Increases to ................ . 8 At-risk rules ............... . 13Duration of property expected toAccrual method ............ . 3 MACRS depreciable Casualty and theftlast more than one year .. . 6Cash method .............. . 3 basis .................... . 7 losses .................. . 14Eligible property ............ . 6Change of method ......... . 12 Property changed to rental Limits on rental losses ..... . 12First-year expensing ........ . 6Constructive receipt of use ..................... . 16 Passive activity losses ..... . 13GO Zone .................. . 2income .................. . 3 Rental real estateMACRS (See ModifiedAccrual method taxpayers .. . 3 activities ................ . 13Accelerated Cost RecoveryCACRS (Accelerated Cost Sale of rental property ... . 2, 14System (MACRS))Capital expenditures:Recovery System): General depreciation systemMethods ................ . 7, 10Deductions vs. effect onEffective date .............. . 7 (GDS)  (See ModifiedOwnership of property ...... . 6basis .................... . 8Active participation ........ . 13 Accelerated Cost RecoveryRental expense ............ . 4Improvements .............. . 5Activities not for profit ..... . 17 System (MACRS))Rented property ............ . 6Local benefit taxes ......... . 4Additions to property  (See also Section 179 deduction ...... . 6Mortgages, payments toImprovements) ............ . 10 HSpecial depreciationobtain ................... . 4Basis ...................... . 8 Help  (See Tax help)allowances ......... . 1, 2, 8Cars:MACRS recovery period ... . 10 Home:Straight line method ........ . 7MACRS recovery periods ... . 9Adjusted basis: Main home ................ . 21Useful life .................. . 6Cash method taxpayers ..... . 3MACRS depreciation ....... . 8 Use as rental property (See UseVacant rental property ...... . 4Casualty losses ............ . 14Adjusted gross income (AGI): of home)Discount, bonds and notesModified (See Modified adjusted Change of accounting issued at  (See Original issuegross income (MAGI)) method .................. . 12 discount (OID)) IAdvance rent ................ . 3 Charitable contributions: Dividing of expenses  (See Improvements  (See alsoSecurity deposits ........... . 3 Use of property ............ . 21 Allocation of expenses) Repairs) ................... . 5Advertising .................. . 4 Cleaning and Dwelling units: Assessments for localAllocation of expenses: maintenance .............. . 4 Definition ................. . 21 improvements ............ . 8Change of property to rental Closing costs ............... . 7 Fair rental price ........... . 21 Basis ...................... . 8use ..................... . 16 Comments on publication ... . 2 Personal use of ........... . 21 Depreciation of rentedHow to divide expenses .... . 22 Commissions ............... . 4 property ................. . 6Part of property rented ..... . 17 Computers: MACRS recovery period ... . 10Personal use of rental MACRS recovery periods ... . 9 E Indian reservationproperty .............. . 3, 21 Condominiums ......... . 16, 21 Easements .................. . 8 property ................... . 9Alternative Depreciation System Constructive receipt of Equipment rental expense ... . 4 Insurance ................... . 4(ADS): income .................... . 3 Casualty or theft lossElection of ................. . 9
Cooperative housing .... . 6, 16, payments ................ . 8MACRS ................ . 8, 11 F21 Change of property to rentalAlternative minimum tax (AMT): Fair market value (FMV) .... . 16 use ..................... . 16Cost basis ................... . 7Accelerated depreciation Fair rental price ........ . 21, 22 Fire insurance premiums, costCredit reports ............... . 7methods ................. . 6 basis .................... . 7Fees:Credits:Amended returns ........... . 12 Part of property rented ..... . 17Loan origination fees ..... . 4, 7Residential energy credit beforeApartments: Premiums paid inPoints (See Points)1986 .................... . 8Basement apartments ..... . 22 advance ................. . 4Settlement fees and otherDwelling units ............. . 21 Title insurance, cost basis .. . 7costs .................... . 7Appraisal fees ............... . 7 Interest payments  (See alsoTax return preparationDAssessments for Mortgages) ................ . 4fees ..................... . 4Days of personal use ....... . 21maintenance .............. . 8 Loan origination fees ....... . 4First-year expensing ........ . 6Days used for repairs andAssessments, local  (See Local Rental expenses ........... . 4Form 1040:maintenance ............. . 21assessments) Not rented for profitDeductions:Assistance  (See Tax help) income ................. . 17Capitalizing costs vs. effect on LAssumption of mortgage .... . 7 Part of property rented ..... . 17basis .................... . 8 Land:Attorneys' fees ............ . 7, 8 Rental income andDepreciation (See Depreciation) Cost basis ................. . 7Automobiles: expenses ............... . 12Limitations on ......... . 12, 22 Depreciation ............... . 6MACRS recovery periods ... . 9 Schedule E ............... . 12Passive activity losses (See Leases:
Form 1098:Passive activity) Cancellation payments ..... . 3
Mortgage interest .......... . 4B Equipment leasing .......... . 4Depreciation ............. . 6-12
Form 4684:Alternative Depreciation SystemBasis: Limits:
Casualties and thefts ...... . 14(ADS) (See ModifiedAdjusted basis ............. . 8 Passive activity losses and
Accelerated Cost Recovery Form 4797:Assessments for local credits .................. . 13
System (MACRS)) Sales of businessimprovements ............ . 8 Rental expense
property ................ . 14Basis (See Basis)Basis other than cost ....... . 8 deductions .............. . 22
Publication 527 (2011) Page 31

Page 32 of 32 of Publication 527 13:59 - 30-DEC-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limits: (Cont.) Tax return preparation MACRS optional tables (TablesP
Rental losses ............. . 13 fees ..................... . 4 2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c) .... . 10Part interest:
Taxes ..................... . 4 MACRS recovery periods forLoans: Expenses .................. . 3
Tenant, paid by ............ . 3 property used in rentalAssumption fees ........... . 7 Income .................... . 3
Travel expenses ........... . 4 activities (Table 2-1) ...... . 9Charges connected with getting Passive activity:
Utilities .................... . 4or refinancing, cost Tax credits:Maximum special
Vacant rental property ...... . 4basis .................... . 7 Residential energy creditallowance ............... . 14
Low or no interest .......... . 7 Rental income: allowed before 1986, effectPersonal property:
Origination fees ............ . 4 Advance rent ............... . 3 on basis ................. . 8Rental income from ......... . 3
Cancellation of leaseLocal assessments .......... . 8 Tax help .................... . 29Personal use of rental property payments ................ . 3Losses  (See Gains and losses) Tax return preparation(See also Property changed to Dwelling unit used as fees ....................... . 4rental use) ............ . 16, 21 home ................... . 21 Taxes:Placed-in-service date ....... . 6M Lease with option to buy .... . 3 Deduction of ............... . 4Points ..................... . 4, 7Minimal rental use Minimal rental use Local benefit taxes ......... . 4Pre-rental expenses ......... . 4exception ................ . 22 exception ............... . 22 Real estate taxes ........... . 7Principal residence  (See Home)Missing children, photographs Not rented for profit ........ . 17 Transfer taxes ............. . 7of ......................... . 2 Profit, property not rented Part interest ................ . 3 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 29for ....................... . 17Modified Accelerated Cost Property received from Theft losses ................ . 14Recovery System tenant ................... . 3Property changed to rental Title insurance .............. . 7(MACRS) ............... . 8-11 Reporting ............... . 3, 12use ....................... . 16
Transfer taxes ............... . 7Additions or improvements to Security deposit ............ . 3Basis ..................... . 16
Travel and transportationproperty ................ . 10 Services received fromPublications  (See Tax help)
expenses:Adjusted basis ............. . 8 tenant ................... . 3
Local transportationAlternative Depreciation System Uncollected rent ............ . 4R expenses ................ . 4(ADS) ................ . 8, 11 Used as home ............. . 3Real estate Recordkeeping ............. . 4Basis other than cost ....... . 8 Rental losses  (See also Gainsprofessionals ............ . 13 Rental expenses ........... . 4Conventions .............. . 10 and losses; PassiveReal estate taxes ............ . 7 Standard mileage rate ...... . 4Cost basis ................. . 7 activity) ................... . 13
Real property trades or TTY/TDD information ....... . 29Depreciable basis .......... . 7 Repairs  (See alsobusinesses ............... . 13Effective date .............. . 7 Improvements) ........... . 4, 5
Excluded property .......... . 9 Recordkeeping requirements: Assessments for UGeneral Depreciation System Travel and transportation maintenance ............. . 8 Uncollected rent:(GDS) ............. . 8, 9, 10 expenses ................ . 4 Personal use of rental property Income .................... . 4Nonresidential rental Recovery periods ........... . 9 exception for days used for Use of home:property ................. . 9 Rent ......................... . 7 repairs and Before or after renting ..... . 22Property used in rental activities Advance rent ............... . 3 maintenance ............ . 21 Change to rental use ...... . 16(Table 2-1) ............... . 9 Fair price ................. . 21 Days of personal use ...... . 21Recovery periods ........ . 9, 10 Rental expenses ............ . 3 Fair rental price ........... . 21SResidential rental Advertising ................. . 4 Minimal rental useSale of property:property .............. . 9, 10 Allocation between rental and exception ............... . 22Expenses .................. . 4Special depreciation personal uses ........... . 22 Passive activity rulesGain or loss ............. . 2, 14allowances .............. . 8 Change of property to rental exception ............... . 13Main home ................. . 2Modified adjusted gross income use ..................... . 16 Personal use as dwellingSection 179 deductions ..... . 6(MAGI) ................... . 14 Cleaning and unit ..................... . 21Security deposits ........... . 3More information  (See Tax help) maintenance ............. . 4 Utilities .................... . 4, 8Settlement fees ............. . 7Mortgages ................... . 4 Commissions .............. . 4
Shared equity financingAssumption of, cost basis ... . 7 Depreciation ............... . 4
Vagreements .............. . 21Change of property to rental Dwelling unit used as
Vacant rental property ....... . 4use ..................... . 16 Special depreciationhome ................... . 21
End of, OID ................ . 5 allowances ................ . 8Equipment rental ........... . 4 Vacation homes:
Interest ............. . 4, 16, 17 Home, property also used Dividing of expenses ...... . 22Spouse:
Mortgage insurance as ....................... . 3 Dwelling unit .............. . 21Material participation ...... . 13
premiums ................ . 7 Improvements .............. . 5 Fair rental price ........... . 21Standard mileage rates ...... . 4
Part of property rented ..... . 17 Insurance .................. . 4 Minimal rental useSuggestions for
Interest payments .......... . 4 exception ............... . 22publication ................ . 2
Local transportation Personal use of ........... . 21Surveys ..................... . 7N expenses ................ . 4 Valuation:Nonresidential real Part of property rented ..... . 17 Fair market value .......... . 16property ................... . 9 TPoints ..................... . 4Not-for-profit activities ..... . 17 ■Tables and figures:Pre-rental expenses ........ . 4
Improvements, examples ofRental payments ........... . 4
(Table 1-1) ............... . 5Repairs .................. . 4, 5O
MACRS optional tables (TableSale of property ............ . 4Original issue discount
2-2d) ................... . 11(OID) .................... . 4-5
Page 32 Publication 527 (2011)