Userid: YBLAWR00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...cfiles\Pub 535\P535 02-20-2009 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09, 10,11.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z Contents
Introduction .................... . 1Department
of the What's New for 2008 .............. . 2Treasury Business
What's New for 2009 .............. . 2Internal
Revenue Reminders ..................... . 2ExpensesService
1. Deducting Business
Expenses .................. . 2
2. Employees' Pay .............. . 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................ . 8
2008 Returns 4. Interest .................... . 10
5. Taxes ..................... . 15
6. Insurance .................. . 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize .................. . 20
8. Amortization ................ . 25
9. Depletion ................... . 32
10. Business Bad Debts ........... . 37
11. Other Expenses .............. . 40
12. How To Get Tax Help .......... . 46
Index ......................... . 48
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.Get forms and other information
Ordering forms and publications. Visitfaster and easier by: www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Internet www.irs.gov address below and receive a response within 10
days after your request is received.
Apr 03, 2009

Page 2 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items
Internal Revenue Service You may want to see:Reminders
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 Publication
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing) ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small BusinessTax questions. If you have a tax question,
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carcheck the information available on www.irs.gov
Expensesor call 1-800-829-4933. We cannot answer tax
questions sent to either of the above addresses. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
You can file your tax returns electronically using ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsan IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-file
include faster refunds, increased accuracy, and ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
acknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return. Individuals, Estates, and TrustsWhat's New for 2008
You can use one of the following IRS e-file ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsoptions.The following items highlight some changes in
❏ 542 Corporationsthe tax law for 2008. • Use an authorized IRS e-file provider.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and TheftsStandard mileage rate. For 2008, the stan- • Use a personal computer.
dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home• Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistancecar, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of (Including Use by Daycare(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderlybusiness use is: Providers)(TCE) site.
• 50.5 cents per mile for the period January ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk RulesFor details on these fast filing methods, see your1 through June 30, 2008, and income tax package. ❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest
• 58.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 Deduction
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-through December 31, 2008. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertynal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-Environmental cleanup costs. The election Form (and Instructions)dren. Photographs of missing children selectedto deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs by the Center may appear in this publication onhas been extended to cover costs paid or in- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionspages that would otherwise be blank. You cancurred in 2008 and 2009. See chapter 7. help bring these children home by looking at the ❏ 5213 Election To Postpone
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST Determination as To Whether theQualified disaster expenses. You can elect
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Presumption Applies That anto deduct rather than capitalize any qualified
Activity Is Engaged in for Profitdisaster expenses you paid or incurred after
2007. See chapter 7.
See chapter 12 for information about getting
publications and forms.Election to amortize business start-up and
organizational costs. You are no longer re-
quired to attach a statement to your tax return to
1.elect to amortize start-up or organizational costs
paid or incurred after September 8, 2008. See What Can I Deduct?
chapter 8.
To be deductible, a business expense must beDeductingMarginal production of oil and gas. The both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-temporary suspension of the taxable income pense is one that is common and accepted in
limit on percentage depletion from the marginal Business your industry. A necessary expense is one that
production of oil and natural gas is not available is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-
for tax years beginning in 2008. See chapter 9. ness. An expense does not have to be indispen-Expenses sable to be considered necessary.Meal expenses when subject to ªhours of It is important to distinguish business ex-serviceº limits. For 2008, you can deduct penses from:80% of the reimbursed meals your employees Introductionconsume while away from their tax home on • The expenses used to figure cost of goods
business during, or incident to, any period sub- This chapter covers the general rules for deduct- sold,
ject to the Department of Transportation's ing business expenses. Business expenses are • Capital expenses, andthe costs of carrying on a trade or business, andªhours of serviceº limits. See chapter 11.
they are usually deductible if the business is • Personal expenses.
operated to make a profit.
Cost of Goods SoldTopics
What's New for 2009 The This chapter discusses: If your business manufactures products orfollowing items highlight some changes in the purchases them for resale, you generally must• What you can deducttax law for 2009. value inventory at the beginning and end of each
• How much you can deduct tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
Some of your business expenses may be in-age rate for the cost of operating your car, van, • When you can deduct cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost ofpickup, or panel truck in 2009 is 55 cents a mile
• Not-for-profit activities goods sold is deducted from your gross receiptsfor all business miles.
to figure your gross profit for the year. If you
include an expense in the cost of goods sold,Marginal production of oil and gas.  The
you cannot deduct it again as a business ex-temporary suspension of the taxable income
pense.limit on percentage depletion from the marginal
production of oil and natural gas is available for The following are types of expenses that go
tax years beginning in 2009. See chapter 9. into figuring cost of goods sold.
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cost of products or raw materials, in- Usually you recover costs for a particular Capital versus Deductible
cluding freight. asset through depreciation. Generally, you can- Expensesnot recover other costs until you sell the busi-• Storage. ness or otherwise go out of business. However, To help you distinguish between capital and• Direct labor (including contributions to you can choose to amortize certain costs for deductible expenses, different examples arepension or annuity plans) for workers who setting up your business. See Starting a Busi- given below.produce the products. ness in chapter 8 for more information on busi-
ness start-up costs. Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize the• Factory overhead. cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.
If you do not go into business. If you are an You can recover its cost through annual deduc-Under the uniform capitalization rules, you individual and your attempt to go into business is tions for depreciation.must capitalize the direct costs and part of the not successful, the expenses you had in trying to There are dollar limits on the depreciationindirect costs for certain production or resale establish yourself in business fall into two cate- you can claim each year on passenger automo-activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, gories. biles used in your business. See Publicationtaxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack- 463.aging, handling, and administrative costs. 1. The costs you had before making a deci- Generally, repairs you make to your busi-This rule does not apply to personal property sion to acquire or begin a specific busi- ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,you acquire for resale if your average annual ness. These costs are personal and amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul agross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for nondeductible. They include any costs in- business vehicle are capital expenses and arethe preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10 curred during a general search for, or pre- recovered through depreciation.million. liminary investigation of, a business or
Roads and driveways.  The cost of building ainvestment possibility.For more information, see the following
private road on your business property and thesources. 2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-quire or begin a specific business. These• Cost of goods soldÐchapter 6 of Publica- crete one are capital expenses you may be ablecosts are capital expenses and you cantion 334. to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privatededuct them as a capital loss. road on your business property is a deductible• InventoriesÐPublication 538.
If you are a corporation and your attempt to expense.• Uniform capitalization rulesÐPublication go into a new trade or business is not success-538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev- Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulesful, you may be able to deduct all investigatoryenue Code and the related regulations. apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourcosts as a loss.
business are deductible expenses if the toolsThe costs of any assets acquired during your have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theirunsuccessful attempt to go into business are aCapital Expenses cost is minor.part of your basis in the assets. You cannot take
You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some a deduction for these costs. You will recover the Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-
costs. These costs are a part of your investment costs of these assets when you dispose of them. zation rules apply, the cost of replacing
in your business and are called ªcapital ex- short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in good
penses.º Capital expenses are considered as- working condition, but not add to its life, is a
sets in your business. There are, in general, Business Assets deductible expense.
three types of costs you capitalize.
There are many different kinds of business as- Heating equipment. The cost of changing• Business start-up costs (See Tip below). sets; for example, land, buildings, machinery, from one heating system to another is a capital
furniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights. expense.• Business assets.
You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-• Improvements. sets, including freight and installation charges. Personal versus Business
Certain property you produce for use in your ExpensesYou can elect to deduct or amortize trade or business must be capitalized under the
certain business start-up costs. See uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, or
chapters 7 and 8. section 1.263A-2 for information on these rules.
TIP family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
pense for something that is used partly for busi-
ness and partly for personal purposes, divideCost recovery. Although you generally can- Improvements the total cost between the business and per-not take a current deduction for a capital ex-
sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.pense, you may be able to recover the amount The costs of making improvements to a busi- For example, if you borrow money and useyou spend through depreciation, amortization, ness asset are capital expenses if the improve- 70% of it for business and the other 30% for aor depletion. These recovery methods allow you ments add to the value of the asset, appreciably family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%to deduct part of your cost each year. In this lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to a of the interest as a business expense. The re-way, you are able to recover your capital ex- different use. Improvements are generally major maining 30% is personal interest and generallypense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- expenditures. Some examples are: new electric is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationtion (chapter 9) in this publication. You may also wiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing, on deducting interest and the allocation rules.be allowed a section 179 deduction. For infor- bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andmation on the section 179 deduction and depre- lighting improvements. Business use of your home. If you use partciation, see Publication 946. of your home for business, you may be able toHowever, you can currently deduct repairs
deduct expenses for the business use of yourthat keep your property in a normal efficient
home. These expenses may include mortgageoperating condition as a business expense.Going Into Business interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-Treat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of
ciation.The costs of getting started in business, before a machine that only keep it in a normal operating
To qualify to claim expenses for the businessyou actually begin business operations, are cap- condition.
use of your home, you must meet both of theital expenses. These costs may include ex-
following tests.penses for advertising, travel, or wages for Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re-
training employees. conditioning, improving, or altering your prop- 1. The business part of your home must beerty as part of a general restoration plan to make used exclusively and regularly for yourIf you go into business. When you go into it suitable for your business. This applies even if trade or business.business, treat all costs you had to get your some of the work would by itself be classified as
business started as capital expenses. repairs. 2. The business part of your home must be:
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Your principal place of business, or same tax year in which you would have claimed
a deduction, reduce your current year expense When Can Ib. A place where you meet or deal with by the amount of the recovery. If you have apatients, clients, or customers in the Deduct an Expense?recovery in a later year, include the recoverednormal course of your trade or busi-
amount in income in that year. However, if partness, or When you can deduct an expense depends onof the deduction for the expense did not reduce
c. A separate structure (not attached to your accounting method. An accounting methodyour tax, you do not have to include that part ofyour home) used in connection with is a set of rules used to determine when and howthe recovered amount in income.your trade or business. income and expenses are reported. The twoFor more information on recoveries and the basic methods are the cash method and thetax benefit rule, see Publication 525.You generally do not have to meet the exclu- accrual method. Whichever method you choose
sive use test for the part of your home that you must clearly reflect income.
regularly use either for the storage of inventory For more information on accounting meth-Payments in kind. If you provide services toor product samples, or as a daycare facility. ods, see Publication 538.pay a business expense, the amount you canYour home office qualifies as your principal deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-place of business if you meet the following re- You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor. counting, you generally deduct business ex-quirements. penses in the tax year you pay them.Similarly, if you pay a business expense in• You use the office exclusively and regu- goods or other property, you can deduct only Accrual method. Under an accrual method oflarly for administrative or management ac- what the property costs you. If these costs are accounting, you generally deduct business ex-tivities of your trade or business. included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct penses when both of the following apply.
• You have no other fixed location where them as a business expense.
1. The all-events test has been met. The testyou conduct substantial administrative or
is met when:management activities of your trade or Limits on losses. If your deductions for anbusiness. investment or business activity are more than a. All events have occurred that fix the fact
the income it brings in, you have a loss. There of liability, andIf you have more than one business location,
may be limits on how much of the loss you candetermine your principal place of business b. The liability can be determined with rea-deduct.based on the following factors. sonable accuracy.
Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on your• The relative importance of the activities
2. Economic performance has occurred.business activity without the intention of makingperformed at each location.
a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset• If the relative importance factor does not Economic performance. You generallyother income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.determine your principal place of busi- cannot deduct or capitalize a business expense
At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible lossness, consider the time spent at each lo- until economic performance occurs. If your ex-
cation. from a trade or business or other in- pense is for property or services provided to you,
come-producing activity is limited to the invest- or for your use of property, economic perform-
For more information, see Publication 587. ment you have ªat riskº in the activity. You are at ance occurs as the property or services are
risk in any activity for the following. provided, or the property is used. If your ex-Business use of your car. If you use your car pense is for property or services you provide toexclusively in your business, you can deduct car 1. The money and adjusted basis of property others, economic performance occurs as youexpenses. If you use your car for both business you contribute to the activity. provide the property or services.and personal purposes, you must divide your
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activityexpenses based on actual mileage. Example. Your tax year is the calendarif:You can deduct actual car expenses, which year. In December 2008, the Field Plumbinginclude depreciation (or lease payments), gas Company did some repair work at your place ofa. You are personally liable for repayment,and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid itorregistration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- by check in January 2009. If you use the accrualness part of these actual expenses, you may be b. You pledge property (other than prop- method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourable to use the standard mileage rate to figure erty used in the activity) as security for tax return for 2008 because all events haveyour deduction. For 2008, the standard mileage the loan. occurred to ªfixº the fact of liability (in this caserate is 50.5 cents a mile for all business miles the work was completed), the liability can bedriven before July 1, 2008. The rate is 58.5 cents For more information, see Publication 925. determined, and economic performance oc-a mile for business miles driven after June 30, curred in that year.Passive activities. Generally, you are in a2008, and before January 1, 2009. If you use the cash method of accounting,passive activity if you have a trade or businessIf you are self-employed, you can also de- deduct the expense on your 2009 return.activity in which you do not materially partici-duct the business part of interest on your car
pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsloan, state and local personal property tax on the Prepayment. You generally cannot deduct
car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you for losses from passive activities only offset in- expenses in advance, even if you pay them in
claim the standard mileage rate. come from passive activities. You cannot use advance. This rule applies to both the cash and
For more information on car expenses and accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,any excess deductions to offset other income. In
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-addition, passive activity credits can only offset
see Publication 463. pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,the tax on net passive income. Any excess loss
create an asset with a useful life extending sub-or credits are carried over to later years. Sus-
stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.pended passive losses are fully deductible in the
year you completely dispose of the activity. For Example. In 2008, you sign a 10-year leaseHow Much Can I more information, see Publication 925. and immediately pay your rent for the first 3
Net operating loss. If your deductions are years. Even though you paid the rent for 2008,Deduct?
more than your income for the year, you may 2009, and 2010, you can only deduct the rent for
You can deduct the cost of a business expense 2008 on your 2008 tax return. You can deducthave a ªnet operating loss.º You can use a net
if it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary the rent for 2009 and 2010 on your tax returnsoperating loss to lower your taxes in other years.
and it is not a capital expense. for those years.See Publication 536 for more information.
See Publication 542 for information aboutRecovery of amount deducted (tax benefit Contested liability. Under the cash method,
net operating losses of corporations.rule). If you recover part of an expense in the you can deduct a contested liability only in the
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year you pay the liability. Under the accrual profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- income. See Publication 547 for more informa-
tion on casualty losses. For the limits that applying the current year. The activity must be sub-method, you can deduct contested liabilities
to mortgage interest, see Publication 936.stantially the same for each year within thissuch as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
period. You have a profit when the gross incomesion income, war profits, and excess profits Category 2. Deductions that do not result infrom an activity exceeds the deductions.taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability an adjustment to the basis of property are al-(or transfer money or other property to satisfy If a taxpayer dies before the end of the lowed next, but only to the extent your grossthe obligation) or in the tax year you settle the 5-year (or 7-year) period, the ªtestº period ends income from the activity is more than your de-contest. However, to take the deduction in the on the date of the taxpayer's death. ductions under the first category. Most business
year of payment or transfer, you must meet If your business or investment activity deductions, such as those for advertising, insur-
certain conditions. See Contested Liability in passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRS ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,
Publication 538 for more information. will presume it is carried on for profit. This belong in this category.
means the limits discussed here will not apply.
Category 3. Business deductions that de-Related person. Under an accrual method of You can take all your business deductions from
crease the basis of property are allowed last, butthe activity, even for the years that you have aaccounting, you generally deduct expenses only to the extent the gross income from theloss. You can rely on this presumption unlesswhen you incur them, even if you have not yet activity exceeds the deductions you take underthe IRS later shows it to be invalid.paid them. However, if you and the person you the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-owe are related and that person uses the cash tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty lossUsing the presumption later. If you are start-method of accounting, you must pay the ex- an individual could not deduct in category (1)ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) yearspense before you can deduct it. Your deduction belong in this category. Where more than oneshowing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-is allowed when the amount is includible in in- asset is involved, allocate depreciation andsumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) yearscome by the related cash method payee. See these other deductions proportionally.of experience allowed by the test.Related Persons in Publication 538.
Individuals must claim the amounts inYou can elect to do this by filing Form 5213.
categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-Filing this form postpones any determination
ous deductions on Schedule A (Formthat your activity is not carried on for profit until 5
TIP
1040). They are subject to the(or 7) years have passed since you started theNot-for-Profit Activities 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-activity.
cation 529 for information on this limit.The benefit gained by making this election isIf you do not carry on your business or invest-
that the IRS will not immediately questionment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a
Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitwhether your activity is engaged in for profit.loss from the activity to offset other income.
activity. The income and expenses of the activityAccordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport
are as follows.Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in theor recreation, are often not entered into for profit.
required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2)The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to Gross income ................ . $3,200years of profit at the end of this period, yourindividuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S deductions are not limited under these rules. If Subtract:corporations. It does not apply to corporations you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit Real estate taxes ....... . $700other than S corporations. can be applied retroactively to any year with a Home mortgage interest ... . 900In determining whether you are carrying on loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. Insurance ............ . 400an activity for profit, several factors are taken Utilities .............. . 700Filing Form 5213 automatically extends theinto account. No one factor alone is decisive. Maintenance .......... . 200period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (orAmong the factors to consider are whether: Depreciation on an automobile 6007-year) period to 2 years after the due date of
Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700the return for the last year of the period. The• You carry on the activity in a businesslike
period is extended only for deductions of themanner, Loss ...................... . $(500)activity and any related deductions that might be• The time and effort you put into the activity affected.indicate you intend to make it profitable, Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the
You must file Form 5213 within 3 years gross income she earned from the activity. The• You depend on the income for your liveli- after the due date of your return (deter- limit is reached in category (3), as follows.hood, mined without extensions) for the year
TIP
in which you first carried on the activity, or, if Limit on deduction ............ . $3,200• Your losses are due to circumstances be-
earlier, within 60 days after receiving writtenyond your control (or are normal in the Category 1: Taxes andnotice from the Internal Revenue Service pro-start-up phase of your type of business), interest .............. . $1,600posing to disallow deductions attributable to the Category 2: Insurance,• You change your methods of operation in activity. utilities, and maintenance .. . 1,300 2,900an attempt to improve profitability,
Available for Category 3 ....... . $ 300• You (or your advisors) have the knowl- Limit on Deductions
edge needed to carry on the activity as a The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-successful business, If your activity is not carried on for profit, take tween the automobile and machine as follows.deductions in the following order and only to the• You were successful in making a profit in extent stated in the three categories. If you are $600 depreciation for thesimilar activities in the past, x $300 = $225an individual, these deductions may be taken $800 automobile• The activity makes a profit in some years, only if you itemize. These deductions may be
and taken on Schedule A (Form 1040).
$200 depreciation for thex  $300 = $75• You can expect to make a future profit $800 machineCategory 1. Deductions you can take for per-from the appreciation of the assets used in sonal as well as for business activities are al- The basis of each asset is reduced accord-the activity. lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness ingly.
deductions, such as those for home mortgage Ida includes the $3,200 of gross income on
Presumption of profit. An activity is pre- interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in line 21 of Form 1040.The $1,600 for category (1)
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit this category. Deduct them on the appropriate is deductible in full on the appropriate lines for
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de- taxes and interest on Schedule A (Form 1040).
current year. Activities that consist primarily of duct a casualty loss on property you own for Ida deducts the remaining $1,600 ($1,300 for
personal use only to the extent it is more thanbreeding, training, showing, or racing horses are category (2) and $300 for category (3)) as other
$100 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted grosspresumed carried on for profit if they produced a miscellaneous deductions on Schedule A (Form
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1040) subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- • Welfare-to-work credit (claimed on Form Factors to consider. To determine if pay is
gross-income limit. reasonable, consider the following items and8861).
any other pertinent facts.• Credit for employer differential wage pay-Partnerships and S corporations. If a part-
• The duties performed by the employee.ments (claimed on Form 8932; only fornership or S corporation carries on a
payments made in 2009).not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the • The volume of business handled.
partnership or S corporation level. They are re-
• The character and amount of responsibil-Reduce your deduction for employee wagesflected in the individual shareholder's or part-
ity.by the amount of any employment credits youner's distributive shares.
claim. For more information about these credits, • The complexities of your business.More than one activity. If you have several see the form on which the credit is claimed.
undertakings, each may be a separate activity or • The amount of time required.
several undertakings may be combined. The • The cost of living in the locality.Topicsfollowing are the most significant facts and cir-
This chapter discusses:cumstances in making this determination. • The ability and achievements of the indi-
vidual employee performing the service.• The degree of organizational and eco- • Tests for deducting paynomic interrelationship of various under- • The pay compared with the gross and net
• Kinds of paytakings. income of the business, as well as with
distributions to shareholders if the busi-• The business purpose that is (or might be)
ness is a corporation.served by carrying on the various under- Useful Items
takings separately or together in a busi- • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-You may want to see:ness or investment setting. ployees.
Publication• The similarity of the undertakings. • The history of pay for each employee.
❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax GuideThe IRS will generally accept your characteri-
Test 2ÐFor Serviceszation if it is supported by facts and circum- ❏ 15-A Employer's Supplemental Tax
stances. Guide Performed
If you are carrying on two or more dif- ❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe You must be able to prove the payment wasferent activities, keep the deductions Benefits made for services actually performed.and income from each one separate.
TIP
❏ 15-T New Wage Withholding andFigure separately whether each is a
Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-Advanced Earned Income Creditnot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on
ration pays an employee who is also a share-Payment Tablesdeductions and losses separately for each activ-
holder a salary that is unreasonably highity that is not for profit.
See chapter 12 for information about getting considering the services actually performed, the
excessive part of the salary may be treated as apublications and forms.
constructive distribution to the em-
ployee-shareholder. For more information on
corporate distributions to shareholders, see
Publication 542, Corporations.Tests for2. Deducting Pay
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be Kinds of PayEmployees' Pay an ordinary and necessary expense and you
Some of the ways you may provide pay to yourmust pay or incur it. These and other require-
employees in addition to regular wages or sala-ments that apply to all business expenses are
ries are discussed next. For specialized andIntroduction explained in chapter 1.
detailed information on employees' pay and theIn addition, the pay must meet both of theYou can generally deduct the pay you give your employment tax treatment of employees' pay,following tests.employees for the services they perform. The see Publication 15, Publication 15-A, Publica-pay may be in cash, property, or services. It may • Test 1. It must be reasonable. tion 15-B, and Publication 15-T.include wages, or salaries, or other compensa-
• Test 2. It must be for services performed.tion, such as vacation allowances, bonuses,
Awardscommissions, and fringe benefits. For informa- The form or method of figuring the pay does nottion about deducting employment taxes, see affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses You can generally deduct amounts you pay tochapter 5. and commissions based on sales or earnings, your employees as awards, whether paid in
You can claim the following employ- and paid under an agreement made before the cash or property. If you give property to an
ment credits if you pay wages to indi- services were performed, are both deductible. employee as an employee achievement award,
viduals who meet certain your deduction may be limited.
TIP
requirements. Test 1ÐReasonableness
Achievement awards. An achievement• Work opportunity credit (claimed on Form
Determine the reasonableness of pay by the award is an item of tangible personal property5884).
facts and circumstances. Generally, reasonable that meets all the following requirements.• Credit for affected Midwestern disaster pay is the amount that like enterprises pay for • It is given to an employee for length ofarea employers (claimed on Form the same, or similar, services. service or safety achievement.5884-A).
You must be able to prove that the pay is
• It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- reasonable. Base this determination on the cir- entation.nity employment credit (claimed on Form cumstances that exist when you contract for the
8844). services, not those that exist when the reasona- • It is awarded under conditions and circum-
bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive, stances that do not create a significant• Indian employment credit (claimed on
the excess is disallowed. likelihood of disguised pay.Form 8845).
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

Page 7 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Length-of-service award. An award will Gifts of nominal value. If, to promote em- • Meals you are required by federal law to
ployee goodwill, you distribute food, or mer-qualify as a length-of-service award only if either furnish to crew members of certain com-
chandise of nominal value to your employees atof the following applies. mercial vessels (or would be required to
holidays, you can deduct the cost of these items furnish if the vessels were operated at• The employee receives the award after his as a nonwage business expense. Your deduc- sea). This does not include meals you fur-or her first 5 years of employment. tion for de minimus gifts of food or drink are not nish on vessels primarily providing luxurysubject to the 50% deduction limit that generally• The employee did not receive another water transportation.applies to meals. For more information on thislength-of-service award (other than one of
• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformdeduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later.very small value) during the same year or
or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.in any of the prior 4 years.
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-Education Expenses
Safety achievement award. An award for port camp that is near and integral to an
If you pay or reimburse education expenses forsafety achievement will qualify as an achieve- oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
an employee, you can deduct the payments ifment award unless one of the following applies.
they are part of a qualified educational assis- Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-1. It is given to a manager, administrator, tance program. Deduct them on the ªEmployee efit programs include the following.clerical employee, or other professional benefit programsº or other appropriate line of
employee. your tax return. For information on educational • Accident and health plans.
assistance programs, see Educational Assis-2. During the tax year, more than 10% of • Adoption assistance.tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B.your employees, excluding those listed in
• Cafeteria plans.(1), have already received a safety
Fringe Benefitsachievement award (other than one of very • Dependent care assistance.
small value). A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform- • Educational assistance.
ance of services. You can generally deduct theDeduction limit. Your deduction for the • Life insurance coverage.cost of fringe benefits.cost of employee achievement awards given to
• Welfare benefit funds.You may be able to exclude all or part of theany one employee during the tax year is limited
value of some fringe benefits from your employ-to the following. You can generally deduct amounts you spendees' pay. You also may not owe employment
• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See on employee benefit programs on the applicable
awards. Table 2-1 in Publication 15-B for details. line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-
Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits vide dependent care by operating a dependent• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual-
for activities generally considered entertain- care facility for your employees, deduct yourified plan awards.
ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,
used in connection with such an activity (forA qualified plan award is an achievement salaries, etc.).example, a company aircraft) for certain officers,award given as part of an established written Life insurance coverage. You cannot de-directors, and more-than-10% shareholders isplan or program that does not favor highly com- duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,limited.pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. an employee, or any person with a financialSee Pub. 15-B for an extensive discussion ofA highly compensated employee for 2008 is interest in your business, if you are directly orfringe benefits.an employee who meets either of the following indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-tests. ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct
1. The employee was a 5% owner at any the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefitemployees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-time during the year or the preceding year. fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementgory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-2. The employee received more than having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals$105,000 in pay for the preceding year. benefits to your employees, independent con-you furnish to employees as part of the cost of
tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsgoods sold. If you operate a nursing home,You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-
are any benefits other than deferred compensa-motel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofployee was not also in the top 20% of employees
tion or transfers of restricted property.furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesranked by pay for the preceding year.
for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation, Your deduction for contributions to a welfareAn award is not a qualified plan award if the
etc. benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified costaverage cost of all the employee achievement
awards given during the tax year (that would be for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundDeduction limit on meals. You can gener-
qualified plan awards except for this limit) is are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing
more than $400. To figure this average cost, over to the next tax year.meals to your employees. However, you can
ignore awards of nominal value. deduct the full cost of the following meals. Generally, the fund's ªqualified costº is the
Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage total of the following amounts, reduced by the• Meals whose value you include in an em-business expense on your return or business after-tax income of the fund.ployee's wages.schedule.
• The cost you would have been able to• Meals that qualify as a de minimus fringeYou may not owe employment taxes deduct using the cash method of account-benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-on the value of some achievement cation 15-B. This generally includes meals ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.awards you provide to an employee.
TIP you furnish to employees at your place of • The contributions added to a reserve ac-See Publication 15-B. business if more than half of these em- count that are needed to fund claims in-ployees are provided the meals for your curred but not paid as of the end of theconvenience.Bonuses year. These claims can be for supplemen-
• Meals you furnish to your employees at tal unemployment benefits, severanceYou can generally deduct a bonus paid to an the work site when you operate a restau- pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceemployee if you intended the bonus as addi- rant or catering service. benefits.tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the
services were performed. However, the total bo- • Meals you furnish to your employees as
For more information, see sections 419(c) andnuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona- part of the expense of providing recrea-
419A of the Internal Revenue Code and theble for the services performed. If the bonus is tional or social activities, such as a com-
paid in property, see Property, later. pany picnic. related regulations.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explanation of accountable and nonaccountable same amount you would pay to a stranger forLoans or Advances
plans. use of the same property. Rent is not unreason-
able just because it is figured as a percentage ofYou generally can deduct as wages an advance
gross sales.you make to an employee for services per- Sick and Vacation Pay
formed if you do not expect the employee to Related persons. For this purpose, the fol-repay the advance. However, if the employee Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to lowing are considered related persons.performs no services, treat the amount you ad- your employees for sickness and injury, includ-vanced as a loan. If the employee does not 1. An individual and his or her brothers anding lump-sum amounts, as wages. However,repay the loan, treat it as income to the em- sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,your deduction is limited to amounts not com-ployee. ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),pensated by insurance or other means.
and lineal descendants (children, grand-Below-market interest rate loans. On cer- Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employee children, etc.).tain loans you make to an employee or share- benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused
2. An individual and a corporation if the indi-holder, you are treated as having received vacation leave. You can deduct vacation pay
vidual owns, directly or indirectly, moreinterest income and as having paid compensa- only in the tax year in which the employee actu-
than 50% in value of the outstanding stocktion or dividends equal to that interest. See Be- ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of
of the corporation.low-Market Loans in chapter 4. whether you use the cash or accrual method of
accounting. 3. Two corporations that are members of the
Property same controlled group as defined in sec-
tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.If you transfer property (including your com-
4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.pany's stock) to an employee as payment for
services, you can generally deduct it as wages. 5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if theThe amount you can deduct is the property's fair same person is a grantor of both trusts.market value on the date of the transfer less any 3. 6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the sameamount the employee paid for the property.
trust.You can claim the deduction only for the tax
year in which your employee includes the prop- 7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-Rent Expenseerty's value in income. Your employee is rate trusts if the same person is a grantordeemed to have included the value in income if of both trusts.you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.
8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation if You treat the deductible amount as received Introduction the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,in exchange for the property, and you must rec-
directly or indirectly, more than 50% inThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of rentognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer,
value of the outstanding stock of the cor-or lease payments you make for property youunless it is the company's stock transferred as
poration.use in your business but do not own. It alsopayment for services. Your gain or loss is the
discusses how to treat other kinds of paymentsdifference between the fair market value of the 9. A person and a tax-exempt educational oryou make that are related to your use of thisproperty and its adjusted basis on the date of charitable organization that is controlled di-property. These include payments you make fortransfer. rectly or indirectly by that person or bytaxes on the property, improvements to theThese rules also apply to property trans- members of the family of that person.property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-ferred to an independent contractor for services,
10. A corporation and a partnership if thesion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofgenerally reported on Form 1099-MISC.
same persons own more than 50% inproperty) certain rent expenses at the end of the
Restricted property. If the property you value of the outstanding stock of the cor-chapter.
transfer for services is subject to restrictions that poration and more than 50% of the capital
affect its value, you generally cannot deduct it or profits interest in the partnership.Topics
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- This chapter discusses: 11. Two S corporations or an S corporationtially vested in the recipient. However, if the and a regular corporation if the same per-recipient pays for the property, you must report • The definition of rent sons own more than 50% in value of theany gain at the time of the transfer up to the outstanding stock of each corporation.• Taxes on leased propertyamount paid.
ªSubstantially vestedº means the property is 12. An executor of an estate and a beneficiary• The cost of getting a lease
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This of the estate unless the sale or exchange• Improvements by the lesseemeans that the recipient is not likely to have to is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest.
give up his or her rights in the property in the • Capitalizing rent expenses To determine whether an individual directlyfuture. or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock of
a corporation, see Related Persons in Publica-See chapter 12 for information about gettingReimbursements tion 542, Corporations. For rules that apply topublications and forms.
for Business Expenses transactions between partners and partner-
ships, see Publication 541, Partnerships.
You can generally deduct the amount you pay or
reimburse employees for business expenses in- Rent on your home. If you rent your homeRentcurred for your business. However, your deduc- and use part of it as your place of business, you
tion may be limited. may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatRent is any amount you pay for the use ofIf you make the payment under an accounta- part. You must meet the requirements for busi-property you do not own. In general, you canble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense ness use of your home. For more information,deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is forpaid. For example, if you pay an employee for see Business use of your home in chapter 1.property you use in your trade or business. If youtravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct have or will receive equity in or title to the prop- Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid inthis payment as a travel expense. If you make erty, the rent is not deductible. your trade or business is deductible in the yearthe payment under a nonaccountable plan, de-
paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, youduct it as wages and include it in the employee's Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental
can deduct only the amount that applies to yourW-2. deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the
use of the rented property during the tax year.See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and issue of reasonableness arises only if you and
You can deduct the rest of your payment onlyEntertainment in chapter 11 for more informa- the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related
over the period to which it applies.tion about deducting reimbursements and an person (defined below) is reasonable if it is the
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You are a calendar year tax- contains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter- lease term and all rent payments are due in the
mine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal calendar year to which the rent relates (or in thepayer and you leased a building for 5 years
income tax purposes. Revenue Procedure preceding or following calendar year).beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year.
2001-29 on page 1160 of the same InternalYou paid the first year's rent ($12,000) on June Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustRevenue Bulletin provides the information re-30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 ×  $12,000) use an accrual method of accounting (and timequired to be furnished in a request for an ad-for the rent that applies to the first year. value of money principles) for your rental ex-vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. penses, regardless of your overall method ofExample 2. You are a calendar year tax- Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at accounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf.payer. Last January you leased property for 3 the IRS has determined that a lease was de-In general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28years for $6,000 a year. You paid the full signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only,$18,000 (3 ×  $6,000) during the first year of the rent and stated or imputed interest into accountthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveragedlease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000, under a constant rental accrual method in whichlease transaction to be the owner of the propertythe part of the lease that applies to that year. the rent is treated as accruing ratably over theand the transaction to be a valid lease if all the entire lease term. For details, see section 467 ofCanceling a lease. You generally can deduct factors in the revenue procedure are met, in- the Internal Revenue Code.as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business cluding the following.
lease. • The lessor must maintain a minimum un-
conditional ªat riskº equity investment inLease or purchase. There may be instances the property (at least 20% of the cost of Taxes onin which you must determine whether your pay- the property) during the entire lease term.ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
Leased Propertyproperty. You must first determine whether your • The lessee may not have a contractual
agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con- right to buy the property from the lessor at
If you lease business property, you can deducttract. Payments made under a conditional sales less than fair market value when the right
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay tocontract are not deductible as rent expense. is exercised.
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these
Conditional sales contract. Whether an • The lessee may not invest in the property, taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-
agreement is a conditional sales contract de- except as provided by Revenue Procedure counting method.
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine 2001-28.
intent based on the provisions of the agreement Cash method. If you use the cash method of• The lessee may not lend any money to theand the facts and circumstances that exist when accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-lessor to buy the property or guarantee theyou make the agreement. No single test, or tional rent only for the tax year in which you payloan used by the lessor to buy the prop-special combination of tests, always applies. them.erty.However, in general, an agreement may be con-
sidered a conditional sales contract rather than • The lessor must show that it expects to Accrual method. If you use an accrual
a lease if any of the following is true. receive a profit apart from the tax deduc- method of accounting, you can deduct taxes as
tions, allowances, credits, and other tax additional rent for the tax year in which you can• The agreement applies part of each pay- attributes. determine all the following.ment toward an equity interest you will re-
ceive. • That you have a liability for taxes on theThe IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing leased property.• You get title to the property after you make a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue
a stated amount of required payments. Procedure 2009-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve- • How much the liability is.
nue Bulletin No. 2009-1. Internal Revenue Bulle-• The amount you must pay to use the prop- • That economic performance occurred.tin 2009-1 is available at www.irs.gov/pub/erty for a short time is a large part of the irs-irbs/irb09-01.pdf.amount you would pay to get title to the The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
Leveraged leases of limited-use property.property. mined by state or local law and the lease agree-
The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever- ment. Economic performance occurs as you use• You pay much more than the current fair aged leases of so-called limited-use property. the property.rental value of the property. Limited-use property is property not expected to
be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar• You have an option to buy the property at
end of the lease term except for continued leas- year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofa nominal price compared to the value of
ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce- accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-the property when you may exercise the
dure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use ness. Under state law, owners of real propertyoption. Determine this value when you
property and property that is not limited-use become liable (incur a lien on the property) formake the agreement.
property. real estate taxes for the year on January 1 of• You have an option to buy the property at that year. However, they do not have to paya nominal price compared to the total Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18amount you have to pay under the agree- vided for certain leases of tangible property. The months later) when tax bills are issued. Underment. rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable formore than $250,000 and any of the following the real estate taxes in the later year when the• The agreement designates part of the pay- apply. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before thements as interest, or that part is easy to
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable forrecognize as interest. • Rents increase during the lease.
the taxes for that year.• Rents decrease during the lease.Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as
actions may not be considered leases. Lever- • Rents are deferred (rent is payable after rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak's
aged leases generally involve three parties: a the end of the calendar year following the liability under the lease becomes fixed.
lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. calendar year in which the use occurs and
Usually the lease term covers a large part of the Example 2. The facts are the same as inthe rent is allocated).
useful life of the leased property, and the Example 1 except that, according to the terms of• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforelessee's payments to the lessor are enough to the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estatethe end of the calendar year preceding thecover the lessor's payments to the lender. taxes when the owner of the property becomescalendar year in which the use occurs andIf you plan to take part in what appears to be liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct thethe rent is allocated).a leveraged lease, you may want to get an real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for the
advance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on These rules do not apply if your lease specifies earlier year. This is the year in which Oak's
page 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 equal amounts of rent for each month in the liability under the lease becomes fixed.
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- Indirect costs include amounts incurred for
ments of $50 each. renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.Cost of
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize
Uniform capitalization rules. You may beit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-Getting a Lease subject to the uniform capitalization rules if youtization deduction each year will be $150
do any of the following, unless the property is($3,000 ÷  20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 ×You may either enter into a new lease with the produced for your use other than in a business$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5lessor of the property or get an existing lease or an activity carried on for profit.years as rent.from another lessee. Very often when you get an
existing lease from another lessee, you must 1. Produce real property or tangible personalCommissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis-pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, property. For this purpose, tangible per-sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts youbesides having to pay the rent on the lease. sonal property includes a film, sound re-pay to get a lease on property you use in yourIf you get an existing lease on property or cording, video tape, book, or similarbusiness are capital costs. You must amortizeequipment for your business, you generally property.these costs over the term of the lease.must amortize any amount you pay to get that
2. Acquire property for resale.lease over the remaining term of the lease. For Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If you
example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you However, these rules do not apply to the follow-there are 10 years remaining on the lease with bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of ing property.no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss
year. 1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifand amortize it over the remaining term of the
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- your average annual gross receipts arelease.
ble property is not subject to the amortization $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.
rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofchapter 8. the following conditions.
ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease for
a. Your indirect costs of producing theamortization includes all renewal options plus
by Lessee property are $200,000 or less.any other period for which you and the lessor
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. b. You use the cash method of accountingIf you add buildings or make other permanentHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of and do not account for inventories.improvements to leased property, depreciatethe cost of getting the lease is for the term
the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not including
accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew, Example 1. You rent construction equip-Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the ment to build a storage facility. If you are subjectcovery period. You cannot amortize the costlease cost to the original term and any option to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap-over the remaining term of the lease.term based on the facts and circumstances. In italize as part of the cost of the building the rentIf you do not keep the improvements whensome cases, it may be appropriate to make the you paid for the equipment. You recover youryou end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedallocation using a present value computation. cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation onon your adjusted basis in the improvements atFor more information, see Regulations section the building.that time.1.178-1(b)(5).
For more information, see the discussion of Example 2. You rent space in a facility toMACRS in Publication 946, How To DepreciateExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease conduct your business of manufacturing tools. IfProperty.with 20 years remaining on it and two options to you are subject to the uniform capitalization
renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid rules, you must include the rent you paid toAssignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the occupy the facility in the cost of the tools youwho makes permanent improvements to landrenewal options. Because $7,000 is less than produce.later assigns all lease rights to you for money75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or and you pay the rent required by the lease, the$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 More information. For more information onamount you pay for the assignment is a capitalyears. That is the remaining life of your present these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules ininvestment. If the rental value of the leased landlease plus the periods for renewal. Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-increased since the lease began, part of your nal Revenue Code section 263A.capital investment is for that increase in theExample 2. The facts are the same as in rental value. The rest is for your investment inExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the the permanent improvements.original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op- The part that is for the increased rental valuetions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and youthe 20-year remaining life of the original lease. amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was You can depreciate the part that is for yournot less than 75% of the total cost of the lease 4.investment in the improvements over the recov-(or $7,500). ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement. You may
have to pay an additional ªrentº amount over part Interestof the lease period to change certain provisions
in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
ments and amortize them over the remaining Capitalizing Introductionperiod of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
Rent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de- This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-scribed as rent in the agreement. ness interest expense. Business interest ex-Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must pense is an amount charged for the use ofExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect money you borrowed for business activities.and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building costs for certain production or resale activities.
starting on January 1. However, before you oc- Include these costs in the basis of property you Topicscupy it, you decide that you really need less produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- This chapter discusses:space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent ing them as a current deduction. You recover the
from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost • Allocation of interestthe excess space from the original lease. In of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent dispose of the property. • Interest you can deduct
Page 10 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 11 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Interest you cannot deduct affected by the use of property that secures the Example. On January 9, Edith opened a
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-loan.• Capitalization of interest ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed
Example. You secure a loan with property• When to deduct interest funds. The following table shows the transac-
used in your business. You use the loan pro- tions in her account during the tax year.• Below-market loans ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.
Date TransactionYou must allocate interest expense on the loan
to personal use (purchase of the automobile)Useful Items January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan Aeven though the loan is secured by businessYou may want to see: and $1,000 unborrowed
property. funds deposited
Publication If the property that secures the loan is January 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B 
your home, you generally do not allo- deposited❏ 537 Installment Sales cate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP February 19 $800 used for personal❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses interest. The interest is usually deductible as purposesqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction February 27 $700 used for passivehow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-
activitymation, see Publication 936.Form (and Instructions)
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C 
❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions depositedAllocation period. The period for which a
loan is allocated to a particular use begins on the November 20 $800 used for an❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental
date the proceeds are used and ends on the investmentIncome and Loss
earlier of the following dates. December 18 $600 used for personal❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share of
• The date the loan is repaid. purposesIncome, Deductions, Credits, etc.
• The date the loan is reallocated to another Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder's
use. poses as made from the $500 proceeds of LoanShare of Income, Deductions,
A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheCredits, etc.
treats the $700 used for a passive activity asProceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She❏ 3115 Application for Change in third party, the allocation of the loan is still based treats the $800 used for an investment as madeAccounting Method on your use of the funds. This applies whether entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsyou pay for property, services, or anything else❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense the $600 used for personal purposes as madeby incurring a loan, or you take property subjectDeduction from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan Cto a debt. and $400 of unborrowed funds.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
For the periods during which loan proceedsProceeds deposited in borrower's account. are held in the account, Edith treats them asSee chapter 12 for information about getting Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as property held for investment.publications and forms. property held for investment. It does not matter
whether the account pays interest. Any interest Payments from checking accounts. Gen-
you pay on the loan is investment interest ex- erally, you treat a payment from a checking or
pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, similar account as made at the time the check is
you must reallocate the loan based on the use ofAllocation of Interest written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within
the funds. a reasonable period after you write it. You can
The rules for deducting interest vary, depending treat checks written on the same day as written
Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax-on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- in any order.
payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-ness, personal, or investment activities. If you Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-mediately uses the proceeds to open a checkinguse the proceeds of a loan for more than one ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-account. No other amounts are deposited in thetype of expense, you must make an allocation to ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treataccount during the year and no part of the loandetermine the interest for each use of the loan's any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)principal is repaid during the year. On April 2,proceeds. made from any account you own, or from cash,Connie uses $20,000 from the checking accountAllocate your interest expense to the follow- as made from those proceeds. This applies tofor a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-ing categories. any payment made within 30 days before orber 4, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from
after the proceeds are received in cash or de-• Nonpassive trade or business activity in- the account for personal purposes.
posited in your account.terest Under the interest allocation rules, the entire If the loan proceeds are deposited in an$100,000 loan is treated as property held for• Passive trade or business activity interest account, you can apply this rule even if the rulesinvestment for the period from January 4 stated earlier under Order of funds spent would• Investment interest through April 1. From April 2 through September otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as3, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as used• Portfolio interest used for other purposes. If you apply this rule toin the passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as any payments, disregard those payments (and• Personal interest property held for investment. From September 4 the proceeds from which they are made) whenthrough December 31, she must treat $40,000In general, you allocate interest on a loan the applying the rules stated under Order of fundsof the loan as used for personal purposes,same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You spent.$20,000 as used in the passive activity, andallocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- If you received the loan proceeds in cash,$40,000 as property held for investment.ments to specific uses. you can treat the payment as made on the date
Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat you received the cash instead of the date youThe easiest way to trace disburse- loan proceeds deposited in an account as used actually made the payment.ments to specific uses is to keep the (spent) before either of the following amounts.proceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on• Any unborrowed amounts held in thefrom any other funds. August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.same account. Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- • Any amounts deposited after these loan 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the
ceeds and the related interest is not generally proceeds. account for a passive activity expense. Also,
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits other 2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed deducting the interest currently, you may have
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the funds on which interest accrues at different to add it to the cost basis of the property as
same period. Regardless of these other transac- fixed or variable rates as different loans. explained later under Capitalization of Interest.
tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit he Treat these loans as repaid in the order Statement. If you paid $600 or more ofmade on August 18 as being paid on August 4 shown on the loan agreement. mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can ing the year on any one mortgage, you generallytreat the passive activity expense he paid on Loan refinancing. Allocate the replacement will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro- loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan You will receive the statement if you pay interestceeds treated as deposited in the account. was allocated. Make the allocation only to the to a person (including a financial institution or a
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan toOptional method for determining date of cooperative housing corporation) in the course
repay any part of the original loan.reallocation. You can use the following of that person's trade or business. A govern-
method to determine the date loan proceeds are mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingDebt-financed distribution. A debt-financedreallocated to another use. You can treat all the statement.distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-payments from loan proceeds in the account If you receive a refund of interest you over-poration borrows funds and allocates thoseduring any month as taking place on the later of paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-funds to distributions made to partners or share-the following dates. ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotholders. The manner in which you report the deduct this amount. For information on how to• The first day of that month. interest expense associated with the distributed report this refund, see Refunds of interest laterdebt proceeds depends on your use of those• The date the loan proceeds are deposited in this chapter.proceeds.in the account. Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.How to report. If the proceeds were used inHowever, you can use this optional method only Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgagea nonpassive trade or business activity, reportif you treat all payments from the account during cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28;the same calendar month in the same way. penses, which include mortgage commissions,enter ªinterest expenseº and the name of the abstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalInterest on a segregated account. If you partnership or S corporation in column (a) and expenses. If the property mortgaged is businesshave an account that contains only loan pro- the amount in column (h). If the proceeds were or income-producing property, you can amortizeceeds and interest earned on the account, you used in a passive activity, follow the Instructions the costs over the life of the mortgage.can treat any payment from that account as for Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
being made first from the interest. When the Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourtions, to determine the amount of interest ex-
interest earned is used up, any remaining pay- mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forpense that can be reported on Schedule E
ments are from loan proceeds. doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-(Form 1040), line 28; enter ªinterest expenseº
est.and the name of the partnership in column (a)
Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used and the amount in column (f). If the proceeds
Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings were used in an investment activity, enter the
terest charged on employment taxes assessedaccount. When the account had earned interest interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are used
on your business is deductible.of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- for personal purposes, the interest is generally
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming not deductible. Original issue discount (OID). OID is a formfirst from the interest earned on the account,
of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133
erally has OID when its proceeds are less than($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the
its principal amount. The OID is the differenceloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- Interest You between the stated redemption price at maturitycount until the time of the withdrawal is invest-
and the issue price of the loan.ment interest expense. The interest charged on Can Deduct  A loan's stated redemption price at maturitythe part of the proceeds used for personal pur-
is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it You can generally deduct as a business ex- payable on it other than qualified stated interest.until you either repay it or reallocate it to another pense all interest you pay or accrue during the Qualified stated interest is stated interest that isuse is personal interest expense. The interest tax year on debts related to your trade or busi- unconditionally payable in cash or propertycharged on the loan proceeds you left in the ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if (other than another loan of the issuer) at leastaccount ($867) continues to be investment inter- you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or annually over the term of the loan at a singleest expense until you either repay it or reallocate business expense. It does not matter what type fixed rate.it to another use. of property secures the loan. You can deduct You generally deduct OID over the term ofinterest on a debt only if you meet all the follow- the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each yearLoan repayment. When you repay any part of ing requirements. using the constant-yield method, unless the OIDa loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as
• You are legally liable for that debt. on the loan is de minimis.being repaid in the following order.
• Both you and the lender intend that the De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it1. Personal use. debt be repaid. is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the
2. Investments and passive activities (other stated redemption price of the loan at maturity• You and the lender have a truethan those included in (3)). multiplied by the number of full years from thedebtor-creditor relationship. date of original issue to maturity (the term of the3. Passive activities in connection with a loan).rental real estate activity in which you ac- Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a If the OID is de minimis, you can choose onetively participate. business debt, you can deduct only your share of the following ways to figure the amount you
of the total interest paid or accrued.4. Former passive activities. can deduct each year.
5. Trade or business use and expenses for • On a constant-yield basis over the term ofExample. You and your brother borrowcertain low-income housing projects. the loan.money. You are liable for 50% of the note. You
use your half of the loan in your business, and • On a straight-line basis over the term of
Line of credit (continuous borrowings). you make one-half of the loan payments. You the loan.
The following rules apply if you have a line of can deduct your half of the total interest pay-
• In proportion to stated interest payments.credit or similar arrangement. ments as a business deduction.
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid
accrues at the same fixed or variable rate or accrued on real estate you own legally or You make this choice by deducting the OID in a
as a single loan. equitably is deductible. However, rather than manner consistent with the method chosen on
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in by a borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. accrued on the property), you cannot deduct the
which the loan is issued. These charges are also called loan origination interest. Add this interest to the basis of the
fees, maximum loan charges, discount points, or property.
Example. On January 1, 2008, you took out premium charges. If any of these charges
a $100,000 discounted loan and received (points) are solely for the use of money, they are Commitment fees or standby charges.
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on interest. Fees you incur to have business funds available
January 1, 2018 (a 10-year term), and the on a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofBecause points are prepaid interest, you
$100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter- the funds, are not deductible as interest pay-generally cannot deduct the full amount in the
est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each ments. You may be able to deduct them asyear paid. However, you can choose to fully
year, beginning January 1, 2009. The $1,500 deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain business expenses.
OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-than $2,500 ($100,000 ×  .0025 ×  10). You Publication 936. erty used in your business, the fees are indirectchoose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis costs and you generally must capitalize themThe points reduce the issue price of the loanover the term of the loan. Beginning in 2008, you and result in original issue discount, deductible under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-can deduct $150 each year for 10 years. as explained in the preceding discussion. talization of Interest, later.
Constant-yield method. If the OID is not de
Partial payments on a nontax debt. If youminimis, you must use the constant-yield Interest on income tax. Interest charged on
make partial payments on a debt (other than amethod to figure how much you can deduct each income tax assessed on your individual income
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,year. You figure your deduction for the first year tax return is not a business deduction even
in general, first to interest and any remainder tousing the following steps. though the tax due is related to income from
principal. You can deduct only the interest. This your trade or business. Treat this interest as a1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- rule does not apply when it can be inferred that business deduction only in figuring a net operat-erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan. the borrower and lender understood that a differ- ing loss deduction.If you paid points on the loan (as dis- ent allocation of the payments would be made.
cussed later), the issue price generally is Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-
the difference between the proceeds and cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-Installment purchase. If you make an install-
the points. est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youment purchase of business property, the con-
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.tract between you and the seller generally2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
provides for the payment of interest. If no inter-maturity. Interest on loans with respect to life insur-est or a low rate of interest is charged under the
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- ance policies. You generally cannot deductcontract, a portion of the stated principal amount
ments from the result in (2). This is the interest on a debt incurred with respect to anypayable under the contract may be recharacter-
OID you can deduct in the first year. life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractized as interest (unstated interest). The amount
that covers any individual unless that individualrecharacterized as interest reduces your basisTo figure your deduction in any subsequent
is a key person.in the property and increases your interest ex-year, follow the above steps, except determine
pense. For more information on installment If the policy or contract covers a key person,the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
sales and unstated interest, see Publication you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofadjusted issue price, add to the issue price any
537. debt for that person. However, the deduction forOID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)
any month cannot be more than the interestand (3) above.
figured using Moody's Composite Yield on Sea-The yield to maturity is generally shown in
soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known asthe literature you receive from your lender. If you
Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver-Interest Youdo not have this information, consult your lender
age-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody'sor tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is
Cannot Deduct rate) for that month.the discount rate that, when used in computing
the present value of all principal and interest Who is a key person? A key person is anCertain interest payments cannot be deducted.payments, produces an amount equal to the officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofIn addition, certain other expenses that mayprincipal amount of the loan. individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-seem to be interest are not, and you cannot ited to the greater of the following.deduct them as interest.Example. The facts are the same as in the
• Five individuals.previous example, except that you deduct the You cannot currently deduct interest that
OID on a constant yield basis over the term of must be capitalized, and you generally cannot • The lesser of 5% of the total officers andthe loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is deduct personal interest. employees of the company or 20 individu-10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2008, als.you can deduct $93 [($98,500 ×  .102467) − Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi-
$10,000]. For 2009, you can deduct $103 nal lender. If you use the cash method of Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.[($98,593 ×  .102467) − $10,000]. accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay You can generally deduct the interest if the con-with funds borrowed from the original lender tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and theLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan or through a second loan, an advance, or any othermortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any covered individual is someone other than anarrangement similar to a loan. You can deductremaining OID in the tax year in which the loan employee, officer, or someone financially inter-the interest expense once you start making pay-or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end ested in your business. If the contract was pur-ments on the new loan.due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallyWhen you make a payment on the new loan,or similar event. deduct the interest no matter who is covered byyou first apply the payment to interest and then the contract.If you refinance with the original lender, to the principal. All amounts you apply to the
you generally cannot deduct the re- Interest allocated to unborrowed policyinterest on the first loan are deductible, along
maining OID in the year in which the cash value. Corporations and partnerships
CAUTION
!with any interest you pay on the second loan,
refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- generally cannot deduct any interest expensesubject to any limits that apply.
duct it over the term of the new mortgage or allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. ThisCapitalized interest. You cannot currently
original lender under Interest You Cannot De- rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,deduct interest you are required to capitalize
duct, later. 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
director, employee, or 20% owner. For moretalization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
information, see section 264(f) of the InternalPoints. The term ªpointsº is used to describe property and pay interest owed by the seller (for
certain of the charges paid, or treated as paid, example, by assuming the debt and any interest Revenue Code.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information, see sections 1.263A-8 through interest. See Treatment of gift and demand
1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. loans later in this discussion.Capitalization
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2. A below-market loan is a loan on which no
of Interest interest is charged or on which interest is
charged at a rate below the applicable federal
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen- rate. A gift or demand loan that is a be-
erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to When To low-market loan generally is considered an
your expenditures to produce real property or arm's-length transaction in which you, the bor-
Deduct Interestcertain tangible personal property. The property rower, are considered as having received both
must be produced by you for use in your trade or the following.
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedbusiness or for sale to customers. You cannot • A loan in exchange for a note that requiresunder Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do notcapitalize interest related to property that you the payment of interest at the applicableapply to you, deduct interest as follows.acquire in any other manner. federal rate.Interest you paid or incurred during the pro- Cash method. Under the cash method, youduction period must be capitalized if the property • An additional payment in an amount equalcan generally deduct only the interest you actu-produced is designated property. Designated to the forgone interest.ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deductproperty is any of the following. The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-a promissory note you gave as payment be-
• Real property. dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual
pensation, or other payment, depending on thepayment.• Tangible personal property with a class life substance of the transaction.of 20 years or more. Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
For any period, forgone interest  is:duct any interest paid before the year it is due.• Tangible personal property with an esti- Interest paid in advance can be deducted only inmated production period of more than 2 1. The interest that would be payable for thatthe tax year in which it is due.years. period if interest accrued on the loan at the
Discounted loan. If interest or a discount is applicable federal rate and was payable• Tangible personal property with an esti- subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a annually on December 31,mated production period of more than 1 payment of interest and you cannot deduct it minusyear if the estimated cost of production is when you get the loan. For more information,more than $1 million. 2. Any interest actually payable on the loansee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest for the period.You Can Deduct, earlier.
Property you produce. You produce property
Refunds of interest. If you pay interest and Applicable federal rates are publishedif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-
then receive a refund in the same tax year of any by the IRS each month in the Internalvelop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat
part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc- Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenueproperty produced for you under a contract as
TIP
tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a Bulletins are available on the IRS web site atproduced by you up to the amount you pay or
later tax year, include the refund in your income www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRSincur for the property.
to the extent the deduction for the interest re- office to get these rates.
Carrying charges. Carrying charges include duced your tax.
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-Accrual method. Under an accrual method,to carry, transport, or install personal property. low-market loans apply to the following.you can deduct only interest that has accruedYou can choose to capitalize carrying charges
during the tax year.not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where the
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Prepaid interest. See Prepaid interest, forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
mation, see chapter 7. above. 2. Compensation-related loans (be-
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter- Discounted loan. See Discounted loan, low-market loans between an employer
est as a cost of the property produced. You above. and an employee or between an indepen-
recover your interest when you sell or use the dent contractor and a person for whom theTax deficiency. If you contest a federal in-property. If the property is inventory, recover contractor provides services).come tax deficiency, interest does not accruecapitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If until the tax year the final determination of liabil- 3. Corporation-shareholder loans.the property is used in your trade or business, ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,recover capitalized interest through an adjust- 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansthen the interest accrues in the year the tax wasment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or where the avoidance of federal tax is oneasserted and agreed to by you.other method. of the main purposes of the interest ar-However, if you contest but pay the pro- rangement).Partnerships and S corporations. The inter- posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do
est capitalization rules are applied first at the not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are the interest is deductible in the year paid. under a continuing care contract (made af-
then applied at the partners' or shareholders' ter October 11, 1985).Related person. If you use an accruallevel to the extent the partnership or S corpora- method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a Except as noted in (5) above, these rulestion has insufficient debt to support the produc- related person who uses the cash method until apply to demand loans (loans payable in full attion or construction costs. payment is made and the interest is includible in any time upon the lender's demand) outstandingIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you the gross income of that person. The relation- after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatmay have to capitalize interest you incur during ship is determined as of the end of the tax year are not demand loans) made after that date.the tax year for the production costs of the part- for which the interest would otherwise be de-nership or S corporation. You may also have to ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve- Treatment of gift and demand loans. If youcapitalize interest incurred by the partnership or nue Code for more information. receive a below-market gift loan or demandS corporation for your own production costs. To loan, you are treated as receiving an additionalproperly capitalize interest under these rules, payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theyou must be given the required information in an forgone interest on the loan. You are thenattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive treated as transferring this amount back to theBelow-Market Loansfrom the partnership or S corporation. lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
Additional information. The procedures for If you receive a below-market gift or demand ered to occur annually, generally on December
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be- loan and use the proceeds in your trade or 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
yond the scope of this publication. For more business, you may be able to deduct the forgone business, you can deduct the forgone interest
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each year as a business interest expense. The borrower will be determined by all the facts Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5 of
lender must report it as interest income. and circumstances. Consider all the follow- the regulations.
ing factors.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of
$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- a. Whether items of income and deduction
viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred generated by the loan offset each other.
back to the lender is limited to the borrower's net
b. The amount of the items.investment income for the year. This limit ap-
plies if the outstanding loans between the lender c. The cost of complying with the be- 5.and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor- low-market loan provisions if they were
rower's net investment income is $1,000 or less, to apply.
it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, forloan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one of Taxesstructuring the transaction as a be-the main purposes of the interest arrangement.
low-market loan.
Treatment of term loans. If you receive a
below-market term loan other than a gift or de- IntroductionException for loans to qualified continuingmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi- care facilities. The below-market interest You can deduct various federal, state, local, andtional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the rules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualified foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade ordate the loan is made. This payment is equal to continuing care facility under a continuing care business as business expenses.the loan amount minus the present value, at the contract if the lender or lender's spouse is ageapplicable federal rate, of all payments due You cannot deduct federal income62 or older by the end of the calendar year.under the loan. The same amount is treated as taxes, estate and gift taxes, or stateA qualified continuing care facility is one ororiginal issue discount on the loan. See Original inheritance, legacy, and successionmore facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet-
CAUTION
!issue discount (OID)  under Interest You Can taxes.ing the requirements listed below.Deduct, earlier.
1. Designed to provide services under contin- TopicsExceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. The uing care contracts (defined below). This chapter discusses:rules for below-market loans do not apply to any
day on which the total outstanding loans be- 2. Includes an independent living unit, and
• When to deduct taxestween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or either an assisted living or nursing facility,
less. This exception applies only to the follow- or both. • Real estate taxesing. 3. Substantially all of the independent living • Income taxesunit residents are covered by continuing1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is
• Employment taxescare contracts.not directly used to buy or carry in-
come-producing assets. • Other taxesA continuing care contract is a written con-
tract between an individual and a qualified con-2. Compensation-related loans or corpora-
tinuing care facility that includes all of thetion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of Useful Itemsfollowing conditions.any federal tax is not a principal purpose of You may want to see:the interest arrangement. 1. The individual or individual's spouse must
PublicationThis exception does not apply to a term loan be entitled to use the facility for the rest of
described in (2) above that was previously sub- their life or lives. ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guideject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules 2. The individual or individual's spouse will bewill continue to apply even if the outstanding ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessprovided with housing, as appropriate forbalance is reduced to $10,000 or less. the health of the individual or individual's ❏ 510 Excise Taxes
spouse in an:Exceptions for loans without significant tax ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodseffect. The following loans are specifically ex- a. independent living unit (which has addi- ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsempted from the rules for below-market loans tional available facilities outside the unitbecause their interest arrangements do not for the provision of meals and other per- Form (and Instructions)have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil- sonal care), andity of the borrower or the lender. ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsb. assisted living or nursing facility avail-1. Loans made available by lenders to the able in the continuing care facility. ❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employmentgeneral public on the same terms and con- Taxditions that are consistent with the lender's 3. The individual or individual's spouse will be ❏ 3115 Application for Change incustomary business practices. provided with assisted living or nursing Accounting Methodcare available in the continuing care facil-2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
ity, as required for the health of the individ-municipal government that are made avail- See chapter 12 for information about gettingual or the individual's spouse.able under a program of general applica- publications and forms.tion to the public. For more information, see section 7872(h) of
the Internal Revenue Code.3. Certain employee-relocation loans.
Sale or exchange of property. Different rules4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, When Togenerally apply to a loan connected with the saleunless the interest income would be effec-
or exchange of property. If the loan does nottively connected with the conduct of a U.S. Deduct Taxesprovide adequate stated interest, part of thetrade or business and not exempt from
principal payment may be considered interest.U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearHowever, there are exceptions that may require you pay them. This applies whether you use the5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show you to apply the below-market interest rate rules cash method or an accrual method of account-that the interest arrangement has no signif- to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi- ing.icant effect on the federal tax liability of the nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.lender or the borrower. Whether an inter- Under an accrual method, you can deduct a
est arrangement has a significant effect on More information. For more information on tax before you pay it if you meet the exception
the federal tax liability of the lender or the below-market loans, see section 7872 of the for recurring items discussed under Economic
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Performance in Publication 538. You can also Taxes for local benefits. Generally, you can- 2008, to June 30, 2009, are $1,200. July 1 is the
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis- not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and assessment and lien date.
cussed later under Real Estate Taxes. improvements that tend to increase the value of If John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,
your property. These include assessments for $600 will accrue in 2008 ($1,200 ×  6/12, July
Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic- streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, 1±December 31) and the balance will accrue in
tion can require the use of a date for accruing and public parking facilities. You should in- 2009.
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally crease the basis of your property by the amount Separate elections. You can elect to rata-required. However, if you use an accrual of the assessment. bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade ormethod, and can deduct the tax before you pay You can deduct taxes for these local benefits business and for nonbusiness activities if youit, use the original accrual date for the year of only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or account for them separately. Once you elect tochange and all future years to determine when interest charges related to those benefits. If part ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must useyou can deduct the tax. of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest, that method unless you get permission from theyou must be able to show how much of the tax is IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.Example. Your state imposes a tax on per- for these expenses to claim a deduction for thatsonal property used in a trade or business con- Making the election. If you elect to ratablypart of the tax.ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and accrue the taxes for the first year in which you
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In incur real estate taxes, attach a statement toExample. Waterfront City, to improve down-2008, the state changed the assessment and your income tax return for that year. The state-town commercial business, converted a down-lien dates from July 1, 2009, to December 31, ment should show all the following items.town business area street into an enclosed2008, for property tax year 2009. Use the origi- pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full cost • The trades or businesses to which thenal accrual date (July 1, 2009) to determine of construction, financed with 10-year bonds, election applies and the accountingwhen you can deduct the tax. You must also use against the affected properties. The city is pay- method or methods used.the July 1 accrual date for all future years to ing the principal and interest with the annualdetermine when you can deduct the tax. • The period to which the taxes relate.payments made by the property owners.
The assessments for construction costs areUniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi- • The computation of the real estate tax de-
not deductible as taxes or as business ex-talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who duction for that first year.
penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.produce real property or tangible personal prop-
The part of the payments used to pay the inter-erty for use in a trade or business or for sale to Generally, you must file your return by the due
est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.customers. They also apply to certain taxpayers date (including extensions). However, if you
who acquire property for resale. Under these timely filed your return for the year without elect-Charges for services. Water bills, sewerage,rules, you either include certain costs in inven- ing to ratably accrue, you can still make theand other service charges assessed againsttory or capitalize certain expenses related to the election by filing an amended return within 6your business property are not real estate taxes,property, such as taxes. For more information, months after the due date of the return (exclud-but are deductible as business expenses.see chapter 1. ing extensions). Attach the statement to the
amended return and write ªFiled pursuant toPurchase or sale of real estate. If real estateCarrying charges. Carrying charges include section 301.9100-2º on the statement. File theis sold, the real estate taxes must be allocatedtaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or amended return at the same address where youbetween the buyer and the seller.to carry, transport, or install personal property. filed the original return.The buyer and seller must allocate the realYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges not
Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue forestate taxes according to the number of days insubject to the uniform capitalization rules if they
a year after the first year in which you incur realthe real property tax year (the period to whichare otherwise deductible. For more information,
estate taxes or if you want to revoke your elec-the tax imposed relates) that each owned thesee chapter 7.
tion to ratably accrue real estate taxes, file Formproperty. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up
Refunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for 3115. For more information, including applicableto but not including the date of sale. Treat the
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- time frames for filing, see the instructions forbuyer as paying the taxes beginning with the
clude the refund in income to the extent the Form 3115.date of sale. You can usually find this informa-
deduction reduced your federal income tax in tion on the settlement statement you received at
the earlier year. For more information, see Re- closing.
covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule) in If you (the seller) use an accrual method and
chapter 1. Income Taxeshave not elected to ratably accrue real estate
taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourYou must include in income any inter- This section discusses federal, state, local, andpart of the tax on the date you sell the property.est you receive on tax refunds. foreign income taxes.
TIP
Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual Federal income taxes. You cannot deductmethod taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm federal income taxes.County. He has not elected to ratably accrue
property taxes. November 30 of each year is the State and local income taxes. A corporationassessment and lien date for the current real or partnership can deduct state and local in-Real Estate Taxes property tax year, which is the calendar year. He come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-sold the property on June 30, 2008. Under his nership as business expenses. An individualDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local, accounting method he would not be able to can deduct state and local income taxes only asor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the claim a deduction for the taxes because the sale an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formgeneral public welfare. The taxing authority occurred before November 30. He is treated as 1040).must base the taxes on the assessed value of having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- However, an individual can deduct a statethe real estate and charge them uniformly ary 1±June 29), on June 30, and he can deduct tax on gross income (as distinguished from netagainst all property under its jurisdiction. De- it for 2008. income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-ductible real estate taxes generally do not in- ness as a business expense.clude taxes charged for local benefits and Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac-
improvements that increase the value of the Accrual of contested income taxes. If youcrual method, you can elect to accrue real estate
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later. use an accrual method, and you contest a statetax related to a definite period ratably over that
If you use an accrual method, you generally or local income tax liability, you must accrue andperiod.
cannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay deduct any contested amount in the tax year in
them to the government authority. However, you Example. John Smith is a calendar year which the liability is finally determined.
can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during the taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real If additional state or local income taxes for a
year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later. estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1, prior year are assessed in a later year, you can
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct the taxes in the year in which they were
originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil- Other Taxesity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in 6.the year in which the liability is finally deter- The following are other taxes you can deduct ifmined. you incur them in the ordinary course of your
The filing of an income tax return is not trade or business.
Insuranceconsidered a contest and, in the ab-
sence of an overt act of protest, you
TIP
Excise taxes. You can deduct as a businesscan deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary andcan deduct any additional taxes in the prior year Introductionnecessary expenses of carrying on your trade orif you do not show some affirmative evidence of
You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.denial of the liability. essary cost of insurance as a business expenseHowever, if you consistently deduct addi- if it is for your trade, business, or profession.tional assessments in the year they are paid or Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporate However, you may have to capitalize certain
finally determined (including those for which insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationfranchise taxes as a business expense.
there was no contest), you must continue to do rules. For more information, see Capitalized
so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier Premiums, later.
Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,year unless you receive permission to change
and other motor fuels that you use in your busi-your method of accounting. For more informa- Topics
ness are usually included as part of the cost oftion on accounting methods, see When Can I This chapter discusses:
the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-Deduct an Expense? in chapter 1.
rate item. • Deductible premiums
You may be entitled to a credit or refund forForeign income taxes. Generally, you can • Nondeductible premiums
federal excise tax you paid on fuels used fortake either a deduction or a credit for income • Capitalized premiumscertain purposes. For more information, seetaxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a
• When to deduct premiumsPublication 510.U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot
take a deduction or credit for foreign income
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. Useful ItemsOccupational taxes. You can deduct as atax under the foreign earned income exclusion You may want to see:business expense an occupational tax chargedor the foreign housing exclusion. For information at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege ofon these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax Publicationworking or conducting a business in the locality.Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens
❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to FringeAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,
Benefitssee Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi- Personal property tax. You can deduct any
viduals. tax imposed by a state or local government on ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
personal property used in your trade or busi- ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsness.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Employment Taxes Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a Form (and Instructions)
service or on the purchase or use of property asIf you have employees, you must withhold vari- ❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnpart of the cost of the service or property. If theous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em-
service or the cost or use of the property is aployers must withhold their employees' share of See chapter 12 for information about gettingdeductible business expense, you can deductsocial security and Medicare taxes along with publications and forms.the tax as part of that service or cost. If thestate and federal income taxes. You may also
property is merchandise bought for resale, theneed to pay certain employment taxes from your
sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. Ifown funds. These include your share of social
the property is depreciable, add the sales tax tosecurity and Medicare taxes as an employer, Deductible Premiumsthe basis for depreciation. For more informationalong with unemployment taxes.
on basis, see Publication 551. You generally can deduct premiums you pay forYou should treat the taxes you withhold from
the following kinds of insurance related to yourDo not deduct state and local salesyour employees' pay as wages on your tax re-
trade or business. taxes imposed on the buyer that youturn. You can deduct the employment taxes you
must collect and pay over to the state
CAUTION
!must pay from your own funds as taxes. 1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-or local government. Also, do not include these cident, or similar losses.taxes in gross receipts or sales.Example. You pay your employee $18,000
2. Credit insurance that covers losses froma year. However, after you withhold various
business bad debts.taxes, your employee receives $14,500. You
Self-employment tax. You can deductalso pay an additional $1,500 in employment 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as ance for employees, including long-termness expense in figuring your adjusted grosswages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from care insurance.
income. This deduction only affects your incomeyour own funds as taxes.
a. If a partnership pays accident andtax. It does not affect your net earnings fromFor more information on employment taxes, health insurance premiums for its part-self-employment or your self-employment tax.see Publication 15 (Circular E). ners, it generally can deduct them asTo deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line guaranteed payments to partners.
27, the amount shown on the Deduction forUnemployment fund taxes. As an employer, b. If an S corporation pays accident andone-half of self-employment tax line of Scheduleyou may have to make payments to a state health insurance premiums for itsSE (Form 1040).unemployment compensation fund or to a state more-than-2% shareholder-employees,
For more information on self-employmentdisability benefit fund. Deduct these payments it generally can deduct them, but must
tax, see Publication 334.as taxes. also include them in the shareholder's
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified long-term care insurance con-wages subject to federal income tax • A shareholder owning more than 2% of
tract. A qualified long-term care insurancewithholding. See Publication 15-B. the outstanding stock of an S corporation
contract is an insurance contract that only pro-with wages from the corporation reported
vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-4. Liability insurance. on Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
ices. The contract must meet all the following5. Malpractice insurance that covers your requirements.The insurance plan must be establishedpersonal liability for professional negli- under your business. • It must be guaranteed renewable.gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-
tients or clients. • For self-employed individuals filing a • It must provide that refunds, other thanSchedule C, C-EZ, or F, the policy can be refunds on the death of the insured or6. Workers' compensation insurance set by either in the name of the business or in the complete surrender or cancellation of thestate law that covers any claims for bodily name of the individual. contract, and dividends under the contractinjuries or job-related diseases suffered by
may be used only to reduce future premi-employees in your business, regardless of • For partners, the policy can be either in
ums or increase future benefits.fault. the name of the partnership or in the name
of the partner. You can either pay the pre- • It must not provide for a cash surrendera. If a partnership pays workers' compen- miums yourself or your partnership can value or other money that can be paid,sation premiums for its partners, it gen- pay them and report the premium amounts assigned, pledged, or borrowed.erally can deduct them as guaranteed on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaran-
payments to partners. • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-teed payments to be included in your
penses incurred for services or items thatgross income. However, if the policy is inb. If an S corporation pays workers' com- would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-your name and you pay the premiumspensation premiums for its cept where Medicare is a secondary payeryourself, the partnership must reimbursemore-than-2% shareholder-employees, or the contract makes per diem or otheryou and report the premium amounts onit generally can deduct them, but must periodic payments without regard to ex-Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteedalso include them in the shareholder's penses.payments to be included in your gross in-wages.
come. Otherwise, the insurance plan will
Qualified long-term care services. Quali-not be considered to be established under7. Contributions to a state unemployment in- fied long-term care services are:your business.surance fund are deductible as taxes if
they are considered taxes under state law. • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-• For more-than-2% shareholders, the pol-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-icy can be either in the name of the S8. Overhead insurance that pays for business habilitative services, andcorporation or in the name of the share-overhead expenses you have during long
holder. You can either pay the premiumsperiods of disability caused by your injury • Maintenance or personal care services.
yourself or your S corporation can payor sickness. The services must be required by a chronically illthem and report the premium amounts on individual and prescribed by a licensed health9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov- Form W-2 as wages to be included in your care practitioner.ers vehicles used in your business for lia- gross income. However, if the policy is inbility, damages, and other losses. If you your name and you pay the premiums Chronically ill individual. A chronically illoperate a vehicle partly for personal use, yourself, the S corporation must reimburse individual is a person who has been certified asdeduct only the part of the insurance pre- you and report the premium amounts on one of the following.mium that applies to the business use of Form W-2 as wages to be included in your • An individual who has been unable, due tothe vehicle. If you use the standard mile- gross income. Otherwise, the insurance loss of functional capacity for at least 90age rate to figure your car expenses, you plan will not be considered to be estab- days, to perform at least two activities ofcannot deduct any car insurance premi- lished under your business. daily living without substantial assistanceums.
from another individual. Activities of daily10. Life insurance covering your officers and Partners and more-than-2% share- living are eating, toileting, transferringemployees if you are not directly or indi- holders may be able to amend prior (general mobility), bathing, dressing, andrectly a beneficiary under the contract. year returns to take any self-employed continence.
TIP
health insurance deductions allowed under the11. Business interruption insurance that pays • An individual who requires substantial su-rules explained above. Shareholders shouldfor lost profits if your business is shut down pervision to be protected from threats towrite ``Filed Pursuant to Notice 2008-1'' at thedue to a fire or other cause. health and safety due to severe cognitivetop of any amended return. impairment.Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29.
Self-Employed Health The certification must have been made by a
licensed health care practitioner within the previ-Qualified long-term care insurance. YouInsurance Deduction
ous 12 months.can include premiums paid on a qualified
You may be able to deduct premiums paid for long-term care insurance contract for you, your Benefits received. For information on ex-medical and dental insurance and qualified spouse, or your dependents when figuring your cluding benefits you receive from a long-termlong-term care insurance for you, your spouse, deduction. But, for each person covered, you care contract from gross income, see Publica-and your dependents if you are one of the follow- can include only the smaller of the following tion 525.ing. amounts.
Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-• A self-employed individual with a net profit 1. The amount paid for that person. tion for any month you were eligible to partici-reported on Schedule C (Form 1040), pate in any employer (including your spouse's)2. The amount shown below. Use the per-Profit or Loss From Business, Schedule subsidized health plan at any time during thatson's age at the end of the year.C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi- month. This rule is applied separately to plansness, or Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or that provide long-term care insurance and plansa. Age 40 or younger±$310Loss From Farming. that do not provide long-term care insurance.b. Age 41 to 50±$580• A partner with net earnings from However, any medical insurance payments not
self-employment reported on Schedule c. Age 51 to 60±$1,150 deductible on Form 1040, line 29, can be in-
K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of In- cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Ad. Age 61 to 70±$3,080come, Deductions, Credits, etc., box 14, (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, if you item-
e. Age 71 or older±$3,850code A. ize deductions.
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract the Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed
health insurance deduction from your medical Health Insurance Deduction
insurance when figuring medical expenses on Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-
tions. 1. Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse,Effect on self-employment tax. Do not sub-
and your dependents. Do not include payments for any monthtract the health insurance deduction when figur-
you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by youring net earnings for your self-employment tax.
or your spouse's employer or:
How to figure the deduction. Generally, you • Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that werecan use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc- nontaxable because you are a retired public safety officer,tions to figure your deduction. However, if any of • Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4,the following apply, you must use Worksheet
• Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to ªU.S.6-A in this chapter.
Treasury-HCTC,º or
• You had more than one source of income • Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown insubject to self-employment tax. box 1 of Form 1099-H.
Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
insurance. ..................................... . 1.come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract,Income Exclusion.
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following• You are using amounts paid for qualified amounts.long-term care insurance to figure the de- a) Total payments made for that person during the year.duction. b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of
If you are claiming the health coverage tax the year.
credit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverage  $310Ðif that person is age 40 or younger
Tax Credit, before you figure this deduction. $580Ðif age 41 to 50
$1,150Ðif age 51 to 60Health coverage tax credit. You may be
$3,080Ðif age 61 to 70able to take this credit only if you were an eligible
trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al- $3,850Ðif age 71 or older
ternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, or Pension Ben- Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to
efit Guaranty Corporation pension recipient. participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by
Use Form 8885 to figure the amount, if any, of your or your spouse's employer. If more than one person is
this credit. covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1 person. Then enter the total of those amounts .......... . 2.
of Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following. 3. Add the total of lines 1 and 2 ........................ . 3.
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the• Any amounts you included on Form 8885,
trade or business under which the insurance plan is established. Ifline 4.
the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 ........... . 4.• Any qualified health insurance premiums 5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040),you paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.º line 31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), line 3; Schedule F (Form
1040), line 36; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus• Any health coverage tax credit advance
any other income allocable to the profitable businesses. See thepayments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H,
Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do not include anyHealth Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad-
net losses shown on these schedules. .................. . 5.vance Payments.
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 .............................. . 6.
More than one health plan and business. 7. Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 6 ..... . 7.
If you have more than one health plan during the 8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 ........................... . 8.
year and each plan is established under a differ- 9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to
ent business, you must use separate work- the same trade or business in which the insurance plan is
sheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan's net established .................................... . 9.
earnings limit. Include the premium you paid 10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ........................... . 10.under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa- 11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an Srate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) corporation in which you are a more-than-2% shareholder and infrom that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a which the insurance plan is established ................. . 11.plan that provides long-term care insurance, the 12. Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to thetotal of the amounts entered for each person on amount entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Formline 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the 2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. above ........................................ . 12.
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ....... . 13.
14. Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller
of the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do notNondeductible include this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction
on Schedule A (Form 1040). ......................... . 14.Premiums
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from anyYou cannot deduct premiums on the following business, do not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable tokinds of insurance. that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 4b.
* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot
created. However, it does not include capital gain income.deduct amounts credited to a reserve set
up for self-insurance. This applies even if
you cannot get business insurance cover-
age for certain business risks. However,
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your actual losses may be deductible. See produced for your use other than in a business Dividends received. If you receive dividends
Publication 547. or an activity carried on for profit. from business insurance and you deducted the
premiums in prior years, at least part of the2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre- 1. Produce real property or tangible personal dividends generally are income. For more infor-miums for a policy that pays for lost earn- property. For this purpose, tangible per- mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (taxings due to sickness or disability. However, sonal property includes a film, sound re- benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can Isee the discussion on overhead insurance, cording, video tape, book, or similar Deduct?item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear- property.
lier.
2. Acquire property for resale.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities.
However, these rules do not apply to the follow-
a. For contracts issued before June 9, ing property.
1997, you cannot deduct the premiums
1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifon a life insurance policy covering you, 7.your average annual gross receipts arean employee, or any person with a fi-
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.nancial interest in your business if you
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of 2. Property you produce if you meet either of
the policy. You are included among the following conditions. Costs Youpossible beneficiaries of the policy if the
a. Your indirect costs of producing thepolicy owner is obligated to repay a
property are $200,000 or less.loan from you using the proceeds of the Can Deduct
policy. A person has a financial interest b. You use the cash method of accountingin your business if the person is an and do not account for inventories. or Capitalizeowner or part owner of the business or
has lent money to the business.
More information. For more information onb. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in What's Newyou generally cannot deduct the premi-
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-ums on any life insurance policy, en-
nal Revenue Code section 263A.dowment contract, or annuity contract if Environmental cleanup costs. The election
you are directly or indirectly a benefi- to deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs
ciary. The disallowance applies without has been extended to include costs paid or in-
regard to whom the policy covers. curred in 2008 and 2009. See  Environmental
Cleanup Costs.When To Deductc. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
ship, you take out an insurance policy Qualified disaster expenses. You can electPremiumson your own life and name your part- to deduct rather than capitalize any qualifiedners as beneficiaries to induce them to disaster expenses that you paid or incurred afterYou can usually deduct insurance premiums inretain their investments in the partner- 2007. See Qualified Disaster Expenses.the tax year to which they apply.ship, you are considered a beneficiary.
You cannot deduct the insurance premi- Cash method. If you use the cash method ofums. accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-
miums in the tax year you actually paid them, Introduction4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out even if you incurred them in an earlier year.a policy on your life or on the life of an- This chapter discusses costs you can elect toHowever, see Prepayment, later.other person with a financial interest in deduct or capitalize.
your business to get or protect a business You generally deduct a cost as a currentAccrual method. If you use an accrualloan, you cannot deduct the premiums as business expense by subtracting it from yourmethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-a business expense. Nor can you deduct income in either the year you incur it or the yearance premiums before the tax year in which youthe premiums as interest on business you pay it.incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannotloans or as an expense of financing loans. deduct insurance premiums before the tax year If you capitalize a cost, you may be able toIn the event of death, the proceeds of the in which you actually pay them (unless the ex- recover it over a period of years through periodicpolicy are generally not taxed as income ception for recurring items applies). For more deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-even if they are used to liquidate the debt. information about the accrual method of ac- ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to
counting, see chapter 1. For information about the basis of property to which it relates.
the exception for recurring items, see Publica- A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust
tion 538. makes the election to deduct or capitalize the
Capitalized Premiums costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualadvance, even if you pay them in advance. ThisUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you must partner, shareholder, or beneficiary electsrule applies to any expense paid far enough incapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect whether to deduct or capitalize explorationadvance to, in effect, create an asset with acosts for certain production or resale activities. costs.useful life extending substantially beyond theInclude these costs in the basis of property you You may be subject to the alternativeend of the current tax year.produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-Expenses such as insurance are generallying them as a current deduction. You recover the search and experimental, intangibleallocable to a period of time. You can deduct
CAUTION
!costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost drilling, exploration, development, circulation,insurance expenses for the year to which theyof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise and business organizational costs.are allocable.dispose of the property.
For more information on the alternative mini-Indirect costs include premiums for insur-
Example. In 2008, you signed a 3-year in- mum tax, see the instructions for one of theance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-
surance contract. Even though you paid the pre- following forms.ment, materials, property produced, or property
miums for 2008, 2009, and 2010 when youacquired for resale. • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐIn-signed the contract, you can only deduct the dividuals.Uniform capitalization rules. You may be premium for 2008 on your 2008 tax return. You
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you can deduct in 2009 and 2010 the premium allo- • Form 4626, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ
do any of the following, unless the property is cable to those years. Corporations.
Page 20 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 21 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .Topics
This chapter discusses: Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in the
experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all later
• Carrying charges business expense years.
• Research and experimental costs Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first• Intangible drilling costs
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. See
• Exploration costs Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
• Development costs
• Circulation costs of the due date of the return (excluding exten- Costs not included. Research and experi-
mental costs do not include expenses for any ofsions). Attach the statement to the amended• Environmental cleanup costs
the following activities.return and write ªFiled pursuant to section• Qualified disaster expenses 301.9100-2º on the statement. File the amended • Advertising or promotions.return at the same address you filed the original• Business start-up and organizational costs
• Consumer surveys.return.• Reforestation costs
• Efficiency surveys.• Retired asset removal costs
• Management studies.• Barrier removal costs
Research and • Quality control testing.• Film and television production costs
• Research in connection with literary, his-Experimental Costs torical, or similar projects.
Useful Items The costs of research and experimentation are • The acquisition of another's patent, model,You may want to see: generally capital expenses. However, you can production, or process.
elect to deduct these costs as a current businessPublication expense. Your election to deduct these costs is When and how to elect. You make the elec-binding for the year it is made and for all later❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of tion to deduct research and experimental costsyears unless you get IRS approval to make aAssets by deducting them on your tax return for the yearchange. in which you first pay or incur research and
Form (and Instructions) If you meet certain requirements, you may experimental costs. If you do not make the elec-
elect to defer and amortize research and experi- tion to deduct research and experimental costs❏ 3468 Investment Credit mental costs. For information on electing to de- in the first year in which you pay or incur the
fer and amortize these costs, see Research and❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credit costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year
Experimental Costs in chapter 8. only with approval from the IRS.
See chapter 12 for information about getting
publications and forms. Research credit. If you pay or incur qualifiedResearch and experimental costs defined.
research expenses, you may be able to take theResearch and experimental costs are reasona-
research credit. For more information about theble costs you incur in your trade or business for
research credit, see the instructions to Formactivities intended to provide information that
6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities.would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-Carrying Charges
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty
Carrying charges include the taxes and interest exists if the information available to you does not
you pay to carry or develop real property or to establish how to develop or improve a product or
carry, transport, or install personal property. Intangible the appropriate design of a product. Whether
Certain carrying charges must be capitalized costs qualify as research and experimental
Drilling Costsunder the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor- costs depends on the nature of the activity to
mation on capitalization of interest, see chapter which the costs relate rather than on the nature
The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying charges of the product or improvement being developed
wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. Younot subject to the uniform capitalization rules, or the level of technological advancement.
can usually recover them through depreciationbut only if they are otherwise deductible. The costs of obtaining a patent, including or depletion. However, you can elect to deductYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges attorneys' fees paid or incurred in making and intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi-separately for each project you have and for perfecting a patent application, are research and ness expense. These are certain drilling andeach type of carrying charge. For unimproved experimental costs. However, costs paid or in- development costs for wells in the United Statesand unproductive real property, your election is curred to obtain another's patent are not re- in which you hold an operating or working inter-good for only 1 year. You must decide whether search and experimental costs. est. You can deduct only costs for drilling orto capitalize carrying charges each year the
preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orProduct. The term ªproductº includes any ofproperty remains unimproved and unproductive.
geothermal steam or hot water.the following items.For other real property, your election to capital-
You can elect to deduct only the costs ofize carrying charges remains in effect until con- • Formula. items with no salvage value. These includestruction or development is completed. For
wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-• Invention.personal property, your election is effective until
lated to drilling wells and preparing them forthe date you install or first use it, whichever is • Patent. production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-later.
ment work done by contractors under any form• Pilot model.
of contract is also an IDC. However, seeHow to make the election. To make the elec- • Process. Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state-
• Technique. ized, later.ment saying which charges you elect to
capitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for You can also elect to deduct the cost of• Property similar to the items listed above.the year the election is to be effective. However, drilling exploratory bore holes to determine the
It also includes products used by you in yourif you timely filed your return for the year without location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon
trade or business or held for sale, lease, ormaking the election, you can still make the elec- deposits if the shaft is capable of conducting
license.tion by filing an amended return within 6 months hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
does not matter whether there is any intent to to deduct domestic exploration costs paid or You also must recapture deducted explora-
produce hydrocarbons. incurred before the beginning of the develop- tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from
If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas, mine property before it reaches the producing
current business expense, you can elect to de- stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction forand geothermal wells).
duct them over the 60-month period beginning the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and
How to make the election. You elect to de-with the month they were paid or incurred. any later tax years, until the depletion you would
duct exploration costs by taking the deduction have deducted equals the exploration costs youAmounts paid to contractor that must be on your income tax return, or on an amended deducted.capitalized.  Amounts paid to a contractor income tax return, for the first tax year for which Generally, if you dispose of the mine beforemust be capitalized if they are either: you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred you have fully recaptured the exploration costs
during the tax year. Your return must adequately• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of you deducted, recapture the balance by treating
describe and identify each property or mine, anddepreciable property, or all or part of your gain as ordinary income.
clearly state how much is being deducted for Under these circumstances, you generally• Amounts paid only out of production or each one. The election applies to the tax year treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it isproceeds from production if these you make this election and all later tax years. less than your adjusted exploration costs withamounts are depletable income to the re-
respect to the mine. If your gain is more thanPartnerships. Each partner, not the part-cipient.
your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-nership, elects whether to capitalize or to deduct
nary income only a part of your gain, up to thethat partner's share of exploration costs.How to make the election.  You elect to de- amount of your adjusted exploration costs.
duct IDCs as a current business expense by Reduced corporate deductions for explora-taking the deduction on your income tax return tion costs. A corporation (other than an S Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incurfor the first tax year you have eligible costs. No corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- exploration costs for a mine or other naturalformal statement is required. If you file Schedule tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- deposit located outside the United States, youC (Form 1040), enter these costs under ªOther maining 30% of costs and amortize them over cannot deduct all the costs in the current year.expenses.º the 60-month period starting with the month the You can elect to include the costs (other than forFor oil and gas wells, your election is binding exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjustedfor the year it is made and for all later years. For ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize basis of the mineral property to figure cost de-geothermal wells, your election can be revoked mining exploration costs over a 10-year period. pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chapterby the filing of an amended return on which you 9.) If you do not make this election, you mustFor more information on this method of amorti-do not take the deduction. You can file the deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-zation, see Internal Revenue Code sectionamended return for the year up to the normal ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur59(e).time of expiration for filing a claim for credit or them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannotrefund, generally, within 3 years after the date ment costs.be added to its basis in the property to figureyou filed the original return or within 2 years after cost depletion. However, the amount amortizedthe date you paid the tax, whichever is later. is treated as additional depreciation and is sub-
ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.
If you capitalize the drilling and development sition of the property. See Section 1250 Development Costs
costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv- Property under Depreciation Recapture in chap-
ice during the tax year, you may be able to claim ter 3 of Publication 544. You can deduct costs paid or incurred during the
a business energy credit. See the instructions tax year for developing a mine or any otherThese rules also apply to the deduction of
for Form 3468 for more information. natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)development costs by corporations. See Devel-
located in the United States. These costs mustopment Costs, later.Nonproductive well. If you capitalize your be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores orIDCs, you have another option if the well is Recapture of exploration expenses. When minerals in commercially marketable quantities.nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the your mine reaches the producing stage, you Development costs include those incurred fornonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You must recapture any exploration costs you you by a contractor. Also, development costsmust indicate and clearly state your election on elected to deduct. Use either of the following include depreciation on improvements used inyour tax return for the year the well is completed. methods. the development of ores or minerals. They doOnce made, the election for oil and gas wells is not include costs for the acquisition or improve-binding for all later years. You can revoke your ment of depreciable property.election for a geothermal well by filing an Method 1ÐInclude the deducted costs in Instead of deducting development costs inamended return that does not claim the loss. gross income for the tax year the mine the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treatreaches the producing stage. Your electionCosts incurred outside the United States. them as deferred expenses and deduct themmust be clearly indicated on the return. In-You cannot deduct as a current business ex- ratably as the units of produced ores or mineralscrease your adjusted basis in the mine bypense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, benefited by the expenses are sold. This elec-the amount included in income. Generally,gas, or geothermal well located outside the tion applies each tax year to expenses paid oryou must elect this recapture method by theUnited States. However, you can elect to include incurred in that year. Once made, the election isdue date (including extensions) of your re-the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to binding for the year and cannot be revoked forturn. However, if you timely filed your returnfigure depletion or depreciation. If you do not any reason.for the year without making the election,make this election, you can deduct the costs you can still make the election by filing anover the 10-year period beginning with the tax How to make the election. The election toamended return within 6 months of the dueyear in which you paid or incurred them. These deduct development costs ratably as the ores ordate of the return (excluding extensions).rules do not apply to a nonproductive well. minerals are sold must be made for each mineMake the election on your amended return or other natural deposit by a clear indication onand write ªFiled pursuant to section your return or by a statement filed with the IRS301.9100-2º on the form where you are in- office where you file your return. Generally, youcluding the income. File the amended re- must make the election by the due date of theExploration Costs turn at the same address you filed the return (including extensions). However, if youoriginal return. timely filed your return for the year without mak-The costs of determining the existence, location,
Method 2ÐDo not claim any depletion de- ing the election, you can still make the electionextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are
duction for the tax year the mine reaches by filing an amended return within 6 months ofordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead
the producing stage and any later tax years the due date of the return (excluding exten-to the development of a mine. You recover these
until the depletion you would have deducted sions). Clearly indicate the election on yourcosts through depletion as the mineral is re-
equals the exploration costs you deducted. amended return and write ªFiled pursuant tomoved from the ground. However, you can elect
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
section 301.9100-2.º File the amended return at For costs paid or incurred in a Midwestern ªSection 198 Electionº on the line next to the
the same address you filed the original return. disaster area on or after the applicable disaster amount for environmental cleanup costs.
date, treat a site as a qualified contaminated site More than one environmental cleanupForeign development costs. The rules dis- only if the release (or threat of release) or dispo- cost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur morecussed earlier for foreign exploration costs apply sal of a hazardous substance at the site was than one environmental cleanup cost, you canto foreign development costs. caused by a disaster in a Midwestern disaster elect to deduct one or more of such expendi-area described in Table 1 (located in PublicationReduced corporate deductions for develop- tures for that year. You can elect to deduct one4492-B). See Publication 4492-B, Informationment costs. The rules discussed earlier for expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex-for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern Disas-reduced corporate deductions for exploration penditure (whether or not they are of the sameter Area, for Table 1 and the definition of applica-costs also apply to corporate deductions for de- type or paid or incurred with respect to the sameble date and Midwestern disaster area.velopment costs. qualified contaminated site). An election to de-
duct an expenditure for one year has no effectHazardous substance. Hazardous sub-
on other years. You must make a separate elec-stances are defined in section 101(14) of the
tion for each year in which you intend to deductComprehensive Environmental Response,
environmental cleanup costs.Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 andCirculation Costs
certain substances are designated as hazard- Recapture. This deduction may have to beA publisher can deduct as a current business ous in section 102 of the Act. Also, petroleum recaptured as ordinary income under sectionexpense the costs of establishing, maintaining, products are treated as hazardous substances. 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of theor increasing the circulation of a newspaper, However, substances are not hazardous if a property that would have received an addition tomagazine, or other periodical. For example, a removal or remedial action is prohibited under basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra sections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act. diture. For more information on recapturing theemployees for a limited time to get new sub- Qualified contaminated site. A qualified deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationscriptions through telephone calls. Circulation contaminated site is any area that meets both of under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub-costs are deductible even if they normally would the following requirements. lication 544.be capitalized.
This rule does not apply to the following More information. For more information1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,
costs that must be capitalized. about the environmental cleanup cost deduc-for the production of income, or as inven-
tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198.tory.• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-
erty. 2. There has been a release, threat of re-
lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-• The acquisition of circulation through the
stance at or on the site.purchase of any part of the business of Qualified Disasteranother publisher of a newspaper, maga- You must get a statement from the designated
zine, or other periodical, including the state environmental agency that the site meets Expenses
purchase of another publisher's list of sub- requirement (2).
scribers. A site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for, You can elect to deduct rather than capitalize
the national priorities list under section any qualified disaster expenses that you paid or
105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ- incurred after 2007.Other treatment of circulation costs. If you
mental Response, Compensation, and Liabilitydo not want to deduct circulation costs as a Qualified disaster expense. A qualified dis-Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the nationalcurrent business expense, you can elect one of aster expense is an expenditure that:priorities list, contact the U.S. Environmentalthe following ways to recover these costs.
Protection Agency. 1. Is paid or incurred in connection with a• Capitalize all circulation costs that are
trade or business or with business-relatedExpenditures for depreciable property.properly chargeable to a capital account.
property,You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-
• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year ciable property used in connection with the 2. Is otherwise capitalized, andperiod beginning with the tax year they abatement or control of hazardous substances
were paid or incurred. 3. Is for one of the following purposes.at a qualified contaminated site. However, the
part of the depreciation for such property that is a. The abatement or control of hazardousotherwise allocated to the qualified contami-How to make the election. You elect to capi- substances that were released becausenated site shall be treated as an environmentaltalize circulation costs by attaching a statement of a federally declared disaster occur-cleanup cost.to your return for the first tax year the election ring before January 1, 2010,applies. Your election is binding for the year it is
When and how to elect. You elect to deduct b. The removal of debris from, or the dem-made and for all later years, unless you get IRS
environmental cleanup costs by taking the de- olition of structures on, real propertyapproval to revoke it.
duction on the income tax return (filed by the due that is business-related property dam-
date including extensions) for the tax year in aged or destroyed as a result of a fed-
which the costs are paid or incurred. The costs erally declared disaster occurring
are deducted differently depending on the type before such date, orEnvironmental Cleanup of business entity involved.
c. The repair of business-related propertyCosts Individuals. Deduct the environmental damaged as a result of a federally de-
cleanup costs on the ªOther Expensesº line of clared disaster occurring before suchEnvironmental cleanup costs are generally capi- Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule date.tal expenditures. However, you can elect to de- requires you to separately identify each expense
duct these costs as a current business expense included in ªOther Expensesº write ªSection 198
if certain requirements (discussed later) are met. Federally declared disaster. A federally de-Electionº on the line next to the environmental
This special tax treatment is generally available clared disaster is a disaster that occurred in ancleanup costs.
for environmental cleanup costs you pay or incur area declared by the President to be eligible forAll other entities. All other taxpayers (in-before January 1, 2010 (2011 for certain Mid- federal assistance under the Robert T. Staffordcluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)western disaster areas). Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.deduct the environmental cleanup costs on the
Environmental cleanup costs. Environmen- ªOther Deductionsº line of the appropriate fed- Business-related property. Busi-
tal cleanup costs are generally costs you pay or eral income tax return. On a schedule attached ness-related property is property you held (a) for
incur to abate or control hazardous substances to the return that separately identifies each ex- use in a trade or business or for the production
at a qualified contaminated site. pense included in ªOther Deductionsº write of income or (b) that is stock in trade or other
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property included in inventory or held mainly for quantities. See chapter 8 for more information
sale to customers. on qualifying reforestation costs and qualified Retired Asset Removal
timber property.Recapture. If you made the election to deduct CostsIf you elect to deduct qualified reforestationqualified disaster expenses, the deduction may
costs, create and maintain separate timber ac-have to be recaptured as ordinary income under If you retire and remove a depreciable asset insection 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose counts for each qualified timber property and connection with the installation or production ofof the property that would have received an include all reforestation costs and the dates a replacement asset, you can deduct the costsaddition to basis had you not made the election. each was applied. Do not include this qualified of removing the retired asset. However, if youFor more information on recapturing the deduc- timber property in any account (for example, replace a component (part) of a depreciabletion, see  Depreciation and amortization  under asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-depletion block) for which depletion is allowed.Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Publication placement is an improvement and deduct the544. costs if the replacement is a repair.How to make the election. You elect to de-More information. For more information duct qualifying reforestation costs by claimingabout expensing of qualified disaster expenses, the deduction on your timely filed income taxsee Internal Revenue Code section 198A.
return (including extensions) for the tax year the Barrier Removal Costs
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim-
ber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required, The cost of an improvement to a business asset
complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is not is normally a capital expense. However, you canBusiness Start-Up and
elect to deduct the costs of making a facility orrequired, attach a statement containing the fol-
public transportation vehicle more accessible toOrganizational Costs lowing information for each qualified timber
and usable by those who are disabled or elderly.property for which an election is being made.
You must own or lease the facility or vehicle forBusiness start-up and organizational costs are
• The unique stand identification numbers. use in connection with your trade or business.generally capital expenditures. However, you
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business • The total number of acres reforested dur-
tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, orstart-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid ing the tax year. similar real or personal property. A public trans-or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000
• The nature of the reforestation treatments. portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus ordeduction is reduced by the amount your total
railroad car, that provides transportation servicestart-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000. • The total amounts of qualified reforesta- to the public (including service for your custom-Any remaining costs must be amortized. For tion expenditures eligible to be amortized ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-information about amortizing start-up and orga- or deducted. ing transportation services).nizational costs, see chapter 8.
Start-up costs include any amounts paid or You cannot deduct any costs that you paid or However, if you timely filed your return for theincurred in connection with creating an active incurred to completely renovate or build a facilityyear without making the election, you can stilltrade or business or investigating the creation or or public transportation vehicle or to replace
make the election by filing an amended returnacquisition of an active trade or business. Orga- depreciable property in the normal course of
within 6 months of the due date of the returnnizational costs include the costs of creating a business.
(excluding extensions). Clearly indicate thecorporation. For more information on start-up
Deduction limit. The most you can deduct aselection on your amended return and write ªFiledand organizational costs, see chapter 8.
a cost of removing barriers to the disabled andpursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File theHow to make the election.  You elect to de- the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,amended return at the same address you filedduct the start-up or organizational costs by you can add any costs over this limit to the basisthe original return. The election applies whenclaiming the deduction on the income tax return of the property and depreciate these excesscomputing taxable income for the current tax(filed by the due date including extensions) for costs.year and all subsequent years.the tax year in which the active trade or business
begins. However, if you timely filed your return If you elected to deduct qualified timber costs Partners and partnerships. The $15,000
for the year without making the election, you can limit applies to a partnership and also to eachon a federal income tax return filed before June
still make the election by filing an amended partner in the partnership. A partner can allocate15, 2006, but did not include the above informa-return within 6 months of the due date of the the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part-tion, complete Part IV of Form T or the requiredreturn (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate ner's individually incurred costs and the part-statement and attach it to the first federal incomethe election on your amended return and write ner's distributive share of partnership costs. Iftax return you file after June 14, 2006. If youªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File the the partner cannot deduct the entire share ofhave not elected to deduct qualified timber costsamended return at the same address you filed partnership costs, the partnership can add anyin a prior year you may be able to do so by filingthe original return. The election applies when costs not deducted to the basis of the improved
Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-computing taxable income for the current tax property.
year and all subsequent years. ing Method. For more information, see Notice A partnership must be able to show that any
2006-47 on page 892 of Internal Revenue Bulle- amount added to basis was not deducted by the
partner and that it was over a partner's $15,000tin 2006-20. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20
limit (as determined by the partner). If the part-is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20.
Reforestation Costs nership cannot show this, it is presumed that thepdf.
partner was able to deduct the distributive shareFor additional information on reforestationReforestation costs are generally capital expen- of the partnership's costs in full.costs, see chapter 8.ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to
$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0 Example. John Duke's distributive share of
for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paid ABC partnership's deductible expenses for theRecapture. This deduction may have to be
or incurred after October 22, 2004, for each removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.recaptured as ordinary income under section
qualified timber property. The remaining costs John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his sole1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of thecan be amortized over an 84-month period. For proprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 ofproperty that would have received an addition toinformation about amortizing reforestation them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 ofbasis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-costs, see chapter 8. the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC's ex-
diture. For more information on recapturing the Qualifying reforestation costs are the direct penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his
deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationcosts of planting or seeding for forestation or own expenses to the basis of the property used
under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub-reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop- in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John
lication 544.erty that contains trees in significant commercial could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 ± $8,000) of
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
his share of the partnership's expenses because vehicle by a major group of persons who
of how John applied the limit, ABC can add have a disability or are elderly. Introduction$6,000 to the basis of its property.
Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period ofHow to make the election. If you elect toQualification standards. You can deduct time. It is similar to the straight line method ofdeduct your costs for removing barriers to theyour costs as a current expense only if the bar- depreciation.disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onrier removal meets the guidelines and require- your income tax return (partnership return for The various amortizable costs covered inments issued by the Architectural and partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were this chapter are included in the list below. How-Transportation Barriers Compliance Board paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a ever, this chapter does not discuss amortizationunder the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) separate item. The election applies to all the of bond premium. For information on that topic,of 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa- qualifying costs you have during the year, up to see chapter 3 of Publication 550.bilities Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm. the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you
 The following is a list of some architectural must maintain adequate records to support your Topics
barrier removal costs that can be deducted. deduction. This chapter discusses:
For your election to be valid, you generally• Ground and floor surfaces.
must file your return by its due date, including • Deducting amortization• Walks. extensions. However, if you timely filed your
• Amortizing costs of starting a businessreturn for the year without making the election,• Parking lots.
you can still make the election by filing an • Amortizing costs of getting a lease• Ramps. amended return within 6 months of the due date
• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangiblesof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-• Entrances.
cate the election on your amended return and • Amortizing reforestation costs• Doors and doorways. write ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File
• Amortizing costs of geological and geo-the amended return at the same address you• Stairs. physical costsfiled the original return. Your election is irrevoca-
• Floors. ble after the due date, including extensions, of • Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-
your return.• Toilet rooms. ties
• Water fountains. • Amortizing costs of research and experi-
Disabled access credit. If you make your mentation• Telephones. business accessible to persons with disabilities
• Amortizing costs of certain tax preferencesand your business is an eligible small business,• Elevators.
you may be able to claim the disabled access
• Controls. credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must Useful Items
reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by• Signage. You may want to see:the amount of the credit.• Alarms. For more information about the disabled ac- Publicationcess credit, see Form 8826.• Protruding objects.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of• Symbols of accessibility. Assets
You can find the ADA guidelines and require- ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesments for architectural barrier removal at www. Film and Television
usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
Production CostsThe following is a list of some deductible Form (and Instructions)transportation barrier removal costs. Film and television production costs are gener- ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization• Rail facilities. ally capital expenses. However, you can elect to
deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc- ❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ• Buses. tions that begin after October 22, 2004. For Corporations• Rapid and light rail vehicles. more information, see section 181 of the Internal ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐRevenue Code and Temporary RegulationsYou can find the guidelines and requirements for Individualssections 1.181-1T through 1.181-6T.transportation barrier removal at www.fta.dot.
gov. See chapter 12 for information about getting
publications and forms. Also, you can access the ADA website at
www.ada.gov for additional information.
Other barrier removals. To be deductible,
expenses of removing any barrier not covered How To Deduct8.by the above standards must meet all three of
the following tests. Amortization
1. The removed barrier must be a substantial
To deduct amortization that begins during thebarrier to access or use of a facility or Amortization
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562public transportation vehicle by persons
and attach it to your income tax return.who have a disability or are elderly.
To report amortization from previous years,2. The removed barrier must have been a What's New in addition to amortization that begins in thebarrier for at least one major group of per- current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa-sons who have a disability or are elderly Election to amortize business start-up and rately. For example, in 2007 you began to amor-(such as people who are blind, deaf, or organizational costs. You are no longer re- tize a lease. In 2008, you began to amortize awheelchair users). quired to attach a statement to your tax return to second lease. Report amortization from the new
3. The barrier must be removed without cre- elect to amortize start-up or organizational costs lease on line 42 of your 2008 Form 4562. Report
ating any new barrier that significantly im- paid or incurred after September 8, 2008. See amortization from the 2007 lease on line 43 of
pairs access to or use of the facility or Starting a Business, later. your 2008 Form 4562.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 25

Page 26 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you do not have any new amortizable ex- existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the Costs of Organizing a
penses for the current year, you are not required production of income in anticipation of the activ- Corporationto complete Form 4562 (unless you are claiming ity becoming an active trade or business.
depreciation). Report the current year's deduc- Amounts paid to organize a corporation are theQualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz-tion for amortization that began in a prior year direct costs of creating the corporation.able if it meets both the following tests.directly on the ªOther deductionº or ªOther ex-
pense lineº of your return. Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza-• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or
tional cost it must be:incurred it to operate an existing active
trade or business (in the same field as the • For the creation of the corporation,one you entered into).
Starting a Business • Chargeable to a capital account,• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day
• Amortized over the life of the corporation ifyour active trade or business begins.When you start a business, treat all eligible costs the corporation had a fixed life, andyou incur before you begin operating the busi- Start-up costs include amounts paid for theness as capital expenditures which are part of • Incurred before the end of the first tax yearfollowing:your basis in the business. Generally, you re- in which the corporation is in business.
cover costs for particular assets through depre- • An analysis or survey of potential markets,
ciation deductions. However, you generally A corporation using the cash method of ac-products, labor supply, transportation facil-
cannot recover other costs until you sell the counting can amortize organizational costs in-ities, etc.
business or otherwise go out of business. See curred within the first tax year, even if it does not• Advertisements for the opening of theCapital Expenses in chapter 1 for a discussion pay them in that year.business.on how to treat these costs if you do not go into Examples of organizational costs include:
business. • Salaries and wages for employees who • The cost of temporary directors.For costs paid or incurred after September 8, are being trained and their instructors.
2008, you can deduct a limited amount of • The cost of organizational meetings.• Travel and other necessary costs for se-start-up and organizational costs. The costs that curing prospective distributors, suppliers, • State incorporation fees.are not deducted currently can be amortized or customers.ratably over a 180-month period. The amortiza- • The cost of legal services.
tion period starts with the month you begin oper- • Salaries and fees for executives and con-
ating your active trade or business. You are not sultants, or for similar professional serv- Nonqualifying costs. The following items arerequired to attach a statement to make this elec- ices. capital expenses that cannot be amortized:tion. Once made, the election is irrevocable. See
Temporary Regulations sections 1.195-1T, • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do not1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T. curities, such as commissions, profes-include deductible interest, taxes, or researchFor costs paid after October 22, 2004, and sional fees, and printing costs.and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-before September 9, 2008, you can elect to perimental Costs, later. • Costs associated with the transfer of as-deduct a limited amount of business start-up
sets to the corporation.and organizational costs in the year your active Purchasing an active trade or business.
trade or business begins. Any costs not de- Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-
ducted can be amortized ratably over a tive trade or business include only investigative Costs of Organizing180-month period, beginning with the month you costs incurred in the course of a general search a Partnershipbegin business. If the election is made, you must for or preliminary investigation of the business.
attach any statement required by Regulations These are costs that help you decide whether to The costs to organize a partnership are thesections 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and 1.709-1(c). purchase a business. Costs you incur in an direct costs of creating the partnership.However, you can apply the provisions of Tem- attempt to purchase a specific business are cap-
porary Regulations sections 1.195-1T, ital expenses that you cannot amortize. Qualifying costs. You can amortize an orga-1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T to all business start-up nizational cost only if it meets all the followingand organizational costs paid or incurred after Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac- tests.October 22, 2004, provided the period of limita- counting firm and a law firm to assist you in the
• It is for the creation of the partnership andtions on assessment has not expired for the year potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researched
not for starting or operating the partner-of the election. Otherwise the provisions under XYZ's industry and analyzed the financial pro-
Regulations section 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and ship trade or business.jections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firm
1.709-1(c) will apply. prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ, • It is chargeable to a capital account.For costs paid or incurred before October 23, Inc. The letter stated that a binding commitment
• It could be amortized over the life of the2004, you can elect to amortize business would result only after a purchase agreement
start-up and organization costs over an amorti- partnership if the partnership had a fixedwas signed. The law firm and accounting firm
zation period of 60 months or more. See How To life.continued to provide services including a review
Make the Election later. of XYZ's books and records and the preparation • It is incurred by the due date of the part-The cost must qualify as one of the following. of a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, you nership return (excluding extensions) for
signed a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.• A business start-up cost. the first tax year in which the partnership
All amounts paid or incurred to investigate is in business. However, if the partnership• An organizational cost for a corporation. the business before October 22nd are amortiz- uses the cash method of accounting and
able investigative costs. Amounts paid on or• An organizational cost for a partnership. pays the cost after the end of its first tax
after that date relate to the attempt to purchase year, see Cash method partnership under
the business and therefore must be capitalized. How To Amortize, later.
Business Start-Up Costs • It is for a type of item normally expected toDisposition of business. If you completely
benefit the partnership throughout its en-Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for: dispose of your business before the end of the
tire life.(a) creating an active trade or business; or (b) amortization period, you can deduct any remain-
investigating the creation or acquisition of an ing deferred start-up costs. However, you can
Organizational costs include the followingactive trade or business. Start-up costs include deduct these deferred start-up costs only to the
fees.amounts paid or incurred in connection with an extent they qualify as a loss from a business.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Legal fees for services incident to the or- Generally, you must file the return by the due Partnerships. The statement prepared for
date (including any extensions). However, if you a cash basis partnership must also indicate theganization of the partnership, such as ne-
timely filed your return for the year without mak- amount paid before the end of the year for eachgotiation and preparation of the
ing the election, you can still make the election cost.partnership agreement.
by filing an amended return within 6 months of You do not need to separately list any part-• Accounting fees for services incident to the due date of the return (excluding exten- nership organizational cost that is less than $10.the organization of the partnership. sions). For more information, see the instruc- Instead, you can list the total amount of these
tions for Part VI of Form 4562.• Filing fees. costs with the dates the first and last costs were
Once you make the election to amortize incurred.
start-up or organizational costs, you cannot re- After a partnership makes the election toNonqualifying costs. The following costs voke it. amortize organizational costs, it can later file ancannot be amortized. If your business is organized as a corpora- amended return to include additional organiza-tion or partnership, only the corporation or part-• The cost of acquiring assets for the part- tional costs not included in the partnership'snership can elect to amortize its start-up ornership or transferring assets to the part- original return and statement. organizational costs. A shareholder or partnernership.
cannot make this election. You, as a share-• The cost of admitting or removing part- holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs youners, other than at the time the partnership incur in setting up your corporation or partner-
is first organized. Getting a Leaseship. Only the corporation or partnership can
amortize these costs.• The cost of making a contract concerning If you get a lease for business property, youHowever, you, as an individual, can elect tothe operation of the partnership trade or recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofamortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-business including a contract between a the lease. The term of the lease for amortizationest in an existing partnership. These costs qual-partner and the partnership. purposes generally includes all renewal optionsify as business start-up costs if you acquire the
(and any other period for which you and the• The costs for issuing and marketing inter- partnership interest.
lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-ests in the partnership such as brokerage,
Start-up costs election statement. If you newed). However, renewal periods are not in-registration, and legal fees and printing
elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach a cluded if 75% or more of the cost of acquiring thecosts. These ªsyndication feesº are capital
separate statement that contains the following lease is for the term of the lease remaining onexpenses that cannot be depreciated or information. the acquisition date (not including any period foramortized.
which you may choose to renew, extend, or• A description of the business to which the continue the lease).start-up costs relate.Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is
liquidated before the end of the amortization • A description of each start-up cost in- How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Partperiod, the unamortized amount of qualifying curred. VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza-organizational costs can be deducted in the tion that begins during the current year, or on the• The month your active business began (orpartnership's final tax year. However, these appropriate line of your tax return if you are notwas acquired).costs can be deducted only to the extent they otherwise required to file Form 4562.qualify as a loss from a business. • The number of months in your amortiza- For more information on the costs of gettingtion period (which is generally 180 a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in months).How To Amortize chapter 3.
Filing the statement early. You can electDeduct start-up and organizational costs in
to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-equal amounts over the applicable amortization
ment with a return for any tax year before theperiod (discussed earlier). You can choose an
Section 197 Intangiblesyear your active business begins. If you file theamortization period for start-up costs that is dif-
statement early, the election becomes effectiveferent from the period you choose for organiza- Generally, you may amortize the capitalizedin the month of the tax year your active businesstional costs, as long as both are not less than the costs of ªsection 197 intangiblesº (defined later)begins.applicable amortization period. Once you ratably over a 15-year period. You must amor-choose an amortization period, you cannot Revised statement. You can file a revised tize these costs if you hold the section 197change it. statement to include any start-up costs not in- intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-To figure your deduction, divide your total cluded in your original statement. However, you ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-start-up or organizational costs by the months in cannot include on the revised statement any tion of income.the amortization period. The result is the amount cost you previously treated on your return as a
You may not be able to amortize sec-you can deduct for each month. cost other than a start-up cost. You can file the
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-revised statement with a return filed after the
action that did not result in a significantreturn on which you elected to amortize your
CAUTION
!Cash method partnership. A partnership us-
change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningstart-up costs.ing the cash method of accounting can deduct
Rules, later.an organizational cost only if it has been paid by Organizational costs election statement. If Your amortization deduction each year is thethe end of the tax year. However, any cost the you elect to amortize your corporation's or part- applicable part of the intangible's adjusted basispartnership could have deducted as an organi- nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa- (for purposes of determining gain), figured byzational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been rate statement that contains the following amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of information. The 15-year period begins with the later of:payment.
• A description of each cost. • The month the intangible is acquired, or
• The amount of each cost. • The month the trade or business or activityHow To Make the Election
engaged in for the production of income• The date each cost was incurred.
To elect to amortize start-up or organizational begins.• The month your corporation or partnershipcosts, you must complete and attach Form 4562 You cannot deduct amortization for the monthbegan active business (or acquired theand an accompanying statement (explained you dispose of the intangible.business).later) to your return for the first tax year you are
in business. If you have both start-up and orga- If you pay or incur an amount that increases• The number of months in your amortiza-
the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-nizational costs, attach a separate statement to tion period (which is generally 180
ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize ityour return for each type of cost. months).
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
over the remainder of the 15-year period begin- Going concern value. This is the additional • A favorable relationship with distributors
ning with the month the basis increase occurs. value of a trade or business that attaches to (such as favorable shelf or display space
property because the property is an integral part at a retail outlet).You are not allowed any other depreciation
of an ongoing business activity. It includes valueor amortization deduction for an amortizable • A favorable credit rating.based on the ability of a business to continue tosection 197 intangible.
• A favorable supply contract.function and generate income even though
there is a change in ownership (but does notTax-exempt use property subject to a lease.
include any other section 197 intangible). It alsoThe amortization period for any section 197 in- Government-granted license, permit, etc.includes value based on the immediate use ortangible leased under a lease agreement en- This is any right granted by a governmental unitavailability of an acquired trade or business,tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exempt or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-such as the use of earnings during any period inorganization, governmental unit, or foreign per- tal unit. For example, you must amortize thewhich the business would not otherwise beson or entity (other than a partnership), shall not capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuingavailable or operational.be less than 125 percent of the lease term. or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-
lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-Workforce in place, etc. This includes theCost attributable to other property. The ing license.composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to perience, education, or training). It also includes Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-any amount that is included in determining the the terms and conditions of employment, tangibles include a covenant not to compete (orcost of property that is not a section 197 intangi- whether contractual or otherwise, and any other similar arrangement) entered into in connectionble. For example, if the cost of computer value placed on employees or any of their attrib- with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orsoftware is not separately stated from the cost of utes. business, or a substantial portion of a trade orhardware or other tangible property and you For example, you must amortize the part of business. An interest in a trade or businessconsistently treat it as part of the cost of the the purchase price of a business that is for the includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-hardware or other tangible property, these rules existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you ration engaged in a trade or business.do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac- must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing An arrangement that requires the formerquiring real property held for the production of employment contract or relationship with em- owner to perform services (or to provide prop-rental income is considered the cost of goodwill, ployees or consultants. erty or the use of property) is not similar to agoing concern value, or any other section 197
Business books and records, etc. This in- covenant not to compete to the extent theintangible.
cludes the intangible value of technical manuals, amount paid under the arrangement represents
training manuals or programs, data files, and reasonable compensation for those services orSection 197 accounting or inventory control systems. It also for that property or its use.Intangibles Defined includes the cost of customer lists, subscription
Franchise, trademark, or trade name. Alists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,The following assets are section 197 intangibles franchise, trademark, or trade name is a sectionand lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, andand must be amortized over 180 months: 197 intangible. You must amortize its purchasetelevision advertisers.
or renewal costs, other than certain contingent1. Goodwill; Patents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack- payments that you can deduct currently. For
age design, computer software, and any interest2. Going concern value; information on currently deductible contingent
in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or payments, see chapter 11.3. Workforce in place; other similar property, except as discussed later
Professional sports franchise. Aunder Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-4. Business books and records, operating franchise engaged in professional sports andtangibles.systems, or any other information base, any intangible assets acquired in connectionincluding lists or other information concern- Customer-based intangible. This is the com- with acquiring the franchise (including playering current or prospective customers; position of market, market share, and any other contracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz-
value resulting from the future provision of5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de- able over a 15-year period.
goods or services because of relationships withsign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, acustomers in the ordinary course of business.item;
section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-For example, you must amortize the part of the6. A customer-based intangible; tangibles include any right under a license, con-purchase price of a business that is for the
tract, or other arrangement providing for the useexistence of the following intangibles.7. A supplier-based intangible;
of any section 197 intangible. It also includes• A customer base.8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7); any term interest in any section 197 intangible,
whether the interest is outright or in trust.• A circulation base.9. A license, permit, or other right granted by
a governmental unit or agency (including • An undeveloped market or market growth.issuances and renewals); Assets That Are Not• Insurance in force. Section 197 Intangibles10. A covenant not to compete entered into in
• A mortgage servicing contract.connection with the acquisition of an inter- The following assets are not section 197 in-est in a trade or business; and • An investment management contract. tangibles.
11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name; • Any other relationship with customers in- 1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership,volving the future provision of goods or12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest trust, or estate.services.in, any item in this list.
2. Any interest under an existing futures con-
Accounts receivable or other similar rights to tract, foreign currency contract, notionalYou cannot amortize any of the in-
income for goods or services provided to cus- principal contract, interest rate swap, ortangibles listed in items (1) through (8)
tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi- similar financial contract.that you created rather than acquired
CAUTION
!
ness are not section 197 intangibles.unless you created them in acquiring assets that 3. Any interest in land.make up a trade or business or a substantial part Supplier-based intangible. This is the value 4. Most computer software. (See Computerof a trade or business. resulting from the future acquisition of goods or software, later.)services used or sold by the business because
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- of business relationships with suppliers. 5. Any of the following assets not acquired in
ness based on expected continued customer For example, you must amortize the part of connection with the acquisition of a trade
patronage due to its name, reputation, or any the purchase price of a business that is for the or business or a substantial part of a trade
other factor. existence of the following intangibles. or business.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. An interest in a film, sound recording, production of income) but not as part of a 3. You granted the right to use the intangible
video tape, book, or similar property. to a person (or a person related to thatpurchase of a trade or business and either:
person) who held or used it at any timeb. A right to receive tangible property or • Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or during the period in (1). This applies only ifservices under a contract or from a gov- the transaction in which you granted the• Is of a fixed amount that, except for theernmental agency. right and the transaction in which you ac-rules for section 197 intangibles, would be
c. An interest in a patent or copyright. quired the intangible are part of a series ofrecovered under a method similar to the
related transactions. See Related person,unit-of-production method of cost recov-d. Certain rights that have a fixed duration later, for more information.ery.or amount. (See Rights of fixed duration
or amount, later.) However, this does not apply to the following
Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do notintangibles.
6. An interest under either of the following. apply in the following situations.• Goodwill.
• You acquired the intangible from a dece-a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi- • Going concern value. dent and its basis was stepped up to itsble property.
fair market value.• A covenant not to compete.b. A debt that was in existence when the
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-interest was acquired. • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-• A customer-related information base, cus- feror you acquired it from. This exception7. A right to service residential mortgages un- tomer-based intangible, or similar item. does not apply if the transaction in whichless the right is acquired in connection with
you acquired the intangible and the trans-the acquisition of a trade or business or a
action in which the seller or transferor ac-substantial part of a trade or business. Safe Harbor for Creative quired it are part of a series of related8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par- Property Costs transactions.ties to a corporate organization or reorgan-
If you are engaged in the trade or business of • The gain-recognition exception, discussedization in which any part of a gain or loss is
later, applies.film production, you may be able to amortize thenot recognized.
creative property costs for properties not set forIntangible property that is not amortizable production within 3 years of the first capitalized Related person. For purposes of theunder the rules for section 197 intangibles can transaction. You may amortize these costs rata- anti-churning rules, the following are related per-be depreciated if it meets certain requirements. bly over a 15-year period beginning on the first sons.You generally must use the straight line method
day of the second half of the tax year in whichover its useful life. For certain intangibles, the • An individual and his or her brothers, sis-you properly write off the costs for financial ac-depreciation period is specified in the law and ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,regulations. For example, the depreciation pe- ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),you dispose of the creative property rights, youriod for computer software that is not a section and lineal descendants (children, grand-must continue to amortize the costs over the197 intangible is generally 36 months. children, etc.).remainder of the 15-year period.For more information on depreciating intan-
• A corporation and an individual who owns,gible property, see Intangible Property  under Creative property costs include costs paid or
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theWhat Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,
value of the corporation's outstandingProperty? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. scripts, story outlines, motion picture production
stock.rights to books and plays, and other similar
Computer software. Section 197 intangibles properties for purposes of potential future film • Two corporations that are members of thedo not include the following types of computer development, production, and exploitation. same controlled group as defined in sec-software. Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev- tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code, except that ªmore than 20%º is sub-enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,1. Software that meets all the following re-
stituted for ªat least 80%º in that definitionsee Revenue Procedure 2004-36, 2004-24quirements.
and the determination is made without re-I.R.B. 1063, available at 
gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) ofa. It is, or has been, readily available for www.irs.gov/irb/2004-24_IRB/ar16.html.
section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-purchase by the general public. A change in the treatment of creative tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license. property costs is a change in method of
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if moreaccounting.
CAUTION
!c. It has not been substantially modified. than 20% of the value of the corporation'sThis requirement is considered met if outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-the cost of all modifications is not more Anti-Churning Rules directly, by or for the trust or grantor of thethan the greater of 25% of the price of trust.the publicly available unmodified Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing
• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-software or $2,000. most section 197 intangibles if the transaction in
ary and beneficiary, of any trust.which you acquired them did not result in a
2. Software that is not acquired in connection significant change in ownership or use. These • The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andwith the acquisition of a trade or business rules apply to goodwill and going concern value, the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-or a substantial part of a trade or business. and to any other section 197 intangible that is ferent trusts, if the same person is the
not otherwise depreciable or amortizable. grantor of both trusts.Computer software defined. Computer Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot • The executor and beneficiary of an estate.software includes all programs designed to use 15-year amortization for the intangible if anycause a computer to perform a desired function. • A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-of the following conditions apply.It also includes any database or similar item that ganization and a person who directly oris in the public domain and is incidental to the 1. You or a related person (defined later) held indirectly controls the organization (oroperation of qualifying software. or used the intangible at any time from July whose family members control it).
25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.Rights of fixed duration or amount. Section • A corporation and a partnership if the
2. You acquired the intangible from a person197 intangibles do not include any right under a same persons own more than 20% of the
who held it at any time during the period incontract or from a governmental agency if the value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
(1) and, as part of the transaction, the userright is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade poration and more than 20% of the capital
or business (or in an activity engaged in for the did not change. or profits interest in the partnership.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Two S corporations, and an S corporation rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for • A change in the amortization method, pe-
and a regular corporation, if the same per- information on making this choice. riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-
sons own more than 20% of the value of tizable asset.
If this exception applies, the anti-churningthe outstanding stock of each corporation. • A change in the accounting for amortiz-rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted• Two partnerships if the same persons able assets from a single asset account tobasis in the intangible that is more than the gainown, directly or indirectly, more than 20% a multiple asset account (pooling), or vicerecognized by the transferor.of the capital or profits interests in both versa.
Notification. If the person you acquired thepartnerships. • A change in the accounting for amortiz-intangible from chooses to recognize gain under• A partnership and a person who owns, able assets from one type of multiple as-the rules for this exception, that person mustdirectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the set account to a different type of multiplenotify you in writing by the due date of the returncapital or profits interests in the partner- asset account.on which the choice is made.ship.
Changes in amortization that are not a changeAnti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any• Two persons who are engaged in trades
in method of accounting include the following:section 197 intangible acquired in a transactionor businesses under common control (as
for which the principal purpose was either of thedescribed in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal • A change in computing amortization in thefollowing.Revenue Code). tax year in which your use of the asset
• To avoid the requirement that the intangi- changes.When to determine relationship. Persons ble be acquired after August 10, 1993. • An adjustment in the useful life of an am-are treated as related if the relationship existed
• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules. ortizable asset.at the following time.
• Generally, the making of a late amortiza-• In the case of a single transaction, imme-
More information. For more information tion election or the revocation of a timelydiately before or immediately after the
about the anti-churning rules, including addi- valid amortization election.transaction in which the intangible was ac-
tional rules for partnerships, see Regulationsquired. • Any change in the placed-in-service datesection 1.197-2(h).
of an amortizable asset.• In the case of a series of related transac-
tions (or a series of transactions that com- Incorrect Amount of See section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii)(a) of the Regula-prise a qualified stock purchase under
Amortization Deducted tions for more information and examples.section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code), immediately before the earliest If you later discover that you deducted an incor-transaction or immediately after the last Automatic approval. In some instances, yourect amount for amortization for a section 197transaction. may be able to get automatic approval from theintangible in any year, you may be able to make IRS to change your method of accounting fora correction for that year by filing an amendedOwnership of stock. In determining amortization. For a list of automatic accountingreturn. See Amended Return, next. If you are notwhether an individual directly or indirectly owns method changes, see the Instructions for Formallowed to make the correction on an amendedany of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the 3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115return, you can change your accounting methodfollowing rules apply. for more information on getting approval, auto-to claim the correct amortization. See Changing
matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by Your Accounting Method, later.
tions to the automatic approval process.or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
is considered owned proportionately by or for its For more information, see Revenue Proce-
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. dure 2006-12 and Revenue Procedure 2008-52Amended Return
as modified by Announcement 2008-84. SeeRule 2. An individual is considered to own If you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti- Revenue Procedure 2006-12, 2006-3 I.R.B.the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his zation, you can file an amended return to correct 310, available at or her family. Family includes only brothers and the following. www.irs.gov/irb/2006-03_IRB/ar14.html.sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,
See Revenue Procedure 2008-52, 2008-36• A mathematical error made in any year.ancestors, and lineal descendants.
I.R.B. 587, available at• A posting error made in any year.Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.html.
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is See Announcement 2008-84, 2008-38 I.R.B.• An amortization deduction for a sectionconsidered to own the stock directly or indirectly 197 intangible for which you have not 748, available at owned by or for his or her partner. adopted a method of accounting. www.irs.gov/irb/2008-38_IRB/ar14.html.
Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,
or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per- Disposition ofWhen to file. If an amended return is allowed,
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that you must file it by the later of the following dates. Section 197 Intangiblesperson. Do not treat stock constructively owned
• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-nal return for the year in which you did notthe individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make ble property used in your trade or business. Ifdeduct the correct amount. (A return filedanother person the constructive owner of the you held the intangible for more than 1 year, anyearly is considered filed on the due date.)stock. gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for able amortization, is ordinary income (sectionGain-recognition exception. This exception that year. 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangiblesto the anti-churning rules applies if the person
are disposed of in a single transaction or ayou acquired the intangible from (the transferor)
series of related transactions, treat all of themeets both of the following requirements. Changing Your section 197 intangibles as if they were a singleAccounting Method• That person would not be related to you asset for purposes of determining the amount of(as described under Related person, ear- gain that is ordinary income. Any remainingGenerally, you must get IRS approval to changelier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. Ifyour method of accounting. File Form 3115,and partnership interests were replaced by you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gainApplication for Change in Accounting Method, toa 50% test. or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain orrequest a change to a permissible method of
loss. For more information on ordinary or capital• That person chose to recognize gain on accounting for amortization.
gain or loss on business property, see chapter 3the disposition of the intangible and pay The following are examples of a change in
in Publication 544.income tax on the gain at the highest tax method of accounting for amortization.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct any of your amortization deduction for reforestation any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-
costs paid or incurred during the tax year. tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a
The election to amortize reforestation costs for more information.section 197 intangible that you acquired in the
incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-same transaction (or series of related transac- How to make the election. To elect to amor-tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Parttion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, orhave. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement thatbeneficiary cannot make that election.each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi- contains the following information.A partner's or shareholder's share of amor-ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible
tizable costs is figured under the general rulesloss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non- • A description of the costs and the dates
for allocating items of income, loss, deduction,deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi- you incurred them.
etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-ble by the following fraction. • A description of the type of timber beingortizable costs of an estate are divided between• The numerator is the adjusted basis of grown and the purpose for which it isthe estate and the income beneficiary based oneach remaining intangible on the date of grown.the income of the estate allocable to each.the disposition. Attach a separate statement for each property
Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are the• The denominator is the total adjusted ba- for which you amortize reforestation costs.
direct costs of planting or seeding for forestationses of all remaining amortizable section Generally, you must make the election on aor reforestation. Qualifying costs include only197 intangibles on the date of the disposi- timely filed return (including extensions) for thethose costs you must capitalize and include intion. tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-the adjusted basis of the property. They include
ever, if you timely filed your return for the yearcosts for the following items.
Covenant not to compete. A covenant not to without making the election, you can still make
• Site preparation.compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid- the election by filing an amended return within 6
ered disposed of or worthless before you dis- months of the due date of the return (excluding• Seeds or seedlings.
pose of your entire interest in the trade or extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-• Labor.business for which you entered into the cove- ment to the amended return and write ªFiled
nant. pursuant to section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562.• Tools.
File the amended return at the same address• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a you filed the original return.ing and seeding.section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-
Revoking the election. You must get IRS ap-fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect
Qualifying costs do not include costs for which proval to revoke your election to amortize quali-to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-
the government reimburses you under a fying reforestation costs. Your application toble that is not more than the transferor's ad-
cost-sharing program, unless you include the revoke the election must include your name,justed basis. You amortize this part of the
reimbursement in your income. address, the years for which your election was inadjusted basis over the intangible's remaining
effect, and your reason for revoking it. Pleaseamortization period in the hands of the trans- Qualified timber property. Qualified timber provide your daytime telephone number (op-feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers property is property that contains trees in signifi- tional), in case we need to contact you. You, orto a corporation, partnership contributions and cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot your duly authorized representative, must signdistributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun- or other site that you own or lease. The property the application and file it at least 90 days beforetary conversions. qualifies only if it meets all of the following re- the due date (without extensions) for filing yourIn a like-kind exchange or involuntary con- quirements. income tax return for the first tax year for whichversion of a section 197 intangible, you must your election is to end.• It is located in the United States.continue to amortize the part of your adjusted
basis in the acquired intangible that is not more  • It is held for the growing and cutting of
than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or timber you will either use in, or sell for use
Send the application to:converted intangible over the remaining amorti-
 in, the commercial production of timber
Internal Revenue Servicezation period of the exchanged or converted products.
Associate Chief Counselintangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period
• It consists of at least one acre planted with Passthroughs and Special Industriesthe part of your adjusted basis in the acquired
tree seedlings in the manner normally CC:PSI:6intangible that is more than your adjusted basis
used in forestation or reforestation. 1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300in the exchanged or converted intangible.
Washington, DC 20224
Qualified timber property does not includeExample. You own a section 197 intangible
property on which you have planted shelter beltsyou have amortized for 4 full years. It has a
or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind Geological andAmortization period. The 84-month amorti-section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro- zation period starts on the first day of the firstvisions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- Geophysical Costsmonth of the second half of the tax year youtize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining You can amortize the cost of geological andpayer), regardless of the month you actuallyin the original 15-year amortization period for the geophysical expenses paid or incurred in con-incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-transferred asset. You amortize the other nection with oil and gas exploration or develop-ductions for no more than 6 months of the first$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year ment within the U.S. These costs can beand last (eighth) tax years of the period.period. amortized ratably over a 24-month period begin-
ning on the mid-point of the tax year in which theLife tenant and remainderman. If one per-
expenses were paid or incurred. For major inte-son holds the property for life with the remainder
grated oil companies (as defined in sectiongoing to another person, the life tenant is entitled
167(h)(5)) these costs must be amortized rata-Reforestation Costs to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-
bly over a 5-year period for costs paid or in-tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-
You can elect to deduct a limited amount of curred after May 17, 2006 (a 7-year period formainder interest in the property is ignored for
reforestation costs paid or incurred during the costs paid or incurred after December 19, 2007).amortization purposes.
tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. If you retire or abandon the property during
You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber the amortization period, no amortization deduc-
that are not deducted currently over an property within 10 years after the tax year you tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban-
84-month period. There is no limit on the amount incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report donment.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information. For more information on • Mining exploration and development costs
the amortization of pollution control facilities, Ð 10 years, andPollution see Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re- • Research and experimental costs Ð 10lated regulations.Control Facilities years.
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified How to make the election. To elect to amor-pollution control facility over 60 months. How- tize qualifying costs over the optional recoveryResearch andever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilities period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-for an exception. The cost of a pollution control tach a statement containing the following infor-Experimental Costsfacility that is not eligible for amortization can be mation to your return for the tax year in which thedepreciated under the regular rules for deprecia- election begins:You can elect to amortize your research andtion. Also, you can claim a special depreciation experimental costs, deduct them as currentallowance on a certified pollution control facility • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-business expenses, or write them off over athat is qualified property even if you elect to cation number; and10-year period. If you elect to amortize theseamortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am- • The type of cost and the specific amountcosts, deduct them in equal amounts over 60ortizable basis) by the amount of any special months or more. The amortization period begins of the cost for which you are making theallowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica- the month you first receive an economic benefit election.tion 946. from the costs. For a definition of ªresearch and
A certified pollution control facility is a new experimental costsº and information on deduct- Generally, the election must be made on a
identifiable treatment facility used in connection ing them as current business expenses, see timely filed return (including extensions) for the
with a plant or other property in operation before chapter 7. tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
1976, to reduce or control water or atmospheric ever, if you timely filed your return for the year
pollution or contamination. The facility must do Optional write-off method. Rather than without making the election, you can still make
so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, or amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur- the election by filing an amended return within 6
preventing the creation or emission of pollu- rent expense, you have the option of deducting months of the due date of the return (excluding
tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility (writing off) research and experimental costs extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended
must be certified by state and federal certifying ratably over a 10-year period beginning with the return and write ªFiled pursuant to section
authorities. tax year in which you incurred the costs. 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the amended
The facility must not significantly increase return at the same address you filed the originalCosts you can amortize. You can amortizethe output or capacity, extend the useful life, or return.costs chargeable to a capital account if you meetreduce the total operating costs of the plant or both the following requirements.other property. Also, it must not significantly Revoking the election. You must obtain con-
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro- • You paid or incurred the costs in your sent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your
duction process or facility. trade or business. request to revoke the election must be submit-
The federal certifying authority will not certify ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before• You are not deducting the costs currently.your property to the extent it appears you will the end of the tax year in which the optional
recover (over the property's useful life) all or part recovery period ends. The request must contain
How to make the election. To elect to amor-of its cost from the profit based on its operation all of the information necessary to demonstrate
tize research and experimental costs, complete the rare and unusual circumstances that would(such as through sales of recovered wastes).
Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in- justify granting revocation. If the request for rev-The federal certifying authority will describe the
come tax return. Generally, you must file the ocation is approved, any unamortized costs arenature of the potential cost recovery. You must
return by the due date (including extensions). deductible in the year the revocation is effective.then reduce the amortizable basis of the facility
However, if you timely filed your return for theby this potential recovery.
year without making the election, you can still
New identifiable treatment facility. A new make the election by filing an amended return
identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre- within 6 months of the due date of the return
ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the
facility. It does not include a building and its amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to
structural components unless the building is ex- section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the 9.clusively a treatment facility. amended return at the same address you filed
the original return.
Atmospheric pollution control facilities. Your election is binding for the year it is
Certain atmospheric pollution control facilities made and for all later years unless you obtain Depletioncan be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, approval from the IRS to change to a different
the following must apply. method.
• The facility must be acquired and placed
What's Newin service after April 11, 2005. If acquired,
the original use must begin with you after
Marginal production of oil and gas. The tem-Optional Write-off April 11, 2005.
porary suspension of the taxable income limita-
• The facility must be used in connection of Certain Tax tion on percentage depletion from the marginal
with an electric generation plant or other production of oil and natural gas is not available
property placed in operation after Decem- Preferences for tax years beginning in 2008. However, it is
ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired. available for tax years beginning in 2009.
You can elect to amortize certain tax preference• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the items over an optional period beginning in thefacility, only the basis attributable to the tax year in which you incurred the costs. If youconstruction, reconstruction, or erection make this election there is no AMT adjustment.completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies. IntroductionThe applicable costs and the optional recovery
Depletion is the using up of natural resources byperiods are as follows:
Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo- mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-• Circulation costs Ð 3 years,ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a tion deduction allows an owner or operator to
pollution control facility by 20% before figuring account for the reduction of a product's• Intangible drilling and development costs
the amortization deduction. reserves.Ð 60 months,
Page 32 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 33 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
There are two ways of figuring depletion: The number of units sold during the tax yearCost Depletion
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For does not include any for which depletion deduc-
mineral property, you generally must use the tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.To figure cost depletion you must first determine
method that gives you the larger deduction. For the following.
standing timber, you must use cost depletion. Figuring the cost depletion deduction.• The property's basis for depletion. Once you have figured your property's basis for
depletion, the total recoverable units, and theTopics • The total recoverable units of mineral in
number of units sold during the tax year, you canthe property's natural deposit.This chapter discusses:
figure your cost depletion deduction by taking• The number of units of mineral sold during the following steps.• Who can claim depletion the tax year.
• Mineral property Step Action Result
Basis for depletion. To figure the property's• Timber  1 Divide your property's Rate perbasis for depletion, subtract all the following basis for depletion by unit.
from the property's adjusted basis. total recoverable units.
1. Amounts recoverable through:  2 Multiply the rate per Cost
unit by units sold depletionWho Can a. Depreciation deductions, during the tax year. deduction.
b. Deferred expenses (including deferredClaim Depletion?
exploration and development costs),
Note. You must keep accounts for the de-andIf you have an economic interest in mineral prop-
pletion of each property and adjust these ac-erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction c. Deductions other than depletion. counts each year for units sold and depletionfor depletion. More than one person can have an
claimed.economic interest in the same mineral deposit or 2. The residual value of land and improve-timber. ments at the end of operations. Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gasYou have an economic interest if both the property. Owners of oil and gas property may3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-following apply. use an elective safe harbor in determining theposes other than mineral production.• You have acquired by investment any in- property's recoverable reserves for purposes of
terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- computing cost depletion. If this election isAdjusted basis. The adjusted basis of yourber. made, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce-property is your original cost or other basis, plus
dure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Revenuecertain additions and improvements, and minus• You have a legal right to income from the Bulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/certain deductions such as depletion allowed orextraction of the mineral or cutting of the irs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf.allowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedtimber to which you must look for a return
To make the election, attach a statement tobasis can never be less than zero. See Publica-of your capital investment.
your timely filed (including extensions) originaltion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationA contractual relationship that allows you an return for the first tax year for which the safeon adjusted basis.economic or monetary advantage from products harbor is elected. The statement must indicate
of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, that you are electing the safe harbor provided byTotal recoverable units. The total recover-in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, ifable units is the sum of the following.ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of, made, is effective for the tax year in which it is
mineral property is not an economic interest. • The number of units of mineral remaining made and all subsequent years. It cannot be
at the end of the year (including units re- revoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but
Individuals, corporations, estates, and covered but not sold). may be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it
trusts who claim depletion deductions cannot be re-elected for the next 5 years.• The number of units of mineral sold duringmay be liable for alternative minimum
CAUTION
!
the tax year (determined under yourtax. Percentage Depletionmethod of accounting, as explained next).
To figure percentage depletion, you multiply aYou must estimate or determine recoverable certain percentage, specified for each mineral,units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands by your gross income from the property duringMineral Property of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod- the tax year.ucts using the current industry method and theMineral property includes oil and gas wells, The rates to be used and other conditionsmost accurate and reliable information you canmines, and other natural deposits (including ge- and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-obtain.othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term cussed later under Independent Producers and
ªpropertyº means each separate interest you Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells.Number of units sold. You determine theown in each mineral deposit in each separate Rates and other rules for percentage depletionnumber of units sold during the tax year basedtract or parcel of land. You can treat two or more of other specific minerals are found later inon your method of accounting. Use the followingseparate interests as one property or as sepa- Mines and Geothermal Deposits.table to make this determination.rate properties. See section 614 of the Internal
Revenue Code and the related regulations for Gross income. When figuring your percent-IF you THEN the units soldrules on how to treat separate mineral interests. age depletion, subtract from your gross incomeuse ... during the year are ...There are two ways of figuring depletion on from the property the following amounts.
The cash The units sold for whichmineral property. • Any rents or royalties you paid or incurredmethod of you receive payment• Cost depletion. for the property.accounting during the tax year
(regardless of the year of• Percentage depletion. • The part of any bonus you paid for a lease
sale). on the property allocable to the productGenerally, you must use the method that gives sold (or that otherwise gives rise to grossAn accrual The units sold based onyou the larger deduction. However, unless you income) for the tax year.method of your inventories andare an independent producer or royalty owner,
accounting method of accounting foryou generally cannot use percentage depletion A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as
inventory.for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells, a lessee to satisfy a production payment re-
later. tained by the lessor.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use the following fraction to figure the part of For information on the depletion deduction a related person in marketing or distrib-
the bonus you must subtract. for wells that produce natural gas that is either uting oil, natural gas, or their
sold under a fixed contract or produced from by-products.
No. of units sold in the tax year geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,Bonus c. To any person given authority under anRecoverable units from the × later.Payments agreement with you or a related personproperty
to occupy any retail outlet owned,
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos- leased, or controlled by you or a relatedIndependent Producers andits, gross income from the property is defined person.Royalty Ownerslater under Oil and Gas Wells. For property other
than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well, 2. The combined gross receipts from salesIf you are an independent producer or royaltygross income from the property is defined later (not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, orowner, you figure percentage depletion using aunder Mines and Geothermal Deposits. their by-products by all retail outlets takenrate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-
into account in (1) are more than $5 millionerty based on your average daily production ofTaxable income limit. The percentage deple- for the tax year.domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up totion deduction generally cannot be more than
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your For the purpose of determining if this ruleever, certain refiners, as explained next, andtaxable income from the property figured without applies, do not count the following.certain retailers and transferees of proven oilthe depletion deduction and the domestic pro- • Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)and gas properties, as explained later, cannotduction activities deduction. of oil or natural gas to commercial or in-claim percentage depletion. For information onTaxable income from the property means dustrial users.figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentagegross income from the property minus all allowa-
depletion, later.ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de- • Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-
pletion or qualified domestic production ment of Defense.Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-activities) attributable to mining processes, in- pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple- • Sales of oil or natural gas or theircluding mining transportation. These deductible tion if you or a related person refine crude oil and by-products outside the United States ifitems include, but are not limited to, the follow- you and the related person refined more than none of your domestic production or thating. 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax year of a related person is exported during the
based on average (rather than actual) daily re-• Operating expenses. tax year or the prior tax year.
finery runs for the tax year. The average daily• Certain selling expenses. refinery run is computed by dividing total refinery Related person. To determine if you and
runs for the tax year by the total number of days• Administrative and financial overhead. another person are related persons, see Re-
in the tax year. lated person under Refiners who cannot claim• Depreciation. percentage depletion, earlier.Related person. You and another person• Intangible drilling and development costs. are related persons if either of you holds a signif- Sales through a related person. You are
icant ownership interest in the other person or if• Exploration and development expendi- considered to be selling through a related per-
a third person holds a significant ownership in-tures. son if any sale by the related person produces
terest in both of you. gross income from which you may benefit be-
For example, a corporation, partnership, es-The following rules apply when figuring your cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significanttaxable income from the property for purposes est in the person.
ownership interest in it are related persons. Aof the taxable income limit. You are not considered to be selling throughpartnership and a trust are related persons if one a related person who is a retailer if all the follow-• Do not deduct any net operating loss de- person holds a significant ownership interest in ing apply.duction from the gross income from the each of them.property. • You do not have a significant ownershipFor purposes of the related person rules,
interest in the retailer.significant ownership interest means direct or• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one oftributions from the gross income from the • You sell your production to persons whothe following.property. are not related to either you or the retailer.
• The value of the outstanding stock of a• If, during the year, you dispose of an item • The retailer does not buy oil or natural gascorporation.of section 1245 property that was used in from your customers or persons related to
connection with mineral property, reduce your customers.• The interest in the profits or capital of aany allowable deduction for mining ex- partnership. • There are no arrangements for the retailerpenses by the part of any gain you must
to acquire oil or natural gas you produced• The beneficial interests in an estate orreport as ordinary income that is allocable
for resale or made available for purchasetrust.to the mineral property. See section
by the retailer.1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-
Any interest owned by or for a corporation,mation on how to figure the ordinary gain • Neither you nor the retailer knows of orpartnership, trust, or estate is considered to beallocable to the property. controls the final disposition of the oil orowned directly both by itself and proportionately natural gas you sold or the original sourceby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. of the petroleum products the retailer ac-Oil and Gas Wells quired for resale.Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oil pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
or gas well unless at least one of the following tion if both the following apply. Transferees who cannot claim percentage
applies. depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-1. You sell oil or natural gas or their pletion if you received your interest in a proven• You are either an independent producer or by-products directly or through a related oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 anda royalty owner. person in any of the following situations. before October 12, 1990. For a definition of the
• The well produces natural gas that is ei- term ªtransfer,º see section 1.613A-7(n) of thea. Through a retail outlet operated by youther sold under a fixed contract or pro- regulations. For a definition of the term ªinterestor a related person.duced from geopressured brine. in proven oil or gas property,º see section
b. To any person who is required under an 1.613A-7(p) of the regulations.
If you are an independent producer or royalty agreement with you or a related person
Figuring percentage depletion. Generally,owner, see Independent Producers and Royalty to use a trademark, trade name, or
as an independent producer or royalty owner,Owners, next. service mark or name owned by you or
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you figure your percentage depletion by comput-  If you have production from marginal wells, depletion allowance for that property for
ing your average daily production of domestic oil see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue the year.
or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas
gas quantity. If your average daily production quantity. Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan- Business entities and family members. dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,tity, you figure your percentage depletion by You must allocate the depletable oil or gas your deduction for percentage depletion is lim-multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas quantity among the following related persons in ited to the smaller of the following.property (defined later) by 15%. If your average proportion to each entity's or family member'sdaily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds • 100% of your taxable income from theproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year.your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must property figured without the deduction for
• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% ormake an allocation as explained later under Av- depletion and the deduction for domestic
more of the beneficial interest is owned byerage daily production exceeds depletable production activities under section 199 of
the same or related persons (consideringquantities. the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini-
only persons that own at least 5% of the tion of taxable income from the property,In addition, there is a limit on the percentage
beneficial interest). see Taxable income limit, earlier, underdepletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,
Mineral Property.later. • You and your spouse and minor children.
• 65% of your taxable income from allA related person is anyone mentioned in theAverage daily production. Figure your aver- sources, figured without the depletion al-related persons discussion under Nondeduct-age daily production by dividing your total do- lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-ible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, exceptmestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by duction activities, any net operating lossthat for purposes of this allocation, item (1) inthe number of days in your tax year. carryback, and any capital loss carryback.that discussion includes only an individual, his or
Partial interest. If you have a partial inter- her spouse, and minor children. You can carry over to the following year any
est in the production from a property, figure your amount you cannot deduct because of theControlled group of corporations. Mem-share of the production by multiplying total pro- 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-bers of the same controlled group of corpora-duction from the property by your percentage of pletion allowance (before applying any limits) fortions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringinterest in the revenues from the property. the following year.the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. TheyYou have a partial interest in the production share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, afrom a property if you have a net profits interest Partnerships and S Corporationscontrolled group of corporations is defined inin the property. To figure the share of production section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, Generally, each partner or shareholder, and notfor your net profits interest, you must first deter- except that the stock ownership requirement in the partnership or S corporation, figures the de-mine your percentage participation (as mea- that definition is ªmore than 50%º rather than ªat pletion allowance separately. (However, seesured by the net profits) in the gross revenue least 80%.º Electing large partnerships must figure deple-from the property. To figure this percentage, you
tion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share-divide the income you receive for your net profits Gross income from the property. For pur- holder must decide whether to use cost orinterest by the gross revenue from the property. poses of percentage depletion, gross income percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholderThen multiply the total production from the prop- from the property (in the case of oil and gas uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-erty by your percentage participation to figure wells) is the amount you receive from the sale of ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his oryour share of the production. the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. her taxable income from all sources.If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,Example. John Oak owns oil property in but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis.which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest. uct before sale or transport it before sale, the The partnership or S corporation must allocateDuring the year, the property produced 10,000 gross income from the property is the represen- to each partner or shareholder his or her sharebarrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000. tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas propertyJohn had expenses of $90,000 attributable to gas, before conversion or transportation. held by the partnership or S corporation. Thethe property. The property generated a net profit
If you sold gas after you removed it from the partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-
premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP, tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gasceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 ×  .20) for
determine gross income from the property for property.his net profits interest.
percentage depletion purposes without regard Each partner's share of the adjusted basis ofPaul determined his percentage participation to the RMFP. the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he
Gross income from the property does not cording to that partner's interest in partnershipreceived) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from
include lease bonuses, advance royalties, or capital. However, in some cases, it is figuredthe property). Paul determined his share of the
other amounts payable without regard to pro- according to the partner's interest in partnershipoil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-
duction from the property. income.rels ×  11%).
The partnership or S corporation adjusts theAverage daily production exceeds deplet-Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen- partner's or shareholder's share of the adjustedable quantities. If your average daily produc-erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar- basis of the oil and gas property for any capitaltion for the year is more than your depletable oilrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is expenditures made for the property and for anyor natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of change in partnership or S corporation interests.depletion for each domestic oil or natural gasbarrels of your depletable oil quantity that you
Each partner or shareholder must sep-property as follows.choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both
arately keep records of his or her shareoil and natural gas, you must reduce your de- 1. Figure your average daily production of oil of the adjusted basis in each oil and
RECORDSpletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num- or natural gas for the year. gas property of the partnership or S corporation.ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
The partner or shareholder must reduce his or2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gasnatural gas quantity.
her adjusted basis by the depletion allowed orquantity for the year.
allowable on the property each year. The part-Example. You have both oil and natural gas 3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-production. To figure your depletable natural produced from the property using a per- justed basis to figure cost depletion or his or hergas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of centage depletion rate of 15%. gain or loss if the partnership or S corporationyour 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Your
disposes of the property.depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million 4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-
cubic feet of gas (360 ×  6000). You must reduce tion, the numerator of which is the result
your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 figured in (2) and the denominator of which Reporting the deduction. Information that
− 360). is the result figured in (1). This is your you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper- Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual- • Extracting ores or minerals from the
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- ground.ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-
tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%. • Applying certain treatment processes.Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas This is natural gas that is both the following.
depletion for your partnership or S corporation • Transporting ores or minerals (generally,• Produced from a well you began to drillinterest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple- not more than 50 miles) from the point of
after September 1978 and before 1984.tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur- extraction to the plants or mills in which
ing income or loss from rental real estate or the treatment processes are applied.• Determined in accordance with section
royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978
E explain where to report this income or loss and Excise tax. Gross income from mining in-to be produced from geopressured brine.
whether you need to file either of the following cludes the separately stated excise tax received
forms. by a mine operator from the sale of coal to
compensate the operator for the excise tax theMines and• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. mine operator must pay to finance black lungGeothermal Deposits• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- benefits.
tions. Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits, Extraction. Extracting ores or mineralsincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per- from the ground includes extraction by mine
centage depletion.Electing large partnerships must figure de- owners or operators of ores or minerals from the
pletion allowance. An electing large partner- waste or residue of prior mining. This does not
ship, rather than each partner, generally must Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat- apply to extraction from waste or residue of prior
figure the depletion allowance. The partnership ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- mining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
figures the depletion allowance without taking come from the property that you can deduct as or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-income depletion depends on the type of deposit. minerals from the waste or residue.
limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan- The following is a list of the percentage de- Treatment processes. The processes in-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's inter- pletion rates for the more common minerals. cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralest in the partnership is not affected by the
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentdepletion allowance. DEPOSITS RATE processes must be applied by the mine owner orAn electing large partnership is one that
operator. For a listing of treatment processesmeets both the following requirements. Sulphur, uranium, and, if from considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofdeposits in the United States,• The partnership had 100 or more partners the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickelin the preceding year. lations.ore, and mica ............ . 22%
• The partnership chooses to be an electing Transportation of more than 50 miles. IfGold, silver, copper, iron ore, andlarge partnership. the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must becertain oil shale, if from deposits in
the United States .......... . 15% transported more than 50 miles to plants or millsDisqualified persons. An electing large to be treated because of physical and otherBorax, granite, limestone, marble,partnership does not figure the depletion allow- requirements, the additional authorized trans-mollusk shells, potash, slate,ance of its partners that are disqualified per- portation is considered mining and included insoapstone, and carbon dioxidesons. Disqualified persons must figure it the computation of gross income from mining.produced from a well ....... . 14%themselves, as explained earlier.
If you wish to include transportation ofCoal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%All the following are disqualified persons.
more than 50 miles in the computationClay and shale used or sold for• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- of gross income from mining, file an
use in making sewer pipe or brickspletion (discussed under Independent Pro- application in duplicate with the IRS. Include onor used or sold for use as sinteredducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). the application the facts concerning the physicalor burned lightweight aggregates 71/2% and other requirements which prevented the• Retailers who cannot claim percentage
Clay used or sold for use in construction and operation of the plant within 50depletion (discussed under Independent making drainage and roofing tile, miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). flower pots, and kindred products, cation to:• Any partner whose average daily produc- and gravel, sand, and stone (other Internal Revenue Servicetion of domestic crude oil and natural gas than stone used or sold for use by Associate Chief Counsela mine owner or operator asis more than 500 barrels during the tax Passthroughs and Special Industriesdimension or ornamental stone) 5%year in which the partnership tax year CC:PSI:FOends. Average daily production is dis- 1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300You can find a complete list of minerals andcussed earlier. Washington, DC 20224their percentage depletion rates in section
613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Natural Gas Wells Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot takeCorporate deduction for iron ore and coal. a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-You can use percentage depletion for a well that or iron ore mined in the United States if both theproduces natural gas either sold under a fixed ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) is following apply.contract or produced from geopressured brine. reduced by 20% of:
• You disposed of it after holding it for more
• The percentage depletion deduction forNatural gas sold under a fixed contract. than 1 year.
the tax year (figured without regard to thisNatural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies • You disposed of it under a contract underreduction), minusfor a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This is which you retain an economic interest indomestic natural gas sold by the producer under • The adjusted basis of the property at the the coal or iron ore.a contract that does not provide for a price in- close of the tax year (figured without thecrease to reflect any increase in the seller's tax Treat any gain on the disposition as a capitaldepletion deduction for the tax year).liability because of the repeal of percentage de- gain.
pletion for gas. The contract must have been in Disposal to related person. This rule doesGross income from the property. For prop-effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toerty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orsale of the gas. Price increases after February 1, one of the following persons.gas well, gross income from the property means1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax
the gross income from mining. Mining includes • A related person (as listed in chapter 2 ofliability into account unless demonstrated other-
all the following. Publication 544).wise by clear and convincing evidence.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A person owned or controlled by the same royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro- When to claim depletion. Claim your deple-
duced before termination. Increase your ad- tion allowance as a deduction in the year of saleinterests that own or control you.
justed basis in the property by the amount you or other disposition of the products cut from the
include in income. timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting ofGeothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits timber as a sale or exchange (explained below).located in the United States or its possessions Delay rentals. These are payments for defer- Include allowable depletion for timber productsqualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. A ring development of the property. Since delay not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as ageothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir of rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in- cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod-
natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid come that is not subject to depletion. These ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis for
or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a rentals can be avoided by either abandoning the determining gain or loss in the tax year you sell
geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well. lease, beginning development operations, or the timber products.
obtaining production.Figure gross income from the property for a
Example. Assume the same facts as in thegeothermal steam well in the same way as for oil
previous example except that you sold only halfand gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-
of the timber products in the cutting year. Youerty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent-
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletionage depletion on a geothermal deposit cannot Timber
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000be more than 50% of your taxable income from
depletion to your closing inventory of timberYou can figure timber depletion only by the costthe property. products.method. Percentage depletion does not apply to
timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherLessor's Gross Income Electing to treat the cutting of timber as abasis in the timber. Your cost does not include sale or exchange. You can elect, under cer-the cost of land or any amounts recoverableA lessor's gross income from the property that tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timberthrough depreciation.qualifies for percentage depletion usually is the held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.Depletion takes place when you cut standingtotal of the royalties received from the lease. You must make the election on your income taxtimber. You can figure your depletion deductionHowever, for oil, gas, or geothermal property, return for the tax year to which it applies. If youwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelygross income does not include lease bonuses, make this election, subtract the adjusted basismeasured in the process of exploitation.advanced royalties, or other amounts payable for depletion from the fair market value of the
without regard to production from the property. timber on the first day of the tax year in whichFiguring cost depletion. To figure your cost you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.depletion allowance, you multiply the number of You generally report the gain as long-term capi-Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonuses timber units cut by your depletion unit. tal gain. The fair market value then becomesand advanced royalties are payments a lessee
Timber units. When you acquire timber your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or lossmakes before production to a lessor for the grant
property, you must make an estimate of the on the sale or other disposition of the productsof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil to
quantity of marketable timber that exists on the cut from the timber. For more information, seebe extracted from leased property. If you are the
property. You measure the timber using board Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Saleslessor, your income from bonuses and ad-
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later and Other Dispositions of Assets.vanced royalties received is subject to an allow- determine that you have more or less units of You may revoke an election to treat the cut-ance for depletion. timber, you must adjust the original estimate. ting of timber as a sale or exchange without
Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de- IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca-The term ªtimber propertyº means your eco-
pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis tion) is disregarded for purposes of making anomic interest in standing timber in each tract or
in the property by a fraction, the numerator of subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For-block representing a separate timber account.
which is the bonus and the denominator of which est Activities Schedule, for more information.Depletion unit. You figure your depletionis the total bonus and royalties expected to be unit each year by taking the following steps. Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber)received. To figure cost depletion on advanced
to your income tax return if you claim a deduc-royalties, use the computation explained earlier 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of tion for timber depletion, choose to treat theunder Cost Depletion, treating the number of the timber on hand at the beginning of the cutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or makeunits for which the advanced royalty is received year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost an outright sale of timber.as the number of units sold. Depletion in the discussion on Mineral
Property.Figuring percentage depletion. In the
case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you cost of any timber units acquired during
may use the percentage rates discussed earlier the year and any additions to capital.
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo- 3. Figure the number of timber units to takenus or advanced royalty payments are generally 10.into account by adding the number of tim-part of the gross income from the property to ber units acquired during the year to thewhich the rates are applied in making the calcu- number of timber units on hand in the ac-
lation. However, in the case of independent pro- count at the beginning of the year and then Businessducers and royalty owners of oil and gas adding (or subtracting) any correction to
property, bonuses and advance royalty pay- the estimate of the number of timber units
ments are not a part of gross income. Bad Debtsremaining in the account.
Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo- 4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).
nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is This is your depletion unit.
abandoned before you derive any income from Introduction
the extraction of mineral, include in income for Example. You bought a timber tract for If someone owes you money that you are notthe year of expiration, termination, or abandon- $160,000 and the land was worth as much as going to be able to collect, you have a bad debt.ment, the depletion deduction you took. Also the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000. There are two kinds of bad debts Ðbusinessincrease your adjusted basis in the property to Based on an estimated one million board feet and nonbusiness. This chapter discusses only
restore the depletion deduction you previously (1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your business bad debts.
subtracted. depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ Generally, a business bad debt is one that
For advanced royalties, include in income for 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- comes from operating your trade or business.
the year of lease termination, the depletion tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × You can deduct business bad debts on your
claimed on minerals for which the advanced $80). business income tax return.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 37

Page 38 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad You can claim a bad debt deduction 2. More than 30% of your receivables ac-
only if the amount owed to you was crued in the year of the sale were fromdebts and are deductible only as short-term cap-
previously included in gross income. sales to political parties.ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
CAUTION
!
This applies to amounts owed to you from allinformation on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub- 3. You made substantial and continuing ef-sources of taxable income, including sales,lication 550. forts to collect on the debt.services, rents, and interest.
Topics Loan or capital contribution. You cannotAccrual method. If you use the accrual
claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you madeThis chapter discusses: method of accounting, generally, you report in-
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir-come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution to• Definition of business bad debt debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if capital.you have previously included the entire uncol-• When a debt becomes worthless
lectible amount in income. Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi-• How to claim a business bad debt ness partnership breaks up and one of yourIf you qualify, you can use the nonac-
former partners becomes insolvent, you may• Recovery of a bad debt crual-experience method of accounting dis-
have to pay more than your pro rata share. If youcussed later. Under this method, you do not
pay any part of the insolvent partner's share ofhave to accrue income that, based on your ex-Useful Items the debts, you can claim a bad debt deductionperience, you do not expect to collect.
You may want to see: for the amount you paid that is attributable to theCash method. If you use the cash method insolvent partner's share.
of accounting, generally, you report incomePublication Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee awhen you receive payment. You cannot claim a
debt that subsequently becomes worthless, the❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you
debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all thebecause you never included those amounts in❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for following requirements are met.income. For example, a cash basis architectIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails • You made the guarantee in the course of
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of to pay the bill because the architect's fee was your trade or business.
Assets never included in income. • You have a legal duty to pay the debt.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
• You made the guarantee before the debtDebts from a former business. If you sell
❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal became worthless. You meet this require-your business but retain its receivables, these
Rights, and Claims for Refund ment if you reasonably expected youdebts are business debts because they arose
would not have to pay the debt without fullout of your trade or business. If any of these
See chapter 12 for information about getting reimbursement from the issuer.receivables subsequently become worthless,
publications and forms. the loss is still a business bad debt. • You receive reasonable consideration for
making the guarantee. You meet this re-Debt acquired from a decedent. The char-
quirement if you made the guarantee inacter of a loss from debts of a business acquired
accord with normal business practice orfrom a decedent is determined in the same wayDefinition of Business for a good faith business purpose.as debts sold by a business. The executor of the
decedent's estate treats any loss from the debtsBad Debt as a business bad debt if the debts were closely Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne
related to the decedent's trade or business Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of aA business bad debt is a loss from the worth- when they became worthless. Otherwise, a loss $20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-lessness of a debt that was either: from these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad let that is not a ªrelated person.º Elegant Fash-
• Created or acquired in your trade or busi- debt for the decedent's estate. ions is one of Zayne's largest clients. Elegant
ness, or Fashions later defaulted on the loan. As a result,Liquidation. If you liquidate your business Ms. Zayne paid the remaining balance of the• Closely related to your trade or business and some of your accounts receivable become loan in full to the bank.when it became partly or totally worthless. worthless, they become business bad debts. She can claim a business bad debt deduc-
tion only for the amount she paid, since herA debt is closely related to your trade or busi- Types of Business Bad guarantee was made in the course of her tradeness if your primary motive for incurring the debt Debts or business for a good faith business purpose.is business related. Bad debts of a corporation She was motivated by the desire to retain one ofare always business bad debts. The following are situations that may result in a her better clients and keep a sales outlet.
business bad debt.
Deductible in the year paid. If you make aCredit sales. Business bad debts are mainly payment on a loan you guaranteed, you canLoans to clients and suppliers. If you loanthe result of credit sales to customers. Goods deduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsmoney to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and against the borrower.utor for a business reason and subsequently,services that have been performed, but not yet
after making attempts to collect, the loan receiv- Rights against a borrower. When youpaid for, are recorded in your books as either
able becomes worthless, you have a business make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youaccounts receivable or notes receivable. After a
bad debt. may have the right to take the place of thereasonable period of time, if you have tried to
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you havecollect the amount due, but are unable to do so, this right, or some other right to demand pay-Debts of political parties. If a political partythe uncollectible part becomes a business bad ment from the borrower, you cannot claim a bad(or other organization that accepts contributionsdebt. debt deduction until these rights become partlyor spends money to influence elections) owes Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair or totally worthless.you money and the debt becomes worthless,market value (FMV) when received are deducti- you can claim a bad debt deduction only if you Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointlyble only at that value, even though the FMV may use an accrual method of accounting and meet owe you money, your inability to collect from onebe less than the face value. If you purchased an all the following tests. does not enable you to deduct a proportionateaccount receivable for less than its face value, amount as a bad debt.and the receivable subsequently becomes 1. The debt arose from the sale of goods or
services in the ordinary course of yourworthless, the most you are allowed to deduct is Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or
trade or business.the amount you paid to acquire it. pledged property is sold for less than the debt,
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a later tax year, you can deduct the amount you Generally, you can use the nonac-
bad debt. charge off in that year plus the disallowed crual-experience method for accounts receiva-
amount charged-off in the earlier year. The ble for services you performed only if:
charge off in the earlier year, unless reversed on • The services are provided in the fields ofyour books, fulfills the charge-off requirement for accounting, actuarial science, architecture,the later year.When a Debt Becomes consulting, engineering, health, law, or the
performing arts, orTotally worthless debts. If a debt becomesWorthless
totally worthless in the current tax year, you can • You meet the $5 million gross receipts test
deduct the entire amount, less any amount de- for all prior years.You do not have to wait until a debt is due to
ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt wasdetermine whether it is worthless. A debt be-
only partly worthless.comes worthless when there is no longer any Service related income. You can use theYou do not have to make an actualchance the amount owed will be paid. nonaccrual-experience method only forcharge-off on your books to claim a bad debtIt is not necessary to go to court if you can amounts earned by performing services. Youdeduction for a totally worthless debt. However,show that a judgment from the court would be cannot use this method for amounts owed to youyou may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSuncollectible. You must only show that you have from activities such as lending money, sellinglater rules the debt is only partly worthless, youtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt. goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights towill not be allowed a deduction for the debt inBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- receive payment.that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessdence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
bad debt is limited to the amount actuallyan unsecured and unpreferred debt. Gross receipts test.  You meet the gross re-charged off. ceipts test if your average annual gross receiptsProperty received for debt. If you receive for the 3 prior tax years does not exceedFiling a claim for refund. If you did not deductproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reduce $5,000,000.a bad debt on your original return for the year itthe debt by the FMV of the property received.
became worthless, you can file a claim for aYou can deduct the remaining debt as a bad Interest or penalty charged. Generally, youcredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-debt if and when it becomes worthless. cannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodless, you must file the claim by the later of theIf you later sell the property, any gain on the for amounts due on which you charge interest orfollowing dates.sale is due to the appreciation of the property. It a late payment penalty. However, do not treat ais not a recovery of a bad debt. For information • 7 years from the date your original return discount offered for early payment as the charg-on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544. was due (not including extensions). ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
apply.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
• You otherwise accrue the full amount due
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, as gross income at the time you provideHow To Claim a you must file the claim by the later of the follow- the services.
ing dates.Business Bad Debt • You treat the discount allowed for early
• 3 years from the date you filed your origi- payment as an adjustment to gross in-There are two methods to claim a business bad nal return. come in the year of payment.debt.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
• The specific charge-off method. Methods available. You can use any of theYou may have longer to file the claim if you were following nonaccrual-experience methods.• The nonaccrual-experience method. unable to manage your financial affairs due to a
physical or mental impairment. Such an impair- • Revenue-based moving average method.Generally, you must use the specific charge-off
ment requires proof of existence. See Code sec-method. However, you may use the nonac- • Actual experience method.tion 6511(h).crual-experience method if you meet the re-
• Modified Black Motor method.quirements discussed later under For details and more information about filing a
Nonaccrual-Experience Method. claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol- • Modified moving average method.
lowing forms to file a claim. • Alternative nonaccrual-experienceSpecific Charge-Off Method method.Table 10-1. Forms Used To File a
If you use the specific charge-off method, you Apply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa-Claim
can deduct specific business bad debts that rately to each account receivable.
become either partly or totally worthless during IF you filed as Generally, you cannot change from onethe tax year. a... THEN file... method to another without IRS approval. You
Sole proprietor or may be able to obtain automatic consent toPartly worthless debts. You can deduct spe-  Form 1040Xfarmer change your method of accounting. See Regula-cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible
tions section 1.448-2 for more information onduring the tax year. Your tax deduction is limited Corporation  Form 1120X obtaining consent to change to a nonac-to the amount you charge off on your books
crual-experience method (other than one of theduring the year. You do not have to charge off S corporation  Form 1120S
safe harbor methods) or to change from oneand deduct your partly worthless debts annually. (check box H(4))
method to another.You can delay the charge off until a later year. Partnership  Form 1065 For more information about the nonac-However, you cannot deduct any part of a debt (check box G(5)) crual-experience method, including the $5 mil-after the year it becomes totally worthless.
lion gross receipts test, see Code sectionSignificantly modified debt.  An exception 448(d)(5) and Regulations section 1.448-2.to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has Nonaccrual-Experiencebeen significantly modified and on which the
Methodholder recognized gain. For more information,
see Regulations section 1.166-3(a)(3). If you use an accrual method of accounting and Recovery of a Bad
Deduction disallowed. Generally, you can qualify under the rules explained in this section,
claim a partial bad debt deduction only in the you can use the nonaccrual-experience method Debt
year you make the charge-off on your books. If, for bad debts. Under this method, you do not
under audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc- accrue service related income you expect to be If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on your
tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a uncollectible. income tax return and later recover (collect) all
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 39

Page 40 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or part of it, you may have to include all or part of Table 11±1. Reporting Reimbursements
the recovery in gross income. The amount you
IF the type of reimbursement (or otherinclude is limited to the amount you actually
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2deducted. However, you can exclude the
amount deducted that did not reduce your tax. An accountable plan with:Report the recovery as ªOther incomeº on the
appropriate business form or schedule. Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excessSee  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more
returnedinformation.
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If a Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Adequate accounting and return of excessbad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover
both required but excess not returnedthat has not expired before the beginning of the
tax year in which the recovery takes place, you Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.treat the deduction as having reduced your tax. federal rate:A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net Adequate accounting made and excessoperating loss helps lower taxes in the year to returnedwhich you carry the net operating loss. See
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. ThePublication 536 for more information about net
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyoperating losses.
Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.
rate only and excess not returned
11. A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
excess, or both, not required by planOther Expenses
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
What's New • Penalties and fines expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040),
see Publication 463.• Repayments (claim of right)Standard mileage rate. For 2008, the stan- To be deductible for tax purposes, expensesdard mileage rate for each mile of business use • Other miscellaneous expenses incurred for travel, meals, and entertainmentis: must be ordinary and necessary expenses in-
• 50.5 cents per mile for the period January curred while carrying on your trade or business.Useful Items1 through June 30, 2008, and Generally, you also must show that entertain-
You may want to see: ment expenses (including meals) are directly• 58.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 related to, or associated with, the conduct ofthrough December 31, 2008. Publication your trade or business. For more information on
For more information, see Car and truck ex- travel, meals, and entertainment, including de-❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringepenses, under Miscellaneous Expenses. ductibility, see Publication 463.Benefits
Meal expenses when subject to ªhours of ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Reimbursementsserviceº limits. For 2008, you can deduct Expenses80% of the reimbursed meals your employees A ªreimbursement or allowance arrangementº❏ 526 Charitable Contributionsconsume while away from their tax home on provides for payment of advances, reimburse-business during, or incident to, any period sub- ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductionsject to the Department of Transportation's tainment expenses incurred by your employees❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofªhours of serviceº limits. For more information, during the ordinary course of business. Uponsee Meal expenses when subject to ªhours of Assets satisfying your established substantiation re-serviceº limits. quirements, you can deduct the allowable❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education
amount on your tax return. Because of differ-❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates ences between accounting methods and tax
law, these amounts may not be the same. ForSee chapter 12 for information about gettingIntroduction example, you may deduct 100% of the cost ofpublications and forms. meals on your business books and records.This chapter covers business expenses that
However, for tax purposes, only 50% of thesemay not have been explained to you, as a busi-
costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction.ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-
A reimbursement or allowance arrangementtion.
Reimbursement of (including per diem allowances, discussed later)
depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta-Topics Travel, Meals, and ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If youThis chapter discusses:
reimburse these expenses under an accounta-
Entertainment ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-• Travel, meals, and entertainment
able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,• Bribes and kickbacks The following discussion explains how to handle and entertainment expenses on your tax return.
any reimbursements or allowances you may  If you reimburse these expenses under a• Charitable contributions
provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex- nonaccountable plan, then you must report the• Education expenses penses when incurred by your employees. If you reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wage
• Lobbying expenses are self-employed and report your income and and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wages
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on the appropriate line of your tax return. If you 2. Your employees adequately account for You can choose to reimburse your employees
their expenses within 60 days after the ex-make a single payment to your employees and it using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) allow-
penses were paid or incurred.includes both wages and an expense reim- ance. This is an allowance that includes a com-
bursement, you must specify the amount attribu- bination of payments covering fixed and variable3. Your employees return any excess reim-table to reimbursement and report it accordingly. costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to coverbursement within 120 days after the ex-See Table 11±1, Reporting Reimbursements. your employees' variable operating costs (suchpenses were paid or incurred. as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your
4. You give a periodic statement (at least employees' fixed costs (such as depreciation,
quarterly) to your employees that asksAccountable Plans insurance, etc.). For information on using a
them to either return or adequately ac- FAVR allowance, see Revenue ProcedureAn accountable plan, requires your employees count for outstanding advances and they 2008-59 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008-41.to meet all of the following requirements. They comply within 120 days of the date of the You can read Revenue Procedure 2008-59 atmust: statement. www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb08-41.pdf.
1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses
How to deduct. You can claim a deduction for Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-while performing services as your employ-
travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-ees,
you reimburse your employees for these ex- cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed2. Adequately account to you for these ex- penses under an accountable plan. Generally, using the per diem allowance, how you reportpenses within a reasonable period of time, the amount you can deduct for meals and enter- and deduct the allowance depends on whetherand tainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses
later. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a3. Return any excess reimbursement or al- or for meal expenses only and whether the al-
single member limited liability company, deductlowance within a reasonable period of lowance is more than the federal rate.
the travel reimbursement on line 24a and thetime. Regular federal per diem rate. The regulardeductible part of the meals and entertainment
An arrangement under which you advance federal per diem rate is the highest amount thereimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C (Form
money to employees is treated as meeting (3) federal government will pay to its employees1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
above only if the following requirements are also while away from home on travel. It has twoIf you are filing an income tax return for a
met. components:corporation, the reimbursement should be in-
cluded with the amount claimed on the Other• The advance is reasonably calculated not 1. Lodging expense, anddeductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporationto exceed the amount of anticipated ex-
Income Tax Return. If you are filing any other 2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE).penses.
business income tax return, such as a partner- The rates are different for different locations.• You make the advance within a reasona- ship or S corporation return, deduct the reim- Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continentalble period of time. bursement on the appropriate line of the return United States.as provided in the instructions for that return.
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- Standard meal allowance. The federal raterangement are not substantiated, or an excess for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is thereimbursement is not returned within a reasona- Per Diem and Car Allowances standard meal allowance. You may pay only anble period of time by an employee, you are not M & IE allowance to employees who travel awayYou may reimburse your employees under anallowed to deduct these expenses as reim- from home if:accountable plan based on travel days, miles, orbursed under an accountable plan. Instead,
some other fixed allowance. In these cases, • You pay the employee for actual expensestreat the reimbursed expenses as paid under a
your employee is considered to have accountednonaccountable plan, discussed later. for lodging based on receipts submitted to
to you for the amount of the expense that does you,
not exceed the rates established by the federalAdequate accounting. Your employees must • You provide for the lodging,government. Your employee must actually sub-adequately account to you for their travel,
stantiate to you the other elements of the ex- • You pay for the actual expense of themeals, and entertainment expenses. They must
pense, such as time, place, and business lodging directly to the provider,give you documentary evidence of their travel,
purpose.mileage, and other employee business ex- • You do not have reasonable belief thatpenses. This evidence should include items lodging expenses were incurred by theFederal rate. The federal rate can be figuredsuch as receipts, along with either a statement employee, orusing any one of the following methods.of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or
• The allowance is computed on a basissimilar record in which the employee entered 1. For per diem amounts: similar to that used in computing the em-each expense at or near the time the expense
was incurred. ployee's wages (that is, number of hoursa. The regular federal per diem rate.
worked or miles traveled).b. The standard meal allowance.Excess reimbursement or allowance. An
Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail-c. The high-low rate.excess reimbursement or allowance is any
able on the Internet. You can access per diemamount you pay to an employee that is more
2. For car expenses: rates at www.gsa.gov.than the business-related expenses for which
the employee adequately accounted. The em- High-low method. This is a simplifieda. The standard mileage rate.ployee must return any excess reimbursement method of computing the federal per diem rateor other expense allowance to you within a rea- b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). for lodging and meal expenses for travelingsonable period of time. within the continental United States. It elimi-
nates the need to keep a current list of the perCar allowance. Your employee is consideredReasonable period of time. A reasonable diem rate in effect for each city in the continentalto have accounted to you for car expenses thatperiod of time depends on the facts and circum- United States.do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Forstances. Generally, actions that take place Under the high-low method, the per diem2008, the standard mileage rate for each mile ofwithin the times specified in the following list will amount for travel during 2008 is $237 ($58 for Mbusiness use is:be treated as taking place within a reasonable & IE) for certain high-cost locations. All otherperiod of time. • 50.5 cents per mile for the period January areas have a per diem amount of $152 ($45 for1 through June 30, 2008, and M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for the1. You give an advance within 30 days of the
time the employee has incurred the ex- $237 per diem amount under the high-low• 58.5 cents per mile for the period July 1
pense. method are listed in Publication 1542.through December 31, 2008.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting per diem and car allowances. • The per diem allowance. under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
The following discussion explains how to report wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject• The federal rate for M & IE.per diem and car allowances. The manner in to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-
which you report them depends on how the care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canIf you provide your employees with a per diemallowance compares to the federal rate. See deduct the reimbursement as compensation orallowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-Table 11-1. wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-dental expenses, you must treat an amount
ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. DeductAllowance less than or equal to the federal equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of
the allowable amount as compensation orrate. If your allowance for the employee is less travel as an expense for food and beverages. If
wages on the appropriate line of your income taxthan or equal to the appropriate federal rate, that the per diem allowance you provide is less than
return, as provided in its instructions.allowance is not included as part of the em- the federal per diem rate for the area of travel,
ployee's pay in box 1 of the employee's Form you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as Generally, amounts paid for meals, enter-
W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses the amount for food and beverages. tainment, and amusement provided to individu-
(including meals that may be subject to the 50% als who are not your employees are not subjectMeal expenses when subject to ªhours oflimit, discussed later). See How to deduct under to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directlyserviceº limits. For tax years beginning inAccountable Plans, earlier. related to the active conduct of your trade or2008, you can deduct 80% of the reimbursed business. Examples include:Allowance more than the federal rate. If meals your employees consume while awayyour employee's allowance is more than the • Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,from their tax home on business during, or inci-appropriate federal rate, you must report the or the use of a facility. You are allowed adent to, any period subject to the Department ofallowance as two separate items. deduction only to the extent it is includedTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits.
Include the allowance amount up to the fed- See Publication 463 for a detailed discussion in the gross income of the recipient as
eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee's of individuals subject to the Department of compensation for services or as a prize orForm W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. award.explained above). This part of the allowance is
•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-treated as reimbursed under an accountable De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The
quired to be reported on an informationplan. 50% limit does not apply to an expense for food
return, for example, Form 1099-MISC.Include the amount that is more than the or beverage that is excluded from the gross
See the General Instructions for Formsfederal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they income of an employee because it is a de
1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G for more in-apply) of the employee's Form W-2. Deduct it as minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for
formation about reporting requirements.wages subject to income tax withholding, social additional information on de minimis fringe ben-
security, Medicare, and federal unemployment efits. • The cost of providing meals, entertain-taxes. This part of the allowance is treated as ment, goods and services, or use of facili-Company cafeteria or executive diningreimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex- ties you sell to the public. For example, ifroom. The cost of food and beverages youplained later under Nonaccountable Plans. you operate a nightclub, your expense forprovide primarily to your employees on your
the entertainment you furnish to your cus-business premises is deductible. This includes
tomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-the cost of maintaining the facilities for providingMeals and Entertainment ness expense that is fully deductible.the food and beverages. These expenses are
Under an accountable plan, you can generally subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a • The cost of providing meals, entertain-deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible de minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica- ment, or recreational facilities to the gen-business-related meal and entertainment ex- tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation to eral public as a means of advertising orpenses you reimburse your employees. The de- your employees and you treat them as provided promoting goodwill in the community isduction limit applies even if you reimburse them under a nonaccountable plan. fully deductible.for 100% of the expenses.
Employee activities. The expense of provid-
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-Application of the 50% limit. The 50% de-
cluding the use of a facility) for your employeesduction limit applies to reimbursements you
is deductible. The benefit must be primarily formake to your employees for expenses they incur Miscellaneousyour employees who are not highly compen-for meals while traveling away from home on
sated.business and for entertaining business custom- ExpensesFor this purpose, a highly compensated em-ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or
ployee is an employee who meets either of theanother location. It applies to expenses incurred In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentfollowing requirements.at a business convention or reception, business expenses, other miscellaneous expenses thatmeeting, or business luncheon at a club. The are deductible, subject to limitations, include:1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-deduction limit may also apply to meals you
ness during the year or the preceding year. • Amounts paid for the reasonable cost offurnish on your premises to your employees.
An employee is treated as owning any in- advertising that are directly related to yourRelated expenses. Taxes and tips relating terest owned by his or her brother, sister, business activities. Generally, amountsto a meal or entertainment activity you reim- spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend- paid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying)burse to your employee under an accountable ants. are not deductible for tax purposes. Seeplan are included in the amount subject to the Lobbying expenses, later.2. Received more than $100,000 in pay for50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-
the preceding year. You may choose topenses, such as cover charges for admission to • Amounts paid that are directly related toinclude only employees who were also ina nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner the conduct of business meetings of yourthe top 20% of employees when ranked byor cocktail party, or the amount you pay for employees, partners, stockholders,pay for the preceding year.parking at a sports arena, are all subject to the agents, or directors. Some minor social
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to activities may be allowed, however, these For example, the expenses for food, bever-
and from an otherwise allowable business meal ages, and entertainment for a company-wide expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
or a business-related entertainment activity is picnic are not subject to the 50% limit. • Amounts paid that are directly related tonot subject to the 50% limit.
and necessary for attending business
meetings or conventions of certainAmount subject to 50% limit. If you provide Nonaccountable Plans tax-exempt organizations. These organi-your employees with a per diem allowance only
zations include business leagues, cham-for meal and incidental expenses, the amount A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that
bers of commerce, real estates boards,treated as an expense for food and beverages is does not meet the requirements for an account-
the lesser of the following. able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid, and trade and professional associations.
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advertising expenses. You can usually de- are deductible. For more information on how to Damages recovered. Special rules apply to
duct as a business expense the cost of institu- compensation you receive for damages sus-figure your deduction, see Publication 463.
tional or goodwill advertising to keep your name tained as a result of patent infringement, breach
before the public if it relates to business you of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-Charitable contributions. Cash payments to
reasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex- tions. You must include this compensation inan organization, charitable or otherwise, may be
ample, the cost of advertising that encourages your income. However, you may be able to takedeductible as business expenses if the pay-
people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy a special deduction. The deduction applies onlyments are not charitable contributions or gifts. If
U.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar to amounts recovered for actual injury, not anythe payments are charitable contributions or
causes is usually deductible. additional amount. The deduction is the smallergifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-
of the following.penses. However, corporations (other than SAnticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities
corporations) can deduct charitable contribu- • The amount you received or accrued foror reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-
tions on their income tax returns, subject to damages in the tax year reduced by theductible. For example, assume you sold 1-year
limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120 amount you paid or incurred in the year toTV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.
for more information. Sole proprietors, partners recover that amount.From experience, you know you will have ex-
in a partnership, or shareholders in an S corpo-penses of about $15,000 in the coming year for • Your losses from the injury you have notration may be able to deduct charitable contribu-these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the deducted.$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a tions made by their business on Schedule A
reserve or liability account. You can deduct your (Form 1040).
Demolition expenses or losses. Amountsexpenses only when you actually pay or accrue
paid or incurred to demolish a structure are notthem, depending on your accounting method. Example. You paid $15 to a local church for
deductible. These amounts are added to thea half-page ad in a program for a concert it isBribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay- basis of the land where the demolished structuresponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal was located. Any loss for the remaining un-courage readers to buy your products. Your pay-matter. Such activity could result in criminal depreciated basis of a demolished structurement is not a charitable contribution. However,prosecution. Any payments that appear to have would not be recognized until the property isyou may deduct it as an advertising expense.been made, either directly or indirectly, to an disposed.official or employee of any government or an Example. You made a $100,000 donationagency or instrumentality of any government are Education expenses. Ordinary and neces-to a committee organized by the local Chambernot deductible for tax purposes and are in viola- sary expenses paid for the cost of the educationof Commerce to bring a convention to your city,tion of the law. and training of your employees are deductible.intended to increase business activity, includingPayments paid directly or indirectly to a per- See Education Expenses in chapter 2.yours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu-son in violation of any federal or state law (but You may also deduct the cost of your owntion. However, you may deduct it as a businessonly if that state law is generally enforced, de- education (including certain related travel) re-expense.fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty lated to your trade or business. You must beSee Publication 526 for a discussion ofor for the loss of a license or privilege to engage able to show the education maintains or im-donated inventory, including capital gain prop-in a trade or business are also not allowed as a proves skills required in your trade or business,erty.deduction for tax purposes. or that it is required by law or regulations, for
keeping your license to practice, status, or job.Meaning of ªgenerally enforced.º A state Club dues and membership fees. Generally, For example, an attorney can deduct the cost oflaw is considered generally enforced unless it is amounts paid or incurred for membership in any attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)never enforced or enforced only for infamous club organized for business, pleasure, recrea- classes that are required by the state bar associ-persons or persons whose violations are ex-
tion, or any other social purpose are not deducti- ation to maintain his or her license to practicetraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is
ble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure, law.generally enforced unless proper reporting of a
recreation, or other social purpose include, butviolation of the law results in enforcement only Education expenses you incur to meet theare not limited to country clubs, golf and athleticunder unusual circumstances. minimum requirements of your present trade orclubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs, business, or those that qualify you for a newKickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re- and clubs operated to provide meals under cir- trade or business, are not deductible. This is trueferring a client, patient, or customer. The com- cumstances generally considered to be condu- even if the education maintains or improvesmon kickback situation occurs when money or cive to business discussions. skills presently required in your business. Forproperty is given to someone as payment for
more information on education expenses, seeException. The following organizations areinfluencing a third party to purchase from, use
Publication 970.not treated as clubs organized for business,the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-
pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un-son who pays the kickback. In many cases, the Franchise, trademark, trade name. If youless one of the main purposes is to conductperson whose business is being sought or en- buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youentertainment activities for members or theirjoyed by the person who pays the kickback is not can deduct the amount you pay or incur as aguests or to provide members or their guestsaware of the payment. business expense only if your payments are partwith access to entertainment facilities.For example, the Yard Corporation is in the of a series of payments that are:business of repairing ships. It engages in the • Boards of trade.practice of returning 10% of the repair bills as 1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-• Business leagues.kickbacks to the captains and chief officers of tion of the item,the vessels it repairs. Although this practice is • Chambers of commerce. 2. Payable at least annually for the entireconsidered an ordinary and necessary expense
term of the transfer agreement, and• Civic or public service organizations.of getting business, it is clearly a violation of a
state law that is generally enforced. These ex- 3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable• Professional organizations such as bar as-penditures are not deductible for tax purposes, under a fixed formula).sociations and medical associations.whether or not the owners of the shipyard are
When determining the term of the transfer• Real estate boards.subsequently prosecuted.
agreement, include all renewal options and any• Trade associations.Form 1099-MISC. It does not matter other period for which you and the transferrer
whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year reasonably expect the agreement to be re-
are deductible on your income tax return in re- newed.Credit card convenience fees. Credit cardgards to information reporting. See Form companies charge a fee to businesses who ac- A franchise includes an agreement that gives1099-MISC for more information. cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred one of the parties to the agreement the right to
by the business can be deducted as a businessCar and truck expenses. The costs of operat- distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or
expense.ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business facilities within a specified area.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis- Legal fees relating to personal tax advice 2. The Vice President.
may be deductible on Line 22, Schedule Aabled, you can deduct expenses necessary for 3. Any officer or employee of the White(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How-you to be able to work (impairment-related ex- House Office of the Executive Office of theever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita-penses) as a business expense, rather than as a President and the two most senior leveltion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. Seemedical expense. officers of each of the other agencies inPublication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.You are disabled if you have either of the the Executive Office.following. Tax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a 4. Any individual who:tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
that part of your tax return relating to your busi-ple, blindness or deafness) that function- a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the
ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched-ally limits your being employed. Executive Schedule under section 5312
ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost of title 5, United States Code,• A physical or mental impairment that sub- may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
stantially limits one or more of your major b. Has been designated by the Presidentyou itemize deductions.
life activities. as having Cabinet-level status, orYou can also claim a business deduction for
amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted c. Is an immediate deputy of an individualThe expense qualifies as a business expense tax deficiencies for your business operated as a listed in item (a) or (b).if all the following apply. sole proprietor.
• Your work clearly requires the expense for Exceptions to denial of deduction. TheLicenses and regulatory fees. Licenses andyou to satisfactorily perform that work. general denial of the deduction does not apply toregulatory fees for your trade or business paid
• The goods or services purchased are the following.annually to state or local governments generally
clearly not needed or used, other than in- are deductible. Some licenses and fees may • Expenses of appearing before, or commu-cidentally, in your personal activities. have to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more nicating with, any local council or similarinformation.• Their treatment is not specifically provided governing body concerning its legislation
for under other tax law provisions. (local legislation) if the legislation is of di-Lobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex- rect interest to you or to you and an organ-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses ization of which you are a member. AnExample. You are blind. You must use a include amounts paid or incurred for any of the Indian tribal government is treated as areader to do your work, both at and away from following activities. local council or similar governing body.your place of work. The reader's services are • Influencing legislation.only for your work. You can deduct your ex- • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-
penses for the reader as a business expense. • Participating in or intervening in any politi- islation and communicating directly with a
cal campaign for, or against, any candi- covered executive branch official if those
Internet-related expenses. Generally, you date for public office. expenses for the tax year do not exceed
can deduct internet-related expenses including $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).• Attempting to influence the general public,domain registrations fees and webmaster con-
or segments of the public, about elections, • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engagedsulting costs. If you are starting a business you
legislative matters, or referendums. in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-may have to amortize these expenses as
fessional lobbyists) on behalf of anotherstart-up costs. For more information about am- • Communicating directly with covered ex- person (but does apply to payments by theortizing start-up and organizational costs, see ecutive branch officials (defined later) in other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingchapter 8. any attempt to influence the official actions activities).or positions of those officials.
Interview expense allowances. Reimburse-
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-ments you make to job candidates for transpor- Moving machinery. Generally, the cost ofdinating any of the preceding activities.tation or other expenses related to interviews for moving machinery from one city to another is apossible employment are not wages. You can deductible expense. So is the cost of movingYour expenses for influencing legislation anddeduct the reimbursements as a business ex- machinery from one plant to another, or fromcommunicating directly with a covered execu-pense. However, expenses for food, beverages, one part of your plant to another. You can de-tive branch official include a portion of your laborand entertainment are subject to the 50% limit duct the cost of installing the machinery in thecosts and general and administrative costs ofdiscussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- new location. However, you must capitalize theyour business. For information on making thisment. costs of installing or moving newly purchasedallocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-
machinery.tions.Legal and professional fees. Fees charged
You cannot claim a charitable or businessby accountants and attorneys that are ordinary
Outplacement services. The costs of out-expense deduction for amounts paid to an or-and necessary expenses directly related to op-
placement services you provide to your employ-ganization if both of the following apply.erating your business are deductible as busi-
ees to help them find new employment, such asness expenses. However, usually legal fees you • The organization conducts lobbying activi- career counseling, rÂesumÂe assistance, skills as-pay to acquire business assets are not deducti- ties on matters of direct financial interest sessment, etc. are deductible.ble. These costs are added to the basis of the to your business. The costs of outplacement services mayproperty.
cover more than one deduction category. For• A principal purpose of your contribution isFees that include payments for work of a
example, deduct as a utilities expense the costto avoid the rules discussed earlier thatpersonal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-
of telephone calls made under this service andprohibit a business deduction for lobbyingages arising from a personal injury), are not
deduct as rental expense the cost of rentingexpenses.allowed as a business deduction on Schedule C
machinery and equipment for this service.or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both business
If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec- For information on whether the value of out-and personal charges, compute the business
tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a placement services is includable in your employ-portion as follows: multiply the total amount of
notice on the part of dues that is allocable to ees' income, see Publication 15-B.the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is
nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,the amount attributable to business matters, the
you cannot deduct that part of the dues.denominator of which is the total amount paid. Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for late
The result is the portion of the invoice attributa- performance or nonperformance of a contractCovered executive branch official. For
ble to business expenses. The portion attributa- are generally deductible. For instance, you ownpurposes of this discussion, a covered executive
ble to personal matters is the difference and operate a construction company. You havebranch official is any of the following.
between the total amount and the business por- been contracted to construct a building by a
tion (computed above). certain date. Due to construction delays, the1. The President.
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
building is not completed and ready for occu- function are for, or intended for, the use of methods and use the method that results in less
tax.pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You a political party or candidate.
are now required to pay an additional amount for Method 1. Figure your tax for 2008 claiming• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala,each day that completion is delayed beyond the a deduction for the repaid amount.parade, concert, or similar event if identi-completion date stipulated in the contract. fied with a political party or candidate. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2008 claimingThese additional costs are deductible business
a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow theseexpenses.
steps.Repairs. The cost of repairing or improvingOn the other hand, penalties or fines paid to
property used in your trade or business is eitherany government agency or instrumentality be- 1. Figure your tax for 2008 without deductinga deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte-cause of a violation of any law are not deducti- the repaid amount.nance that keeps your property in a normal effi-ble. These fines or penalties include the
cient operating condition, but that does not 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearfollowing amounts.
materially increase the value or substantially without including in income the amount• Paid because of a conviction for a crime or prolong the useful life of the property is deducti- you repaid in 2008.after a plea of guilty or no contest in a ble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, the 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax showncriminal proceeding. cost must be depreciated over the useful life of on your return for the earlier year. This isthe property. See Form 4562 and its instructions• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, the amount of your credit.for how to compute and claim the depreciationstate, or local law in a civil action, includ-
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax fordeduction.ing certain additions to tax and additional
2008 figured without the deduction (stepamounts and assessable penalties im- The cost of repairs includes the costs of
1).posed by the Internal Revenue Code. labor, supplies, and certain other items. The
value of your own labor is not deductible. Exam- If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the• Paid in settlement of actual or possible ples of repairs include: amount repaid as discussed earlier under Typeliability for a fine or penalty, whether civil
of deduction.or criminal. • Reconditioning floors (but not replace-
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim thement),• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro- credit on line 68 of Form 1040, and write ªI.R.C.ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- • Repainting the interior and exterior walls 1341º next to line 68.alty. of a building,
Example. For 2007, you filed a return and• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters,Examples of nondeductible penalties and reported your income on the cash method. Inandfines include the following. 2007, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2007
• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- gross income under a claim of right. Your filing• Fines for violating city housing codes. ment of fixtures). status in 2008 and 2007 is single. Your income• Fines paid by truckers for violating state and tax for both years are as follows:
maximum highway weight laws. Repayments. If you had to repay an amount
2007 2007 • Fines for violating air quality laws. you included in your income in an earlier year, With Income Without Incomeyou may be able to deduct the amount repaid for• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re- Taxablethe year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amountgarding mining safety standards and dis- Income $15,000 $10,000you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be ablecharges into navigable waters. Tax $ 1,863 $ 1,113to take a credit against your tax for the year in
which you repaid it.A fine or penalty does not include any of the 2008 2008 following. Type of deduction. The type of deduction Without Deduction With Deduction
you are allowed in the year of repayment de- Taxable• Legal fees and related expenses to defend
pends on the type of income you included in the Income $49,950 $44,950yourself in a prosecution or civil action for
earlier year. For instance, if you repay ana violation of the law imposing the fine or Tax  $8,838  $ 7,588amount you previously reported as a capitalcivil penalty.
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on Your tax under Method 1 is $7,588. Your tax
• Court costs or stenographic and printing Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as under Method 2 is $8,088, figured as follows:
charges. self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-
Tax previously determined for 2007 $ 1,863ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule• Compensatory damages paid to a govern- Less: Tax as refigured ......... . − 1,113C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).ment. Decrease in 2007 tax $ 750If you reported the amount as wages, unem- Regular tax liability for 2008 ...... . $8,838ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessPolitical contributions. Contributions or gifts Less: Decrease in 2007 tax ...... . − 750ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Formpaid to political parties or candidates are not Refigured tax for 2008 $ 8,0881040) as a miscellaneous itemized deductiondeductible. In addition, expenses paid or in- that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if Because you pay less tax under Method 1, youcurred to take part in any political campaign of a the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1 should take a deduction for the repayment incandidate for public office are not deductible. (discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule 2008.
A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-Indirect political contributions. You can- Repayment does not apply. This discus-duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.not deduct indirect political contributions and sion does not apply to the following.costs of taking part in political activities as busi- Repayment Ð $3,000 or less. If theness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex- • Deductions for bad debts.amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct itpenses include the following. from your income in the year you repaid it. • Deductions from sales to customers, such
• Advertising in a convention program of a as returns and allowances, and similarRepaymentÐover $3,000. If the amountpolitical party, or in any other publication if items.you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-any of the proceeds from the publication duct the repayment, as described earlier. How- • Deductions for legal and other expensesare for, or intended for, the use of a politi- ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit of contesting the repayment.cal party or candidate. for the year of repayment if you included the
income under a ªclaim of right.º This means that• Admission to a dinner or program (includ- Year of deduction (or credit). If you use
at the time you included the income, it appeareding, but not limited to, galas, dances, film the cash method of accounting, you can take the
that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youpresentations, parties, and sporting deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax
qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothevents) if any of the proceeds from the year in which you actually make the repayment.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 45

Page 46 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you use any other accounting method, you can Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed
Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing adeduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only
pendent organization within the IRS whose em- paper return. If you filed Form 8379 withfor the tax year in which it is a proper deduction
ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifunder your accounting method. For example, if
economic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- you filed electronically). Have your 2008you use the accrual method, you are entitled to
ing tax problems that have not been resolved tax return available so you can providethe deduction or credit in the tax year in which
through normal channels, or who believe that an your social security number, your filingthe obligation for the repayment accrues.
IRS system or procedure is not working as it status, and the exact whole dollar amount
should. of your refund.Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional, You can contact the TAS by calling the TAStechnical, and trade journals that deal with your • Download forms, instructions, and publica-toll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 orbusiness field are deductible. tions.TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-
ble for assistance. You can also call or write your • Order IRS products online.Supplies and materials. Unless you have de- local taxpayer advocate, whose phone numberducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally • Research your tax questions online.and address are listed in your local telephonecan deduct the cost of materials and supplies directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad- • Search publications online by topic oractually consumed and used during the tax year. vocate Service ÐYour Voice at the IRS. You keyword.
If you keep incidental materials and supplies can file Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advo- • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- cate Service Assistance (And Application for published in the last few years.tal materials and supplies you bought during the Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an IRS em-
tax year if all the following requirements are met. ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more • Figure your withholding allowances using
information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. the withholding calculator online at • You do not keep a record of when they are
www.irs.gov/individuals.used. Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).
LITCs are independent organizations that pro- • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by• You do not take an inventory of the vide low income taxpayers with representation using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)amount on hand at the beginning and end in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free Assistant.of the tax year. or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide • Sign up to receive local and national taxtax education and outreach for taxpayers who• This method does not distort your income. news by email.speak English as a second language. Publica-
tion 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List,You can also deduct the cost of books, profes- • Get information on starting and operating
provides information on clinics in your area. It issional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor- a small business.
available at www.irs.gov or your local IRS office.mally use them within a year. However, if the
usefulness of these items extends substantially Free tax services.  To find out what servicesbeyond the year they are placed in service, you Phone. Many services are available byare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide togenerally must recover their costs through de- phone. Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free taxpreciation. For more information regarding de- information sources, including publications,
preciation see Publication 946, How to services, and free tax education and assistance • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-Depreciate Property. programs. It also has an index of over 100 tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you rent-year forms, instructions, andUtilities. Business expenses for heat, lights, can listen to on your telephone. publications, and prior-year forms and in-power, telephone service, and water and sewer- Accessible versions of IRS published prod- structions. You should receive your orderage are deductible. However, any part attributa- ucts are available on request in a variety of within 10 days.ble to personal use is not deductible. alternative formats for people with disabilities.
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withTelephone. The cost of basic local tele- Free help with your return. Free help in pre- your tax questions at 1-800-829-4933.phone service (including any taxes) for the first paring your return is available nationwide from
• Solving problems. You can gettelephone line you have in your home, even IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income
face-to-face help solving tax problemsthough you have an office in your home is not Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-deductible. However, charges for business help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-long-distance phone calls on that line, as well as seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed
plain IRS letters, request adjustments toto assist taxpayers age 60 and older with theirthe cost of a second line into your home used
your account, or help you set up a pay-tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronicexclusively for business, are deductible busi-
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-filing and all volunteers will let you know aboutness expenses.
tance Center for an appointment. To findcredits and deductions you may be entitled to
the number, go to claim. To find the nearest Vita or TCE site, call
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the1-800-829-1040.
phone book under United States Govern-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the
ment, Internal Revenue Service.Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-
est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessvisit AARP's website at12. to TTY/TDD equipment, callwww.aarp.org/money/taxaide. 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toFor more information on these programs, go order forms and publications.to www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-upper right-hand corner.How To Get Tax ten to pre-recorded messages coveringInternet. You can access the IRS web- various tax topics.site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7Help • Refund information. To check the status ofdays a week to:
your 2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954• E-file your return. Find out about commer-You can get help with unresolved tax issues, during business hours or 1-800-829-4477cial tax preparation and e-file servicesorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- (automated refund information 24 hours aavailable free to eligible taxpayers.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best • Check the status of your 2008 refund. Go hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt
for you, you will have quick and easy access to to www.irs.gov and click on Where's My of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after
tax help. Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after the mailing a paper return. If you filed Form
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11 visit your local Taxpayer Assistance • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
weeks if you filed electronically). Have Center where you can spread out your • Toll-free and email technical support.your 2008 tax return available so you can records and talk with an IRS representa-
• Two releases during the year.provide your social security number, your tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-
filing status, and the exact whole dollar essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you ± The first release will ship the beginning
amount of your refund. Refunds are sent can call your local Center and leave a of January 2009.
out weekly on Fridays. If you check the message requesting an appointment to re- ± The final release will ship the beginning
status of your refund and are not given the solve a tax account issue. A representa- of March 2009.date it will be issued, please wait until the tive will call you back within 2 business
next week before checking back. days to schedule an in-person appoint- Purchase the DVD from National Technical
ment at your convenience. If you have an Information Service (NTIS) at • Other refund information. To check the
ongoing, complex tax account problem orstatus of a prior year refund or amended www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)a special need, such as a disability, anreturn refund, call 1-800-829-1954. or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVDappointment can be requested. All other for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).issues will be handled without an appoint-Evaluating the quality of our telephone
ment. To find the number of your localservices. To ensure IRS representatives give Small Business Resource Guide
office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts oraccurate, courteous, and professional answers, 2009. This online guide is a must for
look in the phone book under Unitedwe use several methods to evaluate the quality every small business owner or any tax-
States Government, Internal Revenueof our telephone services. One method is for a payer about to start a business. This year's
Service.second IRS representative to listen in on or guide includes:
record random telephone calls. Another is to ask • Helpful information, such as how to pre-some callers to complete a short survey at the Mail. You can send your order for pare a business plan, find financing forend of the call. forms, instructions, and publications to your business, and much more.the address below. You should receive
Walk-in. Many products and services a response within 10 days after your request is • All the business tax forms, instructions,are available on a walk-in basis. received. and publications needed to successfully
manage a business.
• Products. You can walk in to many post Internal Revenue Service • Tax law changes for 2009.offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
certain forms, instructions, and publica- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery finding aid.DVD for tax products. You can orderstores, copy centers, city and county gov-
• Web links to various government agen-Publication 1796, IRS Tax Productsernment offices, credit unions, and office
DVD, and obtain: cies, business associations, and IRS orga-supply stores have a collection of products
available to print from a CD or photocopy nizations.• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS lications. • ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour opportu-offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- nity to suggest changes for future editions.• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
tions.Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- • A site map of the guide to help you navi-
able for research purposes. gate the pages with ease.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
finding aid.• Services. You can walk in to your local • An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module that
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- gives practical tips for teens about starting• Tax law frequently asked questions.ness day for personal, face-to-face tax their own business, creating a business• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-help. An employee can explain IRS letters, plan, and filing taxes.sponse system.request adjustments to your tax account,
or help you set up a payment plan. If you • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the The information is updated during the year.need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- U.S. Code. Visit www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº intions about how the tax law applies to your the upper right-hand corner for more informa-• Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxindividual tax return, or you are more com-
tion.fortable talking with someone in person, forms.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Cleanup costs, Forgone .................. . 14A F
environmental ............ . 23 Life insurance policies ..... . 13Advertising ................. . 43 Fees:
Not deductible ............ . 13Club dues .................. . 43 Commitment .............. . 13Amortization:
Refunds of ................ . 14Legal and professional ..... . 44Comments on publication ... . 1Anti-abuse rule ............ . 30
When to deduct ........... . 14Loan origination ........... . 13Anti-churning rules ........ . 29 Commitment fees .......... . 13
Internet-relatedRegulatory ................ . 44Atmospheric pollution control Computer software ......... . 29 expenses ................ . 44Tax return preparation ..... . 44facilities ................ . 32 Constant-yield method, Interview expenses ......... . 44Corporate organization Fines ....................... . 44OID ...................... . 13
costs ................... . 26 Forgone interest ........... . 14Contested liability ........... . 4Dispositions of section 197 Form:Contributions: Kintangibles .............. . 30 1098 ..................... . 12Charitable ................ . 43 Key person ................. . 13Experimental costs ........ . 32 3115 ................. . 16, 30Political ................... . 45 Kickbacks .................. . 43Geological and geophysical 4562 ..................... . 25Copyrights ................. . 28costs ................... . 31 5213 ...................... . 5Cost depletion ............. . 33How to deduct ............ . 25 8826 ..................... . 25 LCost of getting lease ... . 10, 27Incorrect amount 8885 ..................... . 19 Leases:Cost of goods sold .......... . 2deducted ............... . 30 T ......................... . 37 Canceling .................. . 9Partnership organization Cost recovery ............... . 3 Franchise .............. . 28, 43 Cost of getting ........ . 10, 27costs ................... . 26 Covenant not to Franchise taxes ............ . 17 Improvements by lessee ... . 10Pollution control facilities ... . 32 compete ................. . 28 Fringe benefits .............. . 7 Leveraged ................. . 9Reforestation costs ........ . 31 Credit card convenience Fuel taxes .................. . 17 Mineral ................... . 37Reforestation expenses .... . 24 fees ...................... . 43 Oil and gas ............... . 37Related person ............ . 29
Sales distinguished ......... . 9Research costs ........... . 32 G Taxes on .................. . 9DSection 197 intangibles Gas wells .................. . 36 Legal and professionalDe minimis OID ............ . 12defined ................. . 28 Geological and geophysical fees ...................... . 44Starting a business Debt-financed costs:costs ................... . 26 Licenses ............... . 28, 44distributions ............. . 12 Development, oil andStart-up costs ............. . 26 Life insurance coverage ..... . 7Definitions: gas ..................... . 31Anticipated liabilities ....... . 43 Business bad debt ......... . 38 Limit on deductions ......... . 5Exploration, oil and gas .... . 31Necessary expense ........ . 2Assessments, local ........ . 16 Line of credit ............... . 12Geothermal wells ....... . 21, 36Ordinary expense .......... . 2At-risk limits ................ . 4 Loans:Gifts, nominal value ......... . 7Section 197 intangibles .... . 28Attorney fees ............... . 44 Below-market interestGoing into business ...... . 3, 26Demolition expenses ....... . 43 rate .................... . 14Awards .................... . 6, 7 Goodwill ................... . 28Depletion: Discounted ............... . 14
Mineral property ........... . 33 Origination fees ........... . 13
Oil and gas wells .......... . 34B Loans or Advances .......... . 8HPercentage table .......... . 36Bad debts: Lobbying expenses ........ . 44Health insurance, deduction forTimber .................... . 37Defined ................... . 38 Long-term careself-employed ............ . 18Who can claim ............ . 33How to treat ............... . 39 insurance ................ . 18Heating equipment .......... . 3Depreciation  (See CostRecovery ................. . 39 Losses .................... . 4, 5recovery)Types of .................. . 38 At-risk limits ................ . 4When worthless ........... . 39 Development costs, I Net operating .............. . 4
miners ................... . 22Bonuses: Passive activities ........... . 4Impairment-related
Employee .................. . 7 Disabled, improvements expenses ................ . 44
Royalties ................. . 37 for ....................... . 24 Improvements ............... . 3 MBribes ...................... . 43 Drilling and development By lessee ................. . 10
Machinery parts ............. . 3costs ..................... . 21Brownfields  (See Environmental For disabled and elderly ... . 24
cleanup costs) Meals ...................... . 40Dues, membership ......... . 43 Income taxes ............... . 16
Business: Meals and entertainment ... . 42Incorrect amount of
Assets ..................... . 3 Meals and lodging ........... . 7amortization deducted ... . 30EBooks and records ........ . 28 Medical expenses .......... . 44Insurance:Economic interest .......... . 33Meal expenses ............ . 42 Methods of accounting ...... . 4Capitalized premiums ...... . 20Economic performance ..... . 4Use of car .............. . 4, 43 Deductible premiums ...... . 17 Mining:Education expenses ...... . 7, 43Use of home ............... . 3 Nondeductible Depletion ................. . 36Elderly, improvements premiums ............... . 19 Development costs ........ . 22for ....................... . 24 Self-employed Exploration costs .......... . 22C Employee benefit individuals .............. . 18 Mortgage ................... . 12Campaign contribution ..... . 45 programs ................. . 7 Intangible drilling costs .... . 21 Moving expenses,Capital expenses ............ . 3 Employment taxes ......... . 17 Intangibles, amortization ... . 27 machinery ............... . 44Capitalization of interest ... . 14 Entertainment .............. . 40 Interest:Car allowance .............. . 41 Environmental cleanup Allocation of ............... . 11Car and truck expenses .... . 43 (remediation) costs ...... . 23 NBelow-market ............. . 14
Carrying charges ........... . 21 Excise taxes ............... . 17 Natural gas ................. . 36Business expense for ...... . 10
Charitable contributions .... . 43 Experimentation costs .... . 21, NonqualifyingCapitalized ............ . 13, 14
32 intangibles ............... . 28Circulation costs, newspapers Carrying charge ........... . 21
and periodicals .......... . 23 Exploration costs .......... . 22 Deductible ................ . 12 Not-for-profit activities ...... . 5
Page 48 Publication 535 (2008)

Page 49 of 49 of Publication 535 10:04 -  3-APR-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Political contributions ...... . 45 Rent expense, Fuel ...................... . 17O
capitalizing ............... . 10 Income ................... . 16Pollution controlOffice in home .............. . 3
Leased property ............ . 9facilities .................. . 32 Repairs .................... . 45Oil and gas wells:
Personal property ......... . 17Prepaid expense ............ . 4 Repayments (claim ofDepletion ................. . 34
Real estate ............... . 16Extends useful life ......... . 20 right) ..................... . 45Drilling costs .............. . 21
Sales ..................... . 17Interest ................... . 14Partnerships .............. . 35 Research costs ........ . 21, 32 Unemployment fund ....... . 17Rent ....................... . 8S corporations ............ . 35
Telephone .................. . 46Prepayment penalty ........ . 12Optional write-off method: S Timber ................. . 31, 37Circulation costs .......... . 32 Presumption of profit ........ . 5 Sales taxes ................. . 17 Tools ........................ . 3Experimental costs ........ . 32 Section 179 expense deductionIntangible drilling and Trademark, trade name .... . 28,R (See Cost recovery)development costs ...... . 32 43Real estate taxes ........... . 16 Self-employed health insuranceMining exploration and Travel ...................... . 40Recapture: deduction ................ . 18development costs ...... . 32
Exploration expenses ...... . 22 Self-employment tax ....... . 17Research costs ........... . 32 UTimber property ........... . 31 Self-insurance, reserveOrganization costs: Unemployment fundRecovery of amount for ....................... . 19Corporate ................. . 26 taxes ..................... . 17deducted .................. . 4 Sick pay ..................... . 8Partnership ............... . 26
Unpaid expenses, relatedRefiners who cannot claim Standard meal allowance ... . 41Organizational costs ....... . 24 person ................... . 14percentage depletion ..... . 34 Standard mileage rate ...... . 41Original issue discount ..... . 12 Utilities ..................... . 46Reforestation costs .... . 24, 31 Standby charges ........... . 13Outplacement services ..... . 44
Regulatory fees ............ . 44 Start-up costs .......... . 24, 26
Reimbursements ........... . 40 VSubscriptions .......... . 43, 46P Business expenses ......... . 8 Vacation pay ................ . 8Suggestions forPassive activities ............ . 4 Mileage ................... . 41 publication ................ . 1Payments in kind ............ . 4 Nonaccountable plan ...... . 42 Supplies and materials ..... . 46 WPenalties ................... . 12 Per diem .................. . 41
Wages:Deductible ................ . 44 Related persons: Property ................... . 8Nondeductible ............ . 44 TAnti-churning rules ........ . 29 Tests for deducting pay ..... . 6Prepayment ............... . 12 Tax preparation fees ....... . 44Coal or iron ore ........... . 36
Welfare benefit funds ........ . 7Per diem and car Payments to ............ . 5, 14 Taxes ....................... . 9
allowances ............... . 41 Refiners .................. . 34 Carrying charge ........... . 21 ■Rent expense .............. . 8Percentage depletion ....... . 33 Employment .............. . 17
Unreasonable rent .......... . 8 Excise .................... . 17Personal property tax ...... . 17
Franchise ................. . 17Removal ................... . 24Points ...................... . 13
Publication 535 (2008) Page 49