Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.SGM (12-Dec-2006) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2006Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov
www.irs.gov/efile

Page 2 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Independent contractor. People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,Contents
subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
Introduction.............................. 2 are in an independent trade, business, or profession in
which they offer their services to the general public areWhat’s New for 2006........................ 3 generally independent contractors. However, whether they
are independent contractors or employees depends on theWhat’s New for 2007........................ 3
facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
Reminders ................................ 3 an independent contractor if the payer has the right to
control or to direct only the result of the work and not how itPhotographs of Missing Children............. 4 will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 5
tax. For more information on determining whether you are
2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 12 an independent contractor or an employee, see Publica-
tion 15-A, Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide.3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 16
Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a4. General Business Credits................ 18
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and
5. Business Income....................... 20 Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 27
Limited liability company (LLC).A limited liability com-7. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 29 pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing
8. Business Expenses..................... 31 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 40 reports its income and deductions on its owner’s federal
income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax................ 41
Schedule C or C-EZ.
11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 45
Husband and wife business.If you and your spouse
12. How To Get More Information............. 47 jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in aIndex .................................... 50 partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
Form 1065. For more information, see Publication 541.
Introduction Exception. If you and your spouse wholly own an unin-
corporated business as community property under theThe purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-
community property laws of a state, foreign country, ormation about the federal tax laws that apply to small
U.S. possession, you can treat the business either as abusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory
sole proprietorship or a partnership. The only states withemployees.
community property laws are Arizona, California, Idaho,
Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andAre you self-employed?You are self-employed if you
Wisconsin. A change in your reporting position will becarry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an
treated as a conversion of the entity.independent contractor.
This publication does not cover the topics listed inSole proprietor.A sole proprietor is someone who owns
the following table.an unincorporated business by himself or herself. How-
ever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited
liability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you
IF you need information about: THEN you shouldelect to treat the LLC as a corporation.
see:
Trade or business. A trade or business is generally anCorporations................. Publication 542activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum-Farming .................... Publication 225stances of each case determine whether or not an activityFishermen (Capital Constructionis a trade or business. You do not need to actually make aFund) ...................... Publication 595profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have aPartnerships................. Publication 541profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts toPassive activities.............. Publication 925further the interests of your business. Recordkeeping............... Publication 583You do not have to carry on regular full-time businessRental...................... Publication 527activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time businessS corporations................ Instructions forin addition to your regular job or business may be Form 1120Sself-employment.
Page 2 Publication 334 (2006)

Page 3 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What you need to know.Table A (shown later) provides 2006 is 44.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more
a list of questions you need to answer to help you meetinformation, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
your federal tax obligations. After each question is the
Self-employment tax. The maximum netlocation in this publication where you will find the related
discussion. self-employment earnings subject to the social security
part (12.4%) of the self-employment tax is $94,200 for
IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top quality2006. For more information, see Self-Employment (SE)
service by helping them understand and meet their taxTax in chapter 1 and chapter 10.
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
and fairness to all. Domestic production activities deduction. You may
be able to deduct up to 3% of your qualified production
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- activities income from certain business activities. For morements about this publication and your suggestions forinformation, see Form 8903, Domestic Production Activi-future editions. ties Deduction.You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put “PublicationsIncreased section 179 deduction dollar limit.For taxComment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-years beginning in 2006, the maximum section 179 ex-spond individually to each email, we do appreciate yourpense deduction is increased from $105,000 to $108,000feedback and will consider your comments as we revise($140,000 to $143,000 for qualified enterprise zone, re-our tax products. newal community, and New York Liberty Zone property).You can write us at the following address: For more information, see Depreciation in chapter 8.
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B What’s New for 20071111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406
Washington, DC 20224 The following are some of the tax changes for 2007. For
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, itlights of 2006 Tax Changes.
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.Self-employment tax. The maximum net
self-employment earnings subject to the social securityTax questions.If you have a tax question, visit www.irs. part of the self-employment tax increases to $97,500 forgov or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax ques-2007.tions at either of the addresses listed above.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
What’s New for 2006 2007 is 48.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
The following are some of the tax changes for 2006. For
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2006 Tax Changes.
Reminders
General business credit (Form 3800).You must file
Form 3800 to claim any of the general business creditsAccounting Methods. Certain small business taxpayers
listed on Form 3800. The following three general businessmay be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of
credits have special tax liability limits and are not reportedaccounting and may not be required to account for invento-
on Form 3800. ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.
• The empowerment zone and renewal community
Reportable transactions.You must file Form 8886, Re-employment credit (Form 8844).
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-• The alcohol fuel credit (Form 6478). tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also• The renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian
have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans-coal production credit (Form 8835, Section B).
action understatements. Reportable transactions include:
Mine rescue team training credit.Certain employers 1.  Transactions the same as or substantially similar to
can claim a new mine rescue team training credit. Seetax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS,Publication 553.
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimumStandard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
fee,cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
Publication 334 (2006) Page 3

Page 4 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1 (page 5).
What forms must I file? See chapter 1 (page 10).
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1
(page 9).
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2
month? (page 12).
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2
(page 12).
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5 (page 20).
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See chapter 8 (page 31).
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8 (page 40).
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9 (page 40).
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3 (page 16).
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11 (page 45).
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12 (page 47).
3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party
has, contractual protection against disallowance ofPhotographs of Missingthe tax benefits,
Children4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-
lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certain
The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theforeign currency transactions) or $4 million in any
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-combination of tax years, and
graphs of missing children selected by the Center may5. Transactions with asset holding periods of 45 days orappear in this publication on pages that would otherwiseless and that result in a tax credit of more thanbe blank. You can help bring these children home by$250,000. looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Page 4 Publication 334 (2006)

Page 5 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
1. alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
Filing and Paying
pleted tax return and mail both to the following address.
Business Taxes
Internal Revenue Service
ITIN Operation
Introduction P.O. Box 149342
Austin, TX 78714-9342This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructionstaxpayer identification numbers.
for Form W-7 (Rev. January 2007). If you must includeTable 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically.another person’s SSN on your return and that personTable 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay,does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter thattheir due dates, and the forms you use to report them.person’s ITIN. The application is also available in
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typicalSpanish. The form is available from the IRS website at
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go outwww.irs.gov or you can call 1-800-829-3676 to order the
of business. form.
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
dars for 2007. It has tax calendars that tell you holder to social security benefits or change the
when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
Employer identification number (EIN).You must alsoUseful Items have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifYou may want to see: you do either of the following.
• Pay wages to one or more employees.Publication
• File pension or excise tax returns.❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNForm (and Instructions)
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return You can apply for an EIN:
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals • Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/
businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business
once the application information is validated.❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit From Business
• By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-• By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-tions and forms. ployer Identification Number.
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For moreIdentification Numbers
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your
EIN.This section explains three types of taxpayer identification
numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how toWhen you need identification numbers of other per-get them. sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
certain payments you must report on information returns.Social security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSNThese payments are discussed under Information Re-as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thisturns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient ofnumber on each of your individual income tax forms, suchthese payments (the payee) a statement showing the totalas Form 1040 and its schedules. amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’sTo apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for aidentification number and your identification number on theSocial Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-returns and statements.curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA websiteEmployee. If you have employees, you must get an
at www.socialsecurity.gov. SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each employee exactly as they are shown on the em-IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)ployee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is not
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re-
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
employee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-
vorce.
You may be able to file your tax returns electronically usingForm W-4 is completed by each employee so the cor-
an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRSrect federal income tax can be withheld from their pay.
e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of theIf your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-should file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and moreOther payee.If you make payments to someone who isaccurate than the processing of paper returns. As with anot your employee and you must report the payments onpaper return, you are responsible for making sure youran information return, get that person’s SSN. If you mustreturn contains accurate information and is filed on time.report payments to an organization, such as a corporationUsing e-file does not affect your chances of an IRSor partnership, you must get its EIN. examination of your return.To get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request You can file most commonly used business forms usingfor Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.IRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website atA payee who does not provide you with an identificationwww.irs.gov.number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
mation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-Electronic signatures.Paperless filing is easier than you
tions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,think and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
5498, and W-2G. cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or older
at the end of 2006. If you file electronically using tax
preparation software or a tax professional, you may be
able to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi-
Income Tax
cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly,
you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN andThis part explains whether you have to file an income tax
enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.return and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted grosstax.
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2005 income tax
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any
Do I Have To File math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
an Income Tax Return? provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
accurate and matches the information on record with theYou have to file an income tax return for 2006 if your netSocial Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If yourcheck your annual Social Security Statement.net earnings from self-employment were less than $400,If you use a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign andyou still have to file an income tax return if you meet anynothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For moreother filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-tions. site at www.irs.gov.
Forms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not complete
How Do I File? without your signature. If you are not eligible or choose not
to sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,File your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach
and file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-Schedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or
tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Indi-loss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form
vidual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Online1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from
Return, whichever applies.your business. If you operated more than one business as
a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate ScheduleState returns.In most states, you can file an electronicC for each business. You can use the simpler Schedulestate return simultaneously with your federal return. ForC-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie-more information, check with your local IRS office, statetorship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the othertax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at www.requirements listed in Part I of the schedule. irs.gov.
Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,
or you can have your refund deposited directly to your
checking or savings account.
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as
when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
refund in as few as 10 days.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Offset against debts.As with a paper return, you may Depending on the provider and the specific services
not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look for
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed an “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign.
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries.You can check the status of your re-
Using Your Personal Computer
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
A computer with Internet access is all you need to file youryour return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return
tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all, when you use youravailable because you will need to know the filing status,
personal computer, you can e-file your return from thethe first social security number shown on the return, and
comfort of your home any time of the day or night. Signthe exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on
your return electronically using a self-selected PIN to com-your refund, do one of the following.
plete the process. There is no signature form to submit or• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Refund. Forms W-2 to send in.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-Free Internet filing options.More taxpayers can nowtion, and follow the recorded instructions. prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in yourusing commercial tax preparation software accessible
form instructions. through www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS is
partnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-
aration and filing services to a significant number of tax-Balance due.If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 16,payers. Security and privacy certificate programs will2007, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. Youassure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify forcan make your payment electronically by scheduling anthese services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage atelectronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savingswww.irs.gov.account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also download
Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperlesscompletely online by using a tax preparation software
returns for their clients. You have two options. package available on the Internet.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit itThrough Employers and Financial
electronically to the IRS. Institutions
2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre- Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,pare your return and transmit it for you electronically.members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your
You will be asked to complete Form 8879 to authorize employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as an
the provider to enter your self-selected PIN on your return. employee, member, or customer benefit.
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free Internet filing options• Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 16, 2007) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The chance of an error in making your paymentsFree Help With Your Return
is reduced.
Free help in preparing your return is available nationwideb. You receive immediate confirmation of everyfrom IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax transaction.Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or olderPenalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicenough income tax and self-employment tax for 2006 by
filing. withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
When Is My Tax Return Due?
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Form 1040 for calendar year 2006 is due by April 16, 2007.Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a
If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your returnpenalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your mation, see Publication 505.
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties
and interest. If you cannot file your return on time, use
Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of Time
Self-Employment (SE) TaxTo File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request an
automatic 6-month extension. Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
How Do I Pay Income Tax?
taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay itIf you earned income as a statutory employee,as you earn or receive income during the year. An em- you do not pay SE tax on that income.ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
Social security coverage.Social security benefits areyou expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax
available to self-employed persons just as they are to(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file yourwage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to yourreturn. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If youcoverage under the social security system. Social securitydo not have to make estimated tax payments, you can paycoverage provides you with retirement benefits, disabilityany tax due when you file your return. For more informationbenefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-on estimated tax, see Publication 505. care) benefits.
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-What are my payment options?You can pay your esti-
come, you could cause your social security bene-mated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
fits to be lower when you retire.electronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES
CAUTION
!
payment vouchers. These options include:
How to become insured under social security.You
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federalmust be insured under the social security system before
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-
sured if you have the required number of credits (also2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawalcalled quarters of coverage), discussed next.when you file Form 1040 electronically.
Earning credits in 2006 and 2007.For 2006, you re-3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet.ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each
Other options include crediting an overpayment from your$970 ($1,000 for 2007) of income subject to social security
2006 return to your 2007 estimated tax, and mailing ataxes. Therefore, for 2006, if you had income
(self-employment and wages) of $3,880 that was subject tocheck or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment
social security taxes, you received four credits ($3,880 ÷voucher.
$970).
EFTPS For an explanation of the number of credits you must
have to be insured and the benefits available to you and1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call your family under the social security program, consult your1-800-555-4477. nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a tax Making false statements to get or to increase
obligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS. social security benefits may subject you to penal-
ties.3. Benefits of EFTPS:
CAUTION
!
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit forFor more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSA Employer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
will give you credit only for self-employment income re- responsibilities as an employer.
ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15To help you determine whether the people working fordays after the tax year you earned the income. If you fileyou are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer’syour tax return or report a change in your self-employmentSupplemental Tax Guide. That publication has informationincome after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSAdent contractor or an employee.will not change its records to increase your
If you incorrectly classify an employee as anself-employment income.
independent contractor, you may be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-Who must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SE
CAUTION
!
alty.tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
following applies. An independent contractor is someone who is
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excludingpay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more. Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you areThis section identifies some of the excise taxes you mayand even if you are already receiving social se-have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any ofcurity or Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
the following.
• Manufacture or sell certain products.SE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).• Operate certain kinds of businesses.
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first ucts.$94,200 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
• Receive payment for certain services.2006 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroadFor more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,retirement (tier 1) tax. Excise Taxes for 2006.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2006
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare partForm 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax. eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use ofity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
ozone-depleting chemicals and imported productsleast $94,200, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
containing or manufactured with these chemicals.the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net• Communications and air transportation taxes.earnings.
• Fuel taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,to income on line 27 of Form 1040. 
and tractors.
TIP
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
of different articles.More information.For information on methods of calcu-
lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to report2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-information, see the instructions for Form 2290.
ing items.
Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterly• Social security and Medicare taxes.
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit• Federal income tax withholding. your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ 2 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944
5 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 31 4.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)
4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 or 940-EZ January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other forms-see the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2007.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
5Notices were mailed in February 2006 to eligible employers with an annual employment tax liability of $1,000 or less.
• Payments of $600 or more for services performed
for your business by people not treated as your em-Information Returns
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
accountants, or directors.If you make or receive payments in your business, you
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rentsThe IRS compares the payments shown on the informationpaid to real estate agents.returns with each person’s income tax return to see if the
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forpayments were included in income. You must give a copy
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.of each information return you are required to file to the
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-• Royalty payments of $10 or more.low, you may have to use other returns to report certain
• Payments to certain crew members by operators ofkinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
fishing boats.information returns and when you have to file them, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andYou also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales ofW-2G. $5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income, to report certain payments you make in your
Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-business. These payments include the following items.
ment, to report payments to your employees, such as
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned
income credit payments. For more information on what to
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax ❏ File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
❏ File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏ File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax ❏ File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes ❏ File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 16 of Form 941 or line 15 of Form 944.
❏ File Form 940 or 940-EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were
paid. Note. Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns
in the future..., under Question D.
Information returns ❏ Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
❏ File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
❏ Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
❏ File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2 on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
and W-3. you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater ofPenalties.The law provides for the following penalties if10 or 
1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you areyou do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do notrequired to file for the year.)correctly report the information. For more information, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of CashW-2G.
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap-if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-plies if you do not file information returns by the duetion, or two or more related business transactions. Cashdate, do not include all required information, or re-includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-port incorrect information. cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s and
• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. Thistraveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal account
ment to a payee by the required date, do not include(personal check). For more information, see Publication
all required information, or report incorrect informa-1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
tion. ceived in a Trade or Business).
Penalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-Waiver of penalties.These penalties will not apply ifing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (oryou can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, orand not willful neglect.
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
required information, or for including incorrect information,
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later.
2. If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
Accounting Periods 31 of each year.
and Methods Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
Introduction
last day of a month.You must figure your taxable income and file an income taxIf you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year.books and records and report your income and expensesAlso, you must consistently use an accounting method thatusing the same tax year.clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Useful Items
Change in tax year.Generally, you must file Form 1128,You may want to see:
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, to
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See thePublication
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify for❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If
you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must beSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-tions and forms.
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine(generally your income tax return), you must use your
when and how income and expenses are reported. Yourbooks and records for a specific interval of time called an
accounting method includes not only the overall method ofaccounting period. The annual accounting period for your
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
use for any material item.the following tax years.
You choose an accounting method for your business• A calendar tax year. when you file your first income tax return that includes a
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year.
change your accounting method, you must generally getUnless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax yearIRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the InternalKinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the• Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You keep no books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscalYou must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required undermust use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu-income.
lations.
Business and personal items.You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-Debts paid by another person or canceled.If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
relief as income. If you receive income in this way, youincome of each business. They are separate and distinct
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-only if you maintain complete and separate books and
celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debtrecords for each business.
under Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier toyou make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory isspecial rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generallyRepayments in chapter 13 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales andExpenses.
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
Under the cash method, include in your gross income allthe tax year in which you actually pay them. This includes
items of income you actually or constructively receivebusiness expenses for which you contest liability. How-
during your tax year. If you receive property or services,ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid in
you must include their fair market value in income.advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
Example. On December 30, 2005, Mrs. Sycamore sent
Expenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expenseyou a check for interior decorating services you provided to
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.her. You received the check on January 2, 2006. You must
include the amount of the check in income for 2006.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2006 for a business insurance policy effec-Constructive receipt.You have constructive receipt of
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inincome when an amount is credited to your account or
2006 and $500 in 2007.made available to you without restriction. You do not need
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as
Accrual Method
having received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account inreport income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2006. You do not withdraw it or enter it into yourexpenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2007. You must include it in your grossmethod of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2006. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from oneIncome–General Rule
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is receivedUnder an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-accuracy.
cember 2006. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid untilExample. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2007. She must include this payment in her 2006payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2006. You
income because it was constructively received in 2006.billed the customer in the first week of January 2007, but
you did not receive payment until February 2007. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the taxinclude the amount received for the computer in your 2006year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even ifincome.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
Income–Special Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2006, from a patient. She could not deposit theThe following are special rules that apply to advance pay-
check in her business account until January 2, 2007. Shements, estimating income, and changing a payment
must include this fee in her income for 2006. schedule for services.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimatedEconomic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
amount in gross income, and later determine the exact capitalize a business expense until economic performance
amount is different, take the difference into account in the occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
tax year in which you make the determination. to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
Change in payment schedule for services.If you per- property is used. If your expense is for property or services
form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, youyou provide to others, economic performance occurs as
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agreeyou provide the property or services. An exception allows
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete thecertain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
services and then receive the difference. tax year even though economic performance has not oc-
curred. For more information on economic performance,Advance payments for services.Generally, you reportsee Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-an advance payment for services to be performed in a laterlication 538.tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
However, if you receive an advance payment for servicesExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, youaccrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies incan elect to postpone including the advance payment inDecember 2006. You receive the supplies and the bill inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-December, but you pay the bill in January 2007. You canpone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2006 because all events that fix the
For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv- fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liability
ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-
cation also explains special rules for reporting the followingance occurred in that year.
types of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2006 even if the
• Advance payments for service agreements.
supplies are not delivered until 2007 (when economic• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty performance occurs).contracts.
Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid interest.
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
• Prepaid rent. business, you must generally take inventories into account
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-Advance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-
crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.cluding income from advance payments on agreements for
For more information, see Inventories, later.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of yourSpecial rule for related persons.You cannot deductbusiness. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-business expenses and interest owed to a related personing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessarywho uses the cash method of accounting until you maketo treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes athe payment and the corresponding amount is includible ingift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treatthe related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-amounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theceived. expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If aYou generally include an advance payment in incomededuction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-for the tax year in which you receive it. However, you cantinue to apply even if your relationship with the personuse an alternative method. For information about the alter-ends before the expense or interest is includible in thenative method, see Publication 538. gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediate
Expenses family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generallya list of other related persons, see Related Persons underdeduct or capitalize a business expense when both theAccrual Method in Publication 538.following apply.
Combination Method1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when:
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,
and special methods of accounting if the combinationa. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use itity, and
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.b. The liability can be determined with reasonable
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-accuracy.
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
2. Economic performance has occurred. purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories,
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
later.) You can use the cash method for all otherBusiness not owned or not in existence for 3 years.If
items of income and expenses. you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year
period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,include the period of any predecessor. If your business hasyou must use the cash method for reporting yournot been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base yourexpenses. average on the period it has existed including any short tax
• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-years, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.
penses, you must use an accrual method for figuringMaterials and supplies that are not incidental.If youyour income. account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
• If you use a combination method that includes thethat are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items
cash method, treat that combination method as theyou would otherwise include in inventory in the year you
cash method. sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever is
later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to
Inventories
determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year.Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
your business, you must keep an inventory and use theChanging accounting method. If you are a qualifyingaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want toHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash methodchange to the cash method or to account for inventoriableof accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustchandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-file Form 3115, Application for Change in Accountingable items as materials and supplies that are not incidentalMethod.(discussed later).
More information. For more information about the quali-1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedurefying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more
information about the qualifying small business taxpayer2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in InternalProcedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.2002-18.
Items included in inventory.If you are required to ac-Qualifying taxpayer.You are a qualifying taxpayer if:count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.
• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1
• Merchandise or stock in trade.million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts
• Raw materials.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and• Work in process.dividing by 3.)
• Finished products.• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
• Supplies that physically become a part of the itemsection 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
intended for sale.
Qualifying small business taxpayer.You are a qualify-
Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at theing small business taxpayer if:
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost• Your average annual gross receipts for each priorof goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine thetax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, isvalue of your inventory, you need a method for identifyingmore than $1 million but not more than $10 million.the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year isitems.figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax yearInventory valuation rules cannot be the same for alland the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the totalkinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourby 3.) inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect• You are not prohibited from using the cash method
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent fromunder section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
year to year.• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
ness (described in Publication 538 and RevenueMore information.For more information about invento-
Procedure 2002-28). ries, see Publication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Uniform Capitalization Rules Change in
Accounting MethodUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize
the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for productionOnce you have set up your accounting method, you mustor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofgenerally get IRS approval before you can change toproperty you produce or acquire for resale, rather thananother method. A change in your accounting methodclaiming them as a current deduction. You recover theincludes a change in:costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods
sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-
erty. crual method, and
Activities subject to the uniform capitalization rules.2. Your treatment of any material item.
You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifTo get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application foryou do any of the following, unless the property is pro-Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approvalduced for your use other than in a business or an activityto change an accounting method under either the auto-carried on for profit. matic change procedures or the advance consent request
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For thisprocedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,information, see the form instructions. 
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-
Automatic change procedures.Certain taxpayers canerty.
presume to have IRS approval to change their method of
• Acquire property for resale. accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), ifExceptions.These rules do not apply to the followingthe taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automaticproperty. change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-matic change. For more information, see the Instructions
ing conditions. for Form 3115.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,3.see Inventories, earlier.
Dispositions of
Special Methods Business Property
There are special methods of accounting for certain items
of income or expense. These include the following.
Introduction• Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication
535, Business Expenses. If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in some• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publicationcases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that535. is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publicationa disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
535. report the gain or loss.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To
Useful ItemsDepreciate Property.
You may want to see:• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. Publication
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and Losses
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-Sale of a business.The sale of a business usually is not
tions and forms. a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated
as being sold separately for determining the treatment of
gain or loss.
What Is a Disposition Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesof Property?
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide thisA disposition of property includes the following transac-
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Formtions.
8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
• You sell property for cash or other property. the sale occurred. 
For more information about the sale of a business, see• You exchange property for other property.
chapter 2 of Publication 544.
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
of a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use ofHow Do I Figure
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
a Gain or Loss?• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
• You abandon property.
Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property. IF your... THEN you have a...
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, andAdjusted basis is more than theyou receive property or money in payment. amount realized Loss.
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of underAmount realized is more thanthe threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-the adjusted basis Gain.
erty or money in payment.
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketFor details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needsee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544. Basis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually its
basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherNontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of propertydisposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isinheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustnot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gainuse a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwisebasis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.dispose of the property you receive.
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is yourLike-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-original cost or other basis plus certain additions, andchange of property for the same kind of property. It is theminus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-like-kind exchange, the property traded and the propertyferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,received must be both of the following. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
• Business or investment property. Amount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market• Like property.
value of all property or services you receive. The amount
you realize also includes any of your liabilities that wereReport the exchange of like-kind property on Form
assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about
property you transferred is subject, such as real estatelike-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. 
taxes or a mortgage.
Installment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-Fair market value.Fair market value is the price at whicherty where you receive at least one payment after the taxthe property would change hands between a buyer and ayear of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourseller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.gage from a third party, you probably have an installment
sale. Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
For more information about installment sales, see Publi- disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
cation 537, Installment Sales. for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 17

Page 18 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income. Recognized losses are deductible fromInstallment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer- come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule
tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax- D (Form 1040). 
able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
Casualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties andfrom the disposition of property held for personal use.
Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
Is My Gain or Loss Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).Ordinary or Capital?
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
4.part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not aGeneral Businesscapital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
Creditsthe property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
IntroductionFor more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.Your general business credit for the year consists of your
carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
Is My Capital Gain or Loss
general business credit for the current year may be in-Short Term or Long Term? creased later by the carryback of business credits from
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
Useful Itemsis long or short term depends on how long you own the
You may want to see:property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Publication
Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or ❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
Long-Term Gain or Loss?
Form (and Instructions)
IF you hold the
❏ 3800 General Business Creditproperty... THEN you have a...
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.
tions and forms.
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general businessWhere Do I Report
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Claim theGains and Losses?
Credit, later, because, in most cases, you will also have to
complete Form 3800.Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Formhow to fill them out.
8911).This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel
vehicle refueling property you placed in service. For moreDispositions of business property and depreciable
information, see Form 8911.property.Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910).This
Like-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex- credit consists of the following four credits for new vehicles
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and you placed in service. For more information, see Form
Schedule D (Form 1040). 8910.
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit. have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
enable your business to comply with the Americans with• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit.Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see Form
• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. 8826.
• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906).This credit is avail-
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,Biodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Formsee Form 8906.8864) This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in
your business. For more information, see Form 8864.Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
ment credit (Form 8844).You may qualify for this credit ifCredit for alcohol used as fuel (Form 6478).This credit you have employees and are engaged in a business in anconsists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol credit, andempowerment zone or renewal community for which thesmall ethanol producer credit. For more information, seecredit is available. For more information, see Form 8844Form 6478. and Publication 954.
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909).Thisopment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies tocredit is available for each type of qualified energy efficientcertain contributions made to a selected community devel-appliance produced by the taxpayer in a tax year ending onopment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-or after December 31, 2006. For more information, seemation, see Form 8847. Form 8909.
Credit for employee social security and Medicare Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908).This credit istaxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).This available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold forcredit is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion ofuse as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by
Enhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This creditemployees of your food and beverage establishment
applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. Thewhere tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless
2006 Form 8830 will not be issued since the credit isof whether the food is consumed on or off your business
completely phased out for tax years beginning in 2006 duepremises. However, you cannot get credit for your part of
to the increased applicable reference price of crude oil.social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that are
used to meet the federal minimum wage rate that appliesIndian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-to the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Forplies to qualified wages and health insurance costs youmore information, see Form 8846. paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-
tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and
services (Form 8882).This credit applies to the qualifiedInvestment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit isexpenses you paid for employee childcare and qualifiedthe total of the following credits. For more information, seeexpenses you paid for childcare resource and referralForm 3468.services. For more information, see Form 8882.
• Rehabilitation credit.
Credits for employers affected by Hurricane Katrina,
• Energy credit.Rita, or Wilma (Form 5884-A).A qualified employer can
claim the Hurricane Katrina housing credit for qualified• Qualifying advanced coal project credit.
lodging provided between January 1, 2006, through July 1,
• Qualifying gasification project credit.2006. The employee retention credit expired on December
31, 2005. For more information, see Form 5884-A.
Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel by aThis credit is designed to encourage businesses to in-qualified small business. For more information, see Formcrease the amounts they spend on research and experi-8896.mental activities, including energy research. For more
information, see Form 6765. Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-Credit for small employer pension plan startup costsing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see(Form 8881).This credit applies to pension plan startupForm 8586.costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu-
tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-Mine rescue team training credit.This credit applies to
fied employee pension. For more information, see training program costs you pay or incur for certain mine
Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Businessrescue team employees. For more information, see Publi-
(SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans). cation 553.
Disabled access credit (Form 8826).This credit is aNew markets credit (Form 8874).This credit is for quali-
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that fied equity investments made in qualified community de-
pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who velopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874.
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907).This
credit is for gas produced from biomass; liquid, gaseous, or
5.solid synthetic fuels produced from coal; and coke or coke
gas. For more information, see Form 8907.
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).This credit applies toBusiness Income
qualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs, known
as “orphan drugs for rare diseases and conditions.” For
more information, see Form 8820. Introduction
This chapter primarily explains business income and howQualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
to account for it on your tax return, what items are not8900).Certain regional and switching railroads may be
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-able to claim a credit for expenses made to upgrade their
cupations.railroad tracks (including roadbed, bridges, and related
If there is a connection between any income you receivetrack structures). For more information, see Form 8900.
and your business, the income is business income. A
connection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomeRenewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
would not have been made if you did not have the busi-production credit (Form 8835).This credit is for the sale
ness.of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
United States or U. S. possessions from qualified energyYou can have business income even if you are not
resources at a qualified facility. For more information, seeinvolved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
Form 8835. from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
can be business income.
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861).This credit pro- You report most business income, such as income from
vides businesses with an incentive to hire long-term familythe sale of your products or services, on Schedule C or
assistance recipients. For more information, see FormC-EZ. But you report the income from the sale of business
8861 and Publication 954. assets, such as land and office buildings, on other forms
instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on selling
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).This credit pro-business assets, see chapter 3.
vides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals fromNonemployee compensation. Business incometargeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- includes amounts you received in your businessment rate or other special employment needs. For more that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIP
information, see Form 5884 and Publication 954. This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC you
How To Claim the Credit received. 
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get
the forms you need to claim your current year business
Kinds of Incomecredits.
In addition to the credit form, in most cases you mayYou must report on your tax return all income you receivealso need to file Form 3800. from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,Who must file Form 3800? checks, and credit card charges. But business income canYou must file Form 3800 if you have any of the creditsbe in other forms, such as property or services. These andlisted above (other than the credit for alcohol used as a fuelother types of income are explained next.(Form 6478), the empowerment zone and renewal com-
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomemunity employment credit (Form 8844), or the renewable
from sources outside the United States (foreignelectricity, refined coal, and Indian coal production credit
income), you must report that income on your tax(Form 8835, Section B)). CAUTION
!
return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youForms 8844, 6478, and 8835 (Section B) have special
live outside the United States, you may be able to excludetax liability limits and are not reported on Form 3800. Any
part or all of your foreign-source business income. Forcarryback, carryforward, and passive activity limitation of
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizensthese credits is computed separately on the forms on
and Resident Aliens Abroad.which they are claimed.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may not Bartering for Property or Services
owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax
on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. AfterBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
market value of property or services you receive in bar- You must include the fair market value of any services
tering. If you exchange services with another person and you receive from club members in your gross receipts
you both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the when you receive them even if you have not provided any
services, that value will be accepted as the fair market services to club members.
value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.Information returns.If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-forms.form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
the corporation. You must include the fair market value ofchange Transactions. 
the shares in income. • Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. 
Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art toFor information about these forms, see the General In-
compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of yourstructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G.
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
Real Estate Rents
rental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both
who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an
report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C ororganization that each year gives its members a directory
C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofof members and the services each member provides.
owner described in the preceding sentence, report theMembers get in touch with other members directly and
rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For morebargain for the value of the services to be performed.
information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-In return for accounting services you provided for theerty.house painter’s business, the house painter painted your
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair marketReal estate dealerYou are a real estate dealer if you are
value of the services you received from the house painter.engaged in the business of selling real estate to customers
The house painter must include the fair market value ofwith the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rent
your accounting services in his or her gross receipts.you receive from real estate held for sale to customers is
subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from real
Example 4. You are a member of a barter club thatestate held for speculation or investment is not subject to
uses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts forSE tax.
goods or services provided or received. As soon as units
Trailer park owner.Rental income from a trailer park isare credited to your account, you can use them to buy
subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer parkgoods or services or sell or transfer the units to other
owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-members.
tial services for the convenience of your tenants.You must include the value of credit units you received
 You generally are considered to provide substantialin your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are
services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants’credited to your account.
convenience and normally are not provided to maintain theThe dollar value of units received for services by anlots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifemployee of the club, who can use the units in the samethe compensation for the services makes up a materialmanner as other members, must be included in the em-part of the tenants’ rental payments.ployee’s gross income for the tax year in which received. ItExamples of services that are not normally provided foris wages subject to social security and Medicare taxesthe tenants’ convenience include supervising and main-(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and incometaining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributingtax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em-a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-ployer’s Tax Guide. ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.
Examples of services that are normally provided toExample 5. You operate a plumbing business and usemaintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club andclude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a
specified number of hours. Each member has access to aHotels, boarding houses, and apartments.Rental in-
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels,
ices available. boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax
Members contact each other directly and request serv- if you provide services for the occupants.
ices to be performed. You are not required to provide Generally, you are considered to provide services for
services unless requested by another member, but you the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve-
can use as many of the offered services as you wish nience and are not services normally provided with the
without paying a fee. rental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
service that is not normally provided for the convenience ofOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
the occupants is maid service. However, providing heat Sales.
and light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collectingDividends.Generally, dividends are business income totrash are services normally provided for the occupants’dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-convenience. tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-
come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentPrepaid rent.Advance payments received under a lease
separately from your business activity, the dividends fromthat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment
the stock are nonbusiness income.are income in the year you receive them. This is true no
If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-matter what accounting method or period you use.
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orLease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee forpart of the dividend as business income on your return. Togranting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in yourfind out how much you have to report, see Recovery ofgross receipts in the year received. items previously deducted under Other Income, later.
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross
Canceled Debt
receipts in the year received.
The following explains the general rule for including can-Payments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generalments to someone else under an agreement to pay yourrule.debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
General Rule
your property taxes on leased real property.
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanSettlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased propertyamount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report theto its original condition are income in the amount that thecanceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.nected by the lessee.
ExceptionsPersonal Property Rents
The following discussion covers some exceptions to theIf you are in the business of renting personal propertygeneral rule for canceled debt.(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule CPrice reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to the
or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in theseller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re-amount you owe, you generally do not have income from
ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any ofthe reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
those payments, include them in your gross receipts asthe amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
explained in that discussion. ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-Interest and Dividend Income celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction.Interest and dividends may be considered business in-
come. Example. You get accounting services for your busi-
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that youness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your
ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
come if you are in the business of lending money.accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
depends on your method of accounting.Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomes
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual• Cash method – You do not include the canceled
method of accounting, you must include in gross incomedebt in income because payment of the debt would
interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-have been deductible as a business expense.
ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you• Accrual method – You include the canceled debt inmay be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts income because the expense was deductible whenin chapter 8. you incurred the debt.
Unstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of each For information on the cash and accrual methods of
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andaccounting, see chapter 2.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The excess (if any) of:Exclusions
a. The outstanding principal of qualified real propertyDo not include canceled debt in income in the following
business debt (immediately before the cancella-situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,
tion), overReduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-
ness. For more information, see Form 982.  b. The fair market value (immediately before the
cancellation) of the business real property that is1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case security for the debt, reduced by the outstandingunder title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- principal amount of any other qualified real prop-ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. erty business debt secured by this property imme-
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.diately before the cancellation.
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you
are insolvent. See Publication 908. 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
held by you immediately before the cancellation.3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to aThese adjusted bases are determined after any basisqualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-Farmer’s Tax Guide. vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into
4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-account depreciable real property acquired in con-
ness debt. This situation is explained later. templation of the cancellation.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because itElection.To make this election, complete Form 982takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year intions 2, 3, and 4 do not apply. If it takes place when you arewhich the cancellation occurs. You must file your return byinsolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not applythe due date (including extensions). If you timely filed yourto the extent you are insolvent. return for the year without making the election, you can still
Debt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes anymake the election by filing an amended return within 6
debt for which you are liable or which attaches to propertymonths of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
you hold. sions). For more information, see When to file in the form
instructions.Qualified real property business debt.You can choose
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
Other Incomereal property business debt. If you make the choice, you
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property byThe following discussion explains how to treat other typesthe amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginningof business income you may receive.of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the propertyRestricted property.Restricted property is property thatbefore that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyhas certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receivebefore the disposition. restricted stock or other property for services performed,
Cancellation of qualified real property businessthe fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
debt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (other is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be
tions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
information on including restricted property in income, see
1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with realPublication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
property used in a trade or business.
Gains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ2. It was secured by such real property. a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither
3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.
times. Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.a. Before January 1, 1993.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherb. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumedevidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange ofto acquire, construct, or substantially improve theproperty that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale toreal property. customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report
them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.interest) when you receive them.
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent itLost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-
does not exceed the debt being refinanced. ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment
You cannot exclude more than either of the following you receive for the lost income of your business from
amounts. insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
the payment. For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determinetion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of thewhether property is used more than 50% in your business.following injuries connected with your business.
Section 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-• Patent infringement. tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must• Antitrust injury. recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
including in income on Schedule C part of the deductionEconomic injury.You may be entitled to a deductionyou took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount toagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco-include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 tonomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the followingfind out when you recapture the deduction.amounts.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell• The amount you receive or accrue for damages inor exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havethe tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incurto treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asin the tax year to recover that amount. ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Otherducted.
Dispositions of Assets.
Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Items That Are Not IncomeKickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
In some cases the property or money you receive is notinclude them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
income.related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold. Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are not
income until you realize the increases through a sale orRecovery of items previously deducted.If you recover
other taxable disposition.a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneereduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsincome, you must include with your return a computation
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-showing how you figured the exclusion.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
shipped out on consignment is included in your inventoryExample. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-
until it is sold.come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other
Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal
ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commissionexemptions for a total of $6,600. He would not pay income
on merchandise consigned to you in your income whentax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit orwill not report as income any part of the $300 he may
commission, depending upon the method of accountingrecover in any future year.
you use.
Exception for depreciation.This rule does not apply
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesConstruction allowances.If you enter into a lease after
explained next. August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rentRecapture of depreciation.In the following situations,reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under bothyou have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thisthe following conditions.means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
you deducted in previous years. • Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Listed property.If your business use of listed property• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or fied long-term real property for use in your business
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the propertyat that retail space.
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
tion deduction. You do this by including in income onAmount you can exclude.You can exclude the con-
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ- struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business amount you spent for construction or improvements.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (or• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receive
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for for sales and the sales of others who work under
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining you.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-
• Take into account options to renew when figuring ing business.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do notYou must report this income regardless of whether it istake into account any option to renew at fair marketreported to you on an information return.value determined at the time of renewal.
You are a direct seller if you meet all the following
• Two or more successive leases that are part of theconditions.same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
for the same or substantially similar retail space are1. You are engaged in one of the following trades or
treated as one lease. businesses.
a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer productsRetail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-
either in a home or other place that is not a per-cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on abusiness of selling tangible personal property or services
buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis forto the general public.
resale in a home or other place of business that isQualified long-term real property.Qualified long-term not a permanent retail establishment.real property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shoppingor otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts
news (including any services directly related toto the landlord when the lease ends.
that trade or business).Exchange of like-kind property.If you exchange your
business property or property you hold for investment2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash orsolely for property of a like kind to be used in your businessnot) for services described above is directly relatedor to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.to sales or other output (including performance ofThis means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is notservices) rather than to the number of hours worked.deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the
3. Your services are performed under a written contracttrade-in of a business automobile for another business
between you and the person for whom you performautomobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3.
the services, and the contract provides that you will
Leasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings ornot be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-
makes improvements to your property, the increase in theposes.
value of the property due to the improvements is not
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that theExecutor or administrator.If you administer a deceased
improvements are a payment of rent to you, then theperson’s estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C or
increase in value would be income. C-EZ if you are one of the following:
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not1. A professional fiduciary.
income.
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)
Sales tax.State and local sales taxes imposed on the and both of the following apply.
buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to
a. The estate includes an active trade or business instate or local governments, are not income.
which you actively participate.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade
or business.Guidelines for Selected
Occupations 3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that
requires extensive managerial activities on your part
 This section provides information to determine whetherfor a long period of time, provided these activities are
your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Form enough to be considered a trade or business.
1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).  If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report
Direct seller.You must report all income you receive as a them on line 21 of Form 1040.
direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any ofFishing crew member. If you are a member of the crewthe following. that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
• Income from sales—payments you receive from reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require-
customers for products they buy from you. ments shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance agent, former.Termination payments you re- reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-
tions apply.ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an
insurance company because of services you performed for• You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if allsumers.the following conditions are met.
• You sell them at a fixed price.• You received payments after your agreement to per-
• Your earnings are based on the difference betweenform services for the company ended.
the sales price and your cost of goods sold.• You did not perform any services for the company
after your service agreement ended and before theThis rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aend of the year in which you received the payment.minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether or
not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines• You entered into a covenant not to compete against
you return to your supplier.the company for at least a 1-year period beginning
on the date your service agreement ended. Notary public.Fees you receive for services you perform
• The amount of the payments depended primarily onas a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.
policies sold by you or credited to your account dur-These payments are not subject to self-employment tax
ing the last year of your service agreement or the(see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).
extent to which those policies remain in force for
Public official.Public officials generally do not reportsome period after your service agreement ended, or
what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C orboth.
C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an elected• The amount of the payment did not depend to anytax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixedextent on length of service or overall earnings frompercentage of the taxes collected. Public office includesservices performed for the company (regardless ofany elective or appointive office of the United States or itswhether eligibility for the payments depended onpossessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its politicallength of service). subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any of
these.
Public officials of state or local governments report theirInsurance agent, retired.Income paid by an insurance
fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a feecompany to a retired self-employed insurance agent based
basis and if their services are eligible for, but not coveredon a percentage of commissions received before retire-
by, social security under a federal-state agreement.ment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
commissions and deferred commissions for sales madeReal estate agent or direct seller.If you are a licensedbefore retirement are generally reported on Schedule C orreal estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings areC-EZ. reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of
• Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or
tate agent or direct seller directly relates to yourC-EZ.
sales or other output rather than to the number of
hours you work.Newspaper carrier or distributor.You are a direct seller
and your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if• You perform the services under a written contractall the following conditions apply. that says you will not be treated as an employee for
federal tax purposes.• You are in the business of delivering or distributing
newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-
lated services such as soliciting customers and col-Securities dealer.If you are a dealer in options or com-lecting receipts). modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for-
• Substantially all your pay for these services directly
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equityrelates to your sales or other output rather than to
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop-the number of hours you work.
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to• You perform the services under a written contracthedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Forthat says you will not be treated as an employee formore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).federal tax purposes.
Securities trader.You are a trader in securities if you are
This rule applies whether or not you hire others to helpengaged in the business of buying and selling securities for
you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy theyour own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the numberloss from the disposition of securities is not reported on
of papers you deliver. Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer,
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
Newspaper or magazine vendor.If you are 18 or oldertracts. For more information about securities traders, see
and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings arePublication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-Accounting for Your Income
vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.
Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differsInsurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anotherat times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you musttion discusses some of the more common differences thatsubtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.may affect business transactions. You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orFigure your business income on the basis of a tax yeartheft loss.and according to your regular method of accounting (seeFor information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producingtion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories
to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is 6.taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party.
How To Figure
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.Cost of Goods Sold
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permits
Introductionyou to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow-If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
ing two methods to account for cash discounts. goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-
ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,Personal Use in chapter 6). wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-
2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.
count. This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,You must use the chosen method every year for all youror painter. However, if you work in a personal servicepurchase discounts. business and also sell or charge for the materials andIf you use the second method, the credit balance in thesupplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-account at the end of your tax year is business income.plies to you.Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing If you must account for an inventory in your busi-
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice priceness, you must generally use an accrual method
of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by theof accounting for your purchases and sales. ForCAUTION
!
average or estimated discounts received on the merchan-more information, see chapter 2.
dise.
Trade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and usually are not written into the invoice orFiguring Cost of Goods Sold
charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
on Schedule C Lines 35your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
Through 42tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
Payment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your propertyFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually orare explained in the discussion that follows.
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
until the next year.
Sales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-
tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
year’s closing inventory, attach explanation........ uted property in 2006 at a cost of $400, you would include
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goodsu s e ...................................
sold for 2006 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to other expenses attributable to the property for that year.yourself................................
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-38 Materials and supplies...................... duction for the contributed property.
39 Other costs..............................
40 Add lines 35 through 39..................... Line 36
41 Inventory at end of year.....................
Purchases Less Cost of Items42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4......... Withdrawn for Personal Use
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
Line 35 bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased forInventory at Beginning of Year
manufacture into a finished product.
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that youTrade discounts.The differences between the stated
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them are
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work incalled trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).Do not show the discount amount separately as an item in
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closinggross income.
inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car inence in a schedule attached to your return. inventory reduced by any manufacturer’s rebate that rep-
resents a trade discount.Donation of inventory.If you contribute inventory (prop-
erty that you sell in the course of your business), the
Cash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the
pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices forsmaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it
prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingor its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost
incurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you wouldfor cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-
otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year ofrate discount account or deduct them from total purchases
the contribution. You must remove the amount of yourfor the year. Whichever method you use, you must be
contribution deduction from your opening inventory. It isconsistent. If you want to change your method of figuring
not part of the cost of goods sold. inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for
If the cost of donated inventory is not included in yourChange in Accounting Method. For more information, see
opening inventory, the inventory’s basis is zero and youChange in Accounting Method in chapter 2.
cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat theIf you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youinventory’s cost as you would ordinarily treat it under yourmust include this credit balance in your business income atmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchasethe end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year inreduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.the cost of goods sold for that year.
A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven-Purchase returns and allowances.You must deduct alltory. See Food Inventory in Publication 526, Charitablereturns and allowances from your total purchases duringContributions. the year.
Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who usesMerchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-an accrual method of accounting. In 2006 you contributedchandise for your personal or family use, you must excludeproperty from inventory to a church. It had a fair marketthis cost from the total amount of merchandise you boughtvalue of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2005for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition ofcount with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-the property, and in 2005, you properly deducted $50 ofsonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawingadministrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-account. erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
A drawing account is a separate account you shouldallowed for 2006 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
keep to record the business income you withdraw to payamount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the
for personal and family expenses. As stated above, youcontributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the
also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross
sonal or family use. This account is also known as aincome for 2006 must not include the $400. You remove
“withdrawals account” or “personal account.”that amount from opening inventory for 2006.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLine 37
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inCost of Labor your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
Line 40only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do notAdd Lines 35 through 39
have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the
erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Year
those employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include aSubtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directlyappropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part ofand supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you payusually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function thatyear.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Line 42the manufacturing process.
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling orWhen you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborend of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold arethe remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsyear.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex-
Introduction
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
Other Costs mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orIf you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourmining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldgross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained laterare as follows. under Additions to Gross Profit.
Containers.Containers and packages that are an integral
Businesses that sell products.If you are filing Schedulepart of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anytured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawReturns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youmaterials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off thedise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.actual sales price.
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from yourpenses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
business.ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell services.You do not have to figureInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
income-producing factor for your business. Your gross dures should ensure all items have been included in
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the
professions and businesses that sell services rather than only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
this way. recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
Illustration.This illustration of the gross profit section ofmade the physical count, who priced the items, who made
the income statement of a retail business shows how grossthe extensions, and who proofread the calculations. These
profit is figured. forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record toIncome Statement support its validity.Year Ended December 31, 2006 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts............................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940
Net receipts................................ $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140
Gross profit................................ $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows:
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year................... $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measuresMinus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250
the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale....................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955 goods sold and the selling price.
Cost of goods sold.......................... $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forConsider the following items before figuring your grossthe difference.profit.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts.At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your records($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
show the correct sales tax collected. centage of 331/3%.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or localIf your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amountsregular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withincome on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include
last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income
usually be the same. from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to remove
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how to
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawn
from sale in chapter 6.
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to
8. suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
Business Expenses
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.
Introduction You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if the amountYou can deduct the costs of running your business. These owed you was included in your gross income
CAUTION
!
costs are known as business expenses. These are costseither for the year the deduction is claimed or for a prioryou do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goodsyear.sold.
To be deductible, a business expense must be bothAccrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that iscounting, you normally report income as you earn it. You
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces-can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for yourble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-
business. An expense does not have to be indispensablecome.
to be considered necessary.
Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-For more information about the general rules for deduct-ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsBusiness Expenses. owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
If you have an expense that is partly for businessif you never included those amounts in income.
and partly personal, separate the personal part
More information.For more information about businessfrom the business part.CAUTION
!
bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.
Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-Useful Items business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-You may want to see: tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see PublicationPublication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Car and Truck Expenses❏ 535 Business Expenses
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtions and forms.
transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electricBad Debts
vehicle (Form 8834) or an alternative motor
vehicle (Form 8910) you place in service duringIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
TIP
the year. The vehicle must meet certain requirements anda bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
you do not have to use it in your business to qualify for thedebts and nonbusiness bad debts.
credit. Alternative motor vehicle includes qualified fuel cellA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
motor vehicles, advanced lean burn technology motor ve-operating your trade or business. You may be able to
hicles, qualified hybrid motor vehicles, and qualified alter-deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
native fuel motor vehicles. ness tax return.
Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-Business bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss from
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all thethe worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.
following.
1. Created or acquired in your business. • Getting from one workplace to another in the course
2. Closely related to your business when it became of your business or profession when you are travel-
partly or totally worthless. ing within the city or general area that is your tax
home. Tax home is defined later.A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.• Visiting clients or customers.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Going to a business meeting away from your regular If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for
workplace. a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses
for that year except for business-related parkingCAUTION
!
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplacefees and tolls.when you have one or more regular places of work.
These temporary workplaces can be either within theChoosing the standard mileage rate.If you want to
area of your tax home or outside that area. use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,
you must choose to use it in the first year the car isLocal business transportation does not include expenses
available for use in your business. In later years, you canyou have while traveling away from home overnight. Those
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualexpenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-
expenses.cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
However, if you use your car while traveling away fromIf you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure youryou must choose to use it for the entire lease period
car expense deduction. (including renewals).
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-Standard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot use
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.the standard mileage rate if you:
It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business or work is located. 1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,Example. You operate a printing business out of rented
office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to 3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip other than straight line, for example, ACRS or
transportation between your customers and your print MACRS,
shop. 4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on thetruck between your home and your main or regu-car,lar workplace. These costs are personal commut-
CAUTION
!
6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, oring expenses.
7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-Office in the home.Your workplace can be your home
bursement.if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
principal place of business. For more information, see
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-Business Use of Your Home, later.
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-related
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park yourExample. You are a graphics designer. You operate
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingyour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as
expenses.)your principal place of business. You occasionally have to
drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-Actual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-
tween your home and your clients. dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actual
car or truck expenses.
Methods for Deducting If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
deduction both ways to see which gives you a
Car and Truck Expenses
larger deduction.
TIP
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,Actual car expenses include the costs of the followingyou generally can use one of the following methods toitems.figure your expenses.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration• Standard mileage rate. Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires• Actual expenses.
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
Standard mileage rate.You may be able to use the If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
purposes. For 2006, the standard mileage rate is 44.5 based on the miles driven for each purpose.
cents a mile for all business miles.
Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a 1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
business expense. System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
cation 946.More information.For more information about the rules
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463.Section 179 deduction.You can elect to deduct a limited
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in the
year you place the property in service. This deduction is
Reimbursing Your Employees
known as the “section 179 deduction.” The maximumfor Expenses amount you can elect to deduct during 2006 is $108,000
($143,000 for qualified enterprise zone, renewal commu-You generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your
nity, and New York Liberty Zone property). This limit isemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
reduced by the amount by which the cost of the propertyment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it
placed in service during the tax year exceeds $430,000.depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses
For qualified section 179 Gulf Opportunity Zone property,under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For
the maximum deduction is higher than the deduction fordetails, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chapter
most section 179 property. The total amount of deprecia-explains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells
tion (including the section 179 deduction) you can take foryou whether to report the reimbursement on your em-
a passenger automobile you use in your business and firstployee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
place in service in 2006 is $2,960. Special rules apply to
electric vehicles and trucks and vans. For more informa-
tion, see Publication 946. It explains what property quali-Depreciation fies for the deduction, what limits apply to the deduction,
and when and how to recapture the deduction.If property you acquire to use in your business is expected
to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct Your section 179 election for the cost of any sport
the entire cost as a business expense in the year you utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles is
acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one limited to $25,000. For more information, see the
CAUTION
!
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C.Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.
This method of deducting the cost of business property is
called depreciation. Limited applicability of special depreciation allow-
The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-ance. The additional special depreciation allowances ap-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946. ply only to certain property.
• Certain property with a long production period.What property can be depreciated?You can depreciate
property if it meets all the following requirements.• Certain noncommercial aircraft.
• It must be property you own. • Qualified Liberty Zone property.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in-• Qualified Gulf Opportunity (GO) Zone property.come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use inFor more information, see Publication 946.your business.
Listed property.Listed property is any of the following.• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service. • Most passenger automobiles.
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means• Most other property used for transportation.
that it must be something that wears out, decays,
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
ment, recreation, or amusement.from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
cost of land because land does not wear out, be-• Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.
come obsolete, or get used up.
• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-
• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-tions equipment).
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same
year.  You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-
quirements when depreciating listed property. For more
information about listed property, see Publication 946.Repairs. You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
ments that do not increase the value of your property,Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You cantion, if you are claiming any of the following.deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C-EZ.
• Depreciation on property placed in service during the
current tax year.Depreciation method.The method for depreciating most
• A section 179 deduction.business and investment property placed in service after
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of• Flights on airplanes.
when it was placed in service). • Discounts on property or services.
• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
CAUTION
!
Employee benefit programs include the following.
• Accident and health plans.
Employees’ Pay • Adoption assistance.
• Cafeteria plans.You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform for your• Dependent care assistance.
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.• Educational assistance.To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or • Group-term life insurance coverage.
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both• Welfare benefit funds.the following tests.
• The pay must be reasonable. You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be for services performed. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
Chapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines theseother property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a
requirements. rent or lease expense. If you own the property, include
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179You cannot deduct your own salary or any personaldeduction or a depreciation deduction.withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
prietor, you are not an employee of the business. You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringe
benefits you provide from your employees’If you had employees during the year, you must wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,CAUTION
!
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-
• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses. 1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business
bad debts.• Fringe benefits (discussed later).
3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
ployees, including long-term care insurance.to repay if they are for personal services actually
performed. 4. Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
damage to patients or clients.• Reimbursements for employee business expenses.
6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law• Sick pay.
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or• Vacation pay. job-related diseases suffered by employees in your
business, regardless of fault.Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the
7. Contributions to a state unemployment insuranceperformance of services. The following are examples of
fund are deductible as taxes if they are consideredfringe benefits.
taxes under state law.• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead• Meals and lodging. expenses you have during long periods of disability
• The use of a car. caused by your injury or sickness.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehiclesSelf-employed health insurance deduction.You may
used in your business for liability, damages, and be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per- dental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre- for you and your family.
mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can useIf you use the standard mileage rate to figure yourthe worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure yourcar expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurancededuction. However, if any of the following apply, you mustpremiums. use the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are
• You have more than one source of income subject tonot directly or indirectly the beneficiary under theself-employment tax.contract.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lostforeign earned income).profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or
• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause.
care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiums
on the following kinds of insurance. Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct
expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create anamounts credited to a reserve set up for
asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond theself-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get
end of the current tax year.business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti-
Example. In 2006, you signed a 3-year insurance con-ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas-
tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2006, 2007,ualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
and 2008 when you signed the contract, you can only
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for adeduct the premium for 2006 on your 2006 tax return. You
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-can deduct in 2007 and 2008 the premium allocable to
ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-those years.
ous list.
More information.For more information about deducting3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any personInterest
with a financial interest in your business if you are
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-
You are included among possible beneficiaries ofest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts related
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repayto your business. Interest relates to your business if you
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy.use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
A person has a financial interest in your businessdoes not matter what type of property secures the loan.
if the person is an owner or part owner of theYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of the
business or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
• You are legally liable for that debt.
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life• Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuityrepaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policyYou cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the interest
on your life or on the life of another person with ayou paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
financial interest in your business to get or protect apart personal, you must divide the interest between the
business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as apersonal part and the business part.
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
as interest on business loans or as an expense ofExample. In 2006, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.
financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds During 2006, you used the car 60% for business and 40%
of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses
used to liquidate the debt. on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2006 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense. proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the
plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also
deduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notMore information.For more information about deducting
cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally taxinterest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter
free until you or your employees receive distributions fromexplains the following items.
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%
• Interest you can deduct. of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan• Interest you cannot deduct.
(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-• How to allocate interest between personal and busi-ployee pension.ness use. Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-
• When to deduct interest. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (Thisuntil your employees receive distributions from the plan.is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-on which interest is charged at a rate below the
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallapplicable federal rate.)
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
Legal and Professional Fees to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deductible
Rent Expenseon Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. AddRent is any amount you pay for the use of property you dothem to the basis of the property. not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a business
If the fees include payments for work of a personalexpense only if the rent is for property you use in your
nature (such as making a will), you can take a businessbusiness. If you have or will receive equity in or title to the
deduction only for the part of the fee related to yourproperty, you cannot deduct the rent.
business. The personal part of legal fees for producing or
collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or forUnreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deduction
tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) iffor unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-
you itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rent
cation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the same
amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the sameTax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule C
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.relating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory
Related persons include members of your immediateemployee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole orA (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForYou can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount
a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for
Accounting Periods and Methods.your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.
Rent on your home.If you rent your home and use part of
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
Pension Plans rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
You can set up and maintain the following small businessBusiness Use of Your Home, later.
retirement plans for yourself and your employees.
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-
• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount thatees) plans. applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).
the period to which it applies.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. YouMore information.For more information about rent, see
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your chapter 4 in Publication 535.
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property isTaxes
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addYou can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For informationstate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis ofbusiness.
Assets.Income taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and paycome) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
over to the state or local government. Do notduct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
CAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct
federal income tax.
Excise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allEmployment taxes. You can deduct the social security,excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses ofMedicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes youcarrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussedpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employmentbriefly in chapter 1.taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
deduct payments you made as an employer to a stateFuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and otherunemployment compensation fund or to a state disabilitymotor fuels you use in your business are usually includedbenefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as
a separate item.Self-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of your
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federalself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040.
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForSelf-employment tax is discussed in chapters 1 and 10.
more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes forPersonal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C or2006.C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had toThis section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for theirtainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C orcity registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per-C-EZ.sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used theTravel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessarycar 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, orexpenses of traveling away from home for your business.$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or conditions are met.
C-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
longer than an ordinary day’s work.welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni-2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demandsformly against all property under its jurisdiction. of your work while away from home.For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.for deducting the following items.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-streets, water mains, and sewer lines. tion.
• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property The following is a brief discussion of the expenses you
during the year. can deduct.
• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method ofTransportation.You can deduct the cost of travel by
accounting and choose to accrue real estate tax airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
related to a definite period ratably over that period. business destination.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on fares for these and other types of transportation between
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the and your work location away from home.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofEntertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct
sending baggage and sample or display material between business-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
your regular and temporary work locations. a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can
deduct only 50% of these expenses.Car or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating andThe following are examples of entertainment expenses.maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-
dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck aters, or sporting events.
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to businessyou rent a car while away from home on business, you cancustomers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of mealsin Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct onlyReimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning andees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
laundry while on your business trip. reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which you
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business callsexpenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi-plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices.chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
Tips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expenseand tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your
in this list. employee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
More information.For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Principal place of business.You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a singleBusiness Use trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for
the business use of your home under the principal place of
of Your Home
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principalTo deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
place of business, you must consider all the facts andfor business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
circumstances.then, your deduction may be limited.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place ofTo qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet thehome, you must meet the following tests.
following requirements.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be:
• You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive tive or management activities of your business.
use, later), • You have no other fixed location where you conduct
b. Regular, substantial administrative or management activities
of your business.c. For your business, and
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-2. The business part of your home must be one of thelarly for your business, but your home office does notfollowing: qualify as your principal place of business based on the
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-a. Your principal place of business (defined later),
ness based on the following factors.
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients,
• The relative importance of the activities performed atclients, or customers in the normal course of your
each location.business, or
• If the relative importance factor does not determinec. A separate structure (not attached to your home)
your principal place of business, you can also con-you use in connection with your business.
sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your homeExclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,cannot be identified as your principal place of business,you must use a specific area of your home only for youryou cannot deduct home office expenses. However, fortrade or business. The area used for business can be aother ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seeroom or other separately identifiable space. The spacePublication 587.does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.
You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive useDeduction limit.If your gross income from the businesstest if you use the area in question both for business anduse of your home equals or exceeds your total businessfor personal purposes. expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all your
business expenses related to the use of your home. If yourExample. You are an attorney and use a den in yourgross income from the business use is less than your totalhome to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.business expenses, your deduction for certain expensesYour family also uses the den for recreation. The den is notfor the business use of your home is limited.used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,business deduction for its use.
such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meetation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to thethe exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eithergross income from the business use of your home minusof the following ways. the sum of the following.
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples.1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
even if you did not use your home for business (such2. As a daycare facility.
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualtyFor an explanation of these exceptions, see Publicationand theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day-ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).care Providers).
2. The business expenses that relate to the business
activity in the home (for example, business phone,Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, yousupplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not tomust use a specific area of your home for business on athe use of the home itself.continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
do not use that area for any other purpose. your self-employment tax.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your • Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
Home, to figure your deduction. agency or instrumentality because you broke the
law.More information.For more information on deducting
expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-• Political contributions.
tion 587. • Repairs that add to the value of your property or
significantly increase its life.
Other Expenses
You Can Deduct
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.9.See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
them.
• Advertising. Figuring Net Profit
• Bank fees. or Loss
• Donations to business organizations.
• Education expenses. Introduction• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-After figuring your business income and expenses, you arepenses. ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.
• Environmental cleanup costs. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Impairment-related expenses. the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-
• Interview expense allowances. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Licenses and regulatory fees. can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.
• Moving machinery. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Outplacement services. that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions for
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance orline G and line 32 of Schedule C.
nonperformance of a contract. If you have more than one business, you must
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficientfigure your net profit or loss for each business on
operating condition. a separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
• Repayments of income.
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)• Supplies and materials.
• Utilities. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
Expenses You Cannot Deduct another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOLYou usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from thepenses. For more information, see Publication 535.following.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Your trade or business.
• Charitable contributions. • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
business expenses).• Demolition expenses or losses.
• A casualty or theft.• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
ing, airline, and hotel clubs.
• Moving expenses.
• Lobbying expenses. • Rental property.
A loss from operating a business is the most common
reason for an NOL.
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper- the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim earnings.
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.
Special Rules and Exceptions
Not-for-Profit Activities Aliens.Resident aliens are generally subject to the same
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are notIf you do not carry on your business to make a profit, theresubject to SE tax. Residents of the Virgin Islands, Puertois a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use aRico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianaloss from the activity to offset other income. Activities youIslands, or American Samoa, however, are subject to thedo as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, cometax. For SE tax purposes, they are not nonresident aliens.under this limit. For more information on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S.For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1Tax Guide for Aliens.in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualifiedplains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister orto make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
member of a religious order) that elected an exemptioncan deduct.
from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-
tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
10.
Fishing crew member.If you are a member of the crew
on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earnings
are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.Self-Employment (SE)
1. You do not get any pay for the work except yourTax
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds from
the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all the
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you arefollowing conditions.
and even if you are already receiving social se-
curity and Medicare benefits. a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.
CAUTION
!
b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum
catch.
Who Must Pay SE Tax? c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as
mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cash
 Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE pay is traditional in the fishing industry.
(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment
were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn-2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-
ings from self-employment. ceeds from the sale of the catch.
Sole proprietor or independent contractor.If you are 3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac-4. The boat’s operating crew normally numbers fewertor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) tothan 10 individuals. (An operating crew is consideredfigure your earnings subject to SE tax. as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the average
SE tax rate. The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3% size of the crew on trips made during the last four
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax). calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)
You are not subject to SE tax if you are under age 18Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax.
and you are working for your father or mother.Only the first $94,200 of your combined wages, tips, and
net earnings in 2006 is subject to any combination of theNotary public.Fees you receive for services you perform12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, oras a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ butrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax. are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-All of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings intions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).2006 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare
part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirementState or local government employee.You are subject to
(tier 1) tax. SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur- ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at not covered under a federal-state social security agree-
least $94,200, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of ment.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Foreign government or international organization em-Lost Income Payments
ployee.You are subject to SE tax if both the following
If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your businessconditions are true.
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or other
1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,sources for the lost business income is included in earn-
Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virginreceive the payment, it still relates to your business and is
Islands by: included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though your
business is temporarily inactive.a. A foreign government,
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
ernment, or
c. An international organization. Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages. self-employment.
1. The regular method.U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad. If you
are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living2. The nonfarm optional method.outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE
3. The farm optional method.tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from
self-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion.You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
to use one or both of the optional methods.Exception. The United States has social security
agreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa-Why use an optional method? You may want to use thetion under two social security systems. Under these agree-optional methods (discussed later) when you have a lossments, you generally must only pay social security andor a small net profit and any one of the following applies.Medicare taxes to the country you live in. The country to
which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate which• You want to receive credit for social security benefit
serves as proof of exemption from social security tax in thecoverage.
other country. • You incurred child or dependent care expenses forFor more information, see the Instructions for Schedulewhich you could claim a credit. (An optional methodSE (Form 1040). may increase your earned income, which could in-
crease your credit.)
More Than One Business • You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than onewhich could increase your credit.)trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net
profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces youroptional method may increase your earned income,
profit from another business. which could increase your credit.)
Effects of using an optional method.Using an optionalCommunity Property Income
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
If any of the income from a trade or business, other than acould result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.
partnership, is community property income under stateIf you use either or both optional methods, you must
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of thefigure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even if
spouse carrying on the trade or business. you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the
regular method.
The optional methods may be used only to figure yourGain or Loss SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method youDo not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss
use to determine SE tax.from the disposition of property that is neither stock in trade
nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun-
Regular Methodtary conversion.
Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35%
(.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line
4a.
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Net earnings figured using the regular method are alsoTable 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
called actual net earnings.
IF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings
income is ... are equal to ...Nonfarm Optional Method
$2,400 or less Two-thirds of your gross
nonfarm income.Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do
not come from farming. You may use this method if youMore than $2,400 $1,600meet all the following tests.
1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This
Actual net earnings.Your actual net earnings aremeans that your actual net earnings from
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is,self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of
multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235)the 3 tax years before the one for which you use this
to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings aremethod. The net earnings can be from either farm or
equivalent to net earnings figured using the regularnonfarm earnings or both.
method.2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to beOptional net earnings less than actual net earnings.one after another. You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
your actual net earnings from self-employment.3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
a. Less than $1,733, and Gross nonfarm income of $2,400 or less.The following
examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when grossb. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in-
nonfarm income is $2,400 or less.come.
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 andNet nonfarm profits.Net nonfarm profit generally is theless than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Anntotal of the amounts from: Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from
self-employment were $800 in 2004 and $900 in 2005. She• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040),
meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5
years. Her gross income and net profit in 2006 are as• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
follows:nonfarm partnerships), and
• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). Gross nonfarm income................... $2,100
Net nonfarm profit....................... $1,200
However, you may need to adjust the amount reported
Ann’s actual net earnings for 2006 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss.
.9235). Because her net profit is less than $1,733 and less
Gross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-
generally is the total of the amounts from: farm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,400 (2/3 ×
$2,100). Because these net earnings are higher than her• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040),
actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $1,400
• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), for 2006.
• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 butnonfarm partnerships), and
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income.As-
• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). sume that in Example 1 Ann’s gross income is $1,000 and
her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method to
figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-
Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings tional method because her net profit is not less than
72.189% of her gross income.If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the
following table to figure your net earnings from
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.As-self-employment under the nonfarm optional method.
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,400 (
2/3
× $2,100) as her net earnings.
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.
Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not pay
any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarm
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
optional method because her net earnings under both no more than $1,600 as your combined net earnings from
methods are less than $400. self-employment.
Gross nonfarm income of more than $2,400.The fol- Example. You are a self-employed farmer. You alsolowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings whenoperate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actualgross nonfarm income is more than $2,400. net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and
optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment areExample 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 andshown in Table 10-2.less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income.John
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn-Table 10-2. Example—Farm and Nonfarmings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2004 and Earnings$9,500 in 2005. He meets the test for being self-employed
on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optionalIncome andmethod less than 5 years. His gross income and net profitEarnings Farm Nonfarmin 2006 are as follows:
Gross income $1,200 $1,500
Gross nonfarm income................... $12,000 Actual net earnings $900 $500Net nonfarm profit....................... $1,200
Optional netJohn’s actual net earnings for 2006 are $1,108 ($1,200earnings (2/3 of gross× .9235). Because his net profit is less than $1,733 andincome) $800 $1,000less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,600.Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations ofBecause these net earnings are higher than his actual netmethods you can use to figure net earnings fromearnings, he can report net earnings of $1,600 for 2006.self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-
come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $1,733.
Assume that in Example 1 John’s net profit is $1,800. He• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farm
must use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarmand nonfarm income.
optional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less• Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-than $1,733. come and the regular method for nonfarm income.
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.As- • Method 3. Using the regular method for farm income
sume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. Heand the optional method for nonfarm income.
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,600 as• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farmhis net earnings from self-employment. and nonfarm income.
Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earningsFarm Optional Method figured using the regular method.
Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a
Table 10-3. Example—Net Earningsfarming business. See Publication 225 for information
about this method.
Net
Earnings 1 2 3 4Using Both Optional Methods
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may beActual
able to use both optional methods to determine your netfarm $ 900 $ 900
earnings from self-employment.
Optional To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
farm $ 800 $ 800ods, you must:
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa-Actualrately under each method. Do not combine farm nonfarm $ 500 $ 500earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your net
earnings under either method. Optional
nonfarm $1,000 $1,000• Add the net earnings figured under each method to
arrive at your total net earnings from
Amountself-employment. you can
You can report less than your total actual farm and non-report: $1,400 $1,300 $1,900 $1,600*
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net
*Limited to $1,600 because you used both optional methods.earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fiscal Year Filer
11.If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
Your Rightsearnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
as a Taxpayer
The first part of this chapter explains some of your mostReporting Self-Employment important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Tax
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE
tax. Then enter the SE tax on line 58 of Form 1040 and
Declaration of
attach Schedule SE to Form 1040.
Taxpayer RightsMost taxpayers can use Section A-Short Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use
Section B-Long Schedule SE. Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout yourIf you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form
contact with us.1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do
not otherwise have to file a federal income tax
CAUTION
!
Privacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose toreturn. anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
by law. You have the right to know why we are asking youJoint return.Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file
for information, how we will use it, and what happens if youa joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or
do not provide requested information.both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of
you have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatcomplete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,uses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-use the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
ployee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notAttach both schedules to the joint return.
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourMore than one business.If you have more than one area or the center where you file your return.trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss)
from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from oneRepresentation.You can either represent yourself or,
business will reduce your profit from another business. Filewith proper written authorization, have someone else rep-
one Schedule SE showing the earnings from resent you in your place. Your representative must be a
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, orperson allowed to practice before the IRS, such as an
F for each business. attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. If
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,
Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separatethen we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a netcases.
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking businessYou can have someone accompany you at an interview.
that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C forYou can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 andexamination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided you
another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show-tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.
ing your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing
total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500. Payment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthly
installment payments.
Help with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more
information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS
office that last contacted you.
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collectionas soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue
actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office tothe examination.
review your case. You can also ask a court to review your
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-case.
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals OfficeRelief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensivewaive penalties when allowed by law if you can show youand time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights areacted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appealrect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest thatRights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRSand Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appealemployee. Rights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
Examinations, Appeals, U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.
District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,Collections, and Refunds the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if you
kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If theExaminations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-
court agrees with you on most issues in your case andturns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for
finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may beexamination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.
able to recover some of your administrative and litigationThe inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlesstax. We may close your case without change; or, you may
you tried to resolve your case administratively, includingreceive a refund.
going through the appeals system, and you gave us theThe process of selecting a return for examination usu-
information necessary to resolve the case.ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer
programs to identify returns that may have incorrect
Collections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-amounts. These programs may be based on information
cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingreturns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
payment of federal taxes. It describes:examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
sources that indicates that a return may have incorrectdo if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
amounts. These sources may include newspapers, publicyour bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-payments, delaying collection action, and submitting
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select aan offer in compromise.
return for examination.
• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing aPublication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
release of property.procedures that we follow in examinations. The following
sections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail intions.
Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiries
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request forInnocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your
more information or a reason why we believe a change tospouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying
your return may be needed. You can respond by mail orthe full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your
you can request a personal interview with an examiner. Ifjoint return. To seek relief from any liability related to your
you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Form
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-must be filed within 2 years from the IRS’s first attempt to
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, such as by
applying your refund from one year to the joint liability. ForBy interview.If we notify you that we will conduct yourmore information, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouseexamination through a personal interview, or you requestRelief, and Form 8857. such an interview, you have the right to ask that the
examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatRefunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think youis convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerpaid too much tax. You must generally file the claim withinproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explain3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with theseyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.changes, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return orRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- tax specialists. Workshop topics vary from a general over-
tion on refunds. view of taxes to more specific topics such as recordkeep-
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, youing and retirement plans. Although most are free, some
must file within 3 years from the date the return was dueworkshops have fees associated with them. Any fees
(including extensions) to get that refund. charged for a workshop are paid to the sponsoring organi-
zation, not the IRS.
For more information, visit www.irs.gov/businesses/
small.
Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-12.
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.
It contains a list of free tax publications and describes other
How To Get free tax information services, including tax education and
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
More Information Internet. You can access the IRS website 24
hours a day, 7 days a week, at www.irs.gov to:This section describes the help the IRS and other federal
agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-
nesses. • E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-
ble taxpayers.Internal Revenue Service • Check the status of your 2006 refund. Click on
Where’s My Refund. Wait at least 6 weeks from theYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
date you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
tronically). Have your 2006 tax return available be-tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
cause you will need to know your social securitythat is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
tax help. number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar
amount of your refund.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.The Taxpayer
• Download forms, instructions, and publications.Advocate Service is an independent organization within
the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are exper-• Order IRS products online.
iencing economic harm, who are seeking help in resolving
• Research your tax questions online.tax problems that have not been resolved through normal
channels, or who believe that an IRS system or procedure• Search publications online by topic or keyword.
is not working as it should.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published inYou can contact the Taxpayer Advocate Service by
the last few years.calling toll-free 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TTD
1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance.• Figure your withholding allowances using our with-
You can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate,holding calculator.whose phone number and address are listed in your local
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news bytelephone directory and in Publication 1546, The Taxpayer
email.Advocate Service of the IRS - How To Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems. You can file Form 911, Applica-• Get information on starting and operating a smalltion for Taxpayer Assistance Order, or ask an IRS em-business.ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more information,
.visit www.irs.gov/advocate.
Low income tax clinics (LITCs).LITCs are indepen-
dent organizations that provide low income taxpayers with
representation in federal tax controversies with the IRS forPhone. Many services are available by phone.free or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide tax
education and outreach for taxpayers with limited English
proficiency or who speak English as a second language.
Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List, pro-
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call
vides information on clinics in your area. It is available at1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc-
www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office. tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in-
structions. You should receive your order within 10Small business workshops.Small business workshops days.are designed to help the small business owner understand
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxand fulfill their federal tax responsibilities. Workshops are
questions at 1-800-829-1040.sponsored and presented by IRS partners who are federal
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help necessary, but if you prefer, you can call your local
Center and leave a message requesting an appoint-solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-
ment to resolve a tax account issue. A representa-payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain
tive will call you back within 2 business days toIRS letters, request adjustment to your account, or
schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-help you set up a payment plan. Call your local
nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To
contacts or look in the phone book under Unitedfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
States Government, Internal Revenue Service.look in the phone book under United States Govern-
ment, Internal Revenue Service.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ tions, and publications to the address below andTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax receive a response within 10 business days afterquestions or to order forms and publications. your request is received.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.National Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903• Refund information. To check the status of your
Bloomington, IL 61702-89032006 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for
automated refund information or call IRS tax products CD. You can order Publication1-800-829-1954. Wait at least 6 weeks from the date 1796, IRS Tax Products CD, and obtain:you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed electroni-
cally). Have your 2006 tax return available because
you will need to know your social security number,• Current-year tax forms, instructions, and publica-
your filing status, and the exact whole dollar amounttions.
of your refund. • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - ships withEvaluating the quality of our telephone services. To final release.ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.and professional answers, we use several methods to
evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One method• Tax law frequently asked questions (FAQs).is for a second IRS representative to listen in on or record
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-random telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to
tem.complete a short survey at the end of the call.
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.able on a walk-in basis.
• Toll-free and email technical support.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, The CD is released twice during the year.
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,• The first release will ship the beginning of January.instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county• The final release will ship the beginning of March.
government offices, credit unions, and office supply
stores have a collection of products available to printBuy the CD from National Technical Information Service
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $25 (no handling fee) or call
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter- 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the CD for $25 (plus a $5
handling fee). Price is subject to change.nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
CD for small businesses. Publication 3207, Thesearch purposes. Small Business Resource Guide CD for 2006, is a
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer must for every small business owner or any tax-
Assistance Center every business day for personal,payer about to start a business. This year’s CD includes:
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-letters, request adjustments to your tax account, orness plan, find financing for your business, andhelp you set up a payment plan. If you need to much more.resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you’re• All the business tax forms, instructions, and publica-
more comfortable talking with someone in person, tions needed to successfully manage a business.
visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center where• Tax law changes for 2006.you can spread out your records and talk with an
IRS representative face-to-face. No appointment is• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Web links to various government agencies, business Internet. You can visit the SBA website at www.
associations, and IRS organizations. sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website, you can
find a variety of information of interest to small• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to sug-business owners.gest changes for future editions.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at• A site map of the CD to help you navigate the pages
1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for generalof the CD with ease.
information about programs available to assist
• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that gives prac-small business owners.
tical tips for teens about starting their own business,
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Businesscreating a business plan, and filing taxes.
Development Center or Business Information
An updated version of this CD is available each year in Center to request assistance with your small
early April. You can get a free copy by calling business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBA
1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz. website or call the SBA Answer Desk.
Small Business Administration Other Federal Agencies
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-
and educational programs, counseling services, financial phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-able from the Superintendent of Documents at the
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety Government Printing Office. You can get information and
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis- order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
tance provided by the SBA. Internet. You can visit the GPO website at www.
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs). access.gpo.gov.
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
ices to current and prospective small business owners who
cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small
business.
Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer a Superintendent of Documentssmall business reference library, management video U.S. Government Printing Officetapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.P.O. Box 371954BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals whoPittsburgh, PA 15250-7954are in business or are interested in starting a business can
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge. Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800
or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DCService Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
area.SCORE provides small business counseling and training
to current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,
manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers
a variety of small business workshops.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Consignments ................... 2 4Taxes paid on certain employeeA
tips........................... 1 9Construction allowances........ 2 4Accounting method:
Welfare-to-work................. 2 0Contributions to selectedAccrual.....................13, 31
Work opportunity............... 2 0community developmentAutomatic procedures.......... 1 6
Credit for alcohol used ascorporations, credit for....... 1 9Cash ........................13, 31
fuel............................. 1 9Change in...................... 1 6Corporations...................... 3
Credit for employer-providedCombination.................... 1 4Cost of goods sold.............. 2 7
childcare facilities............. 1 9Special......................... 1 6Credit:
Credit for small employer pensionAccounting periods............. 1 2Advanced lean burn technology
plan startup costs............. 1 9Accrual method: motor vehicle credit.......... 1 9
Income - general rule........... 1 3Alcohol used as fuel............ 1 9
Income - special rules.......... 1 3Alternative fuel vehicle refuelingDOf accounting................... 1 3property...................... 1 8Damages ......................... 2 4Alternative motor vehicle....... 1 8Adjusted basis................... 1 7 Debt:Biodiesel fuels.................. 1 9Administrator.................... 2 5 B a d ............................. 3 1Contributions to selectedAlternative fuel vehicle refueling Canceled ....................... 2 2community developmentproperty credit................. 1 8 Qualified real propertycorporations.................. 1 9Alternative minimum tax........ 2 0 business..................... 2 3Credits for employers affected byAlternative motor vehicle Refund offset against............ 7Hurricane Katrina, Rita, orcredit........................... 1 8 Definitions:Wilma ........................ 1 9Appeal rights.................... 4 6 Accounting methods............ 1 2Diesel fuels, renewable......... 1 9Appreciation..................... 2 4 Accounting periods............. 1 2Disabled access................ 1 9Audits ............................ 4 6 Barter........................... 2 0Distilled spirits.................. 1 9Automobile (See Car expenses) Basis ........................... 1 7Electric vehicle................. 3 1
Business bad debt.............. 3 1Employer-provided
Calendar tax year............... 1 2childcare..................... 1 9B
Cash discount..............27, 28Empowerment zoneBad debts ........................ 3 1
Disposition of property.......... 1 7employment .................. 1 9Barter income.................... 2 0 Drawing account................ 2 8Energy efficient appliance...... 1 9Basis of property................ 1 7 Entertainment expenses........ 3 8Energy efficient home.......... 1 9Biodiesel and renewable diesel Fair market value............... 1 7Enhanced oil recovery.......... 1 9fuels credit..................... 1 9 Fiscal tax year.................. 1 2How to claim.................... 2 0Bribes ............................ 4 0 Fringe benefit................... 3 4Indian coal...................... 2 0Business expenses.............. 3 1 Local transportationIndian employment............. 1 9Business income ................ 2 0 expenses..................... 3 1Investment...................... 1 9Business use of your home..... 3 9 Necessary expense............. 3 1Low sulfur diesel fuel
Net operating loss.............. 4 0production.................... 1 9
Nonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 1Low-income housing............ 1 9C
Ordinary expense............... 3 1Mine rescue team training...... 1 9Canceled debt................... 2 2
Principal place of business..... 3 9New markets ................... 1 9Cancellation of qualified real Qualified long-term realNonconventional sourceproperty business debt....... 2 3 property...................... 2 5fuel........................... 2 0Capital gain or loss.............. 1 8 Qualified real property businessOrphan drug.................... 2 0Car expenses ................31, 32 debt.......................... 2 3Qualified alternative fuel motorCash discount...............27, 28 Rent ............................ 3 6vehicle credit................. 1 9Cash method: Restricted property............. 2 3Qualified fuel cell motor vehicleExpenses ....................... 1 3 Retail space.................... 2 5credit......................... 1 9Income ......................... 1 3 Self-employment (SE) tax....... 8Qualified hybrid motor vehicleChanging accounting Sole proprietor................... 2credit......................... 1 9method ......................... 1 5 Tax home ....................... 3 2Qualified railroad trackCharitable contributions........ 4 0 Trade discount..............27, 28maintenance................. 2 0
Claim for refund................. 4 6 Travel expenses................ 3 7Refined coal.................... 2 0
Collection of tax................. 4 6 Depreciation:Renewable electricity........... 2 0
Combination method of Deduction....................... 3 3Research ....................... 1 9
accounting..................... 1 4 Listed property.................. 3 3Small employer pension plan
Special allowance.............. 3 3Condemned property ............ 1 8 startup costs................. 1 9
Page 50 Publication 334 (2006)

Page 51 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation, recapture......... 2 4 Other ........................... 4 08834 (electric vehicle).......... 3 1
Pension plans.................. 3 68835 (renewable electricity, coalDirect seller..................25, 26
credit)........................ 2 0Rent ............................ 3 6Disabled access credit.......... 1 9
8844 (empowerment zoneTaxes ........................... 3 7Disposition of property:
credit)........................ 1 9Travel........................... 3 7Business property.............. 1 6
Truck ........................... 3 18845 (Indian employmentInstallment sale.............17, 18
credit)........................ 1 9Like-kind exchange.....17, 18, 25
8846 (credit for social security onNontaxable exchange.......... 1 7F tip income)................... 1 9Sale of a business.............. 1 7Fair market value................ 1 78847 (community developmentDistilled spirits credit............ 1 9Farming ........................... 3credit)........................ 1 9Dividend income................. 2 2Filing business taxes............. 5 8857 (innocent spouse)......... 4 6Domestic production activities Fishermen ......................... 38861 (welfare-to-workdeduction....................... 3 credit)........................ 2 0Fishing crew member .......25, 41Donation of inventory........... 2 8 8864 (biodiesel/renewable dieselForm:Drawing account................. 2 8 credit)........................ 1 91040 (tax return)...............6 ,  9Due date of return................ 8 8874 (new markets credit)...... 1 91040-ES (estimated tax).......8 ,  9
8879 (self-selected PIN)......... 71040-V (voucher)................ 7
8881 (pension plan startup costs1099-B (barter)................. 2 1E
credit)........................ 1 91099-MISCe-file............................... 6 8882 (employer-provided childcare(miscellaneous)..........10, 21Economic injury................. 2 4 credit)........................ 1 91128 (change tax year)......... 1 2EFTPS ............................. 8 8886 (transaction statement).... 32210 (underpayment of estimatedElectric vehicle credit........... 3 1 8896 (low sulfur dieseltax)............................ 8Electronic filing................... 6 credit)........................ 1 92290 (excise tax for heavyEmployee ......................... 5 8900 (railroad track maintenancetrucks)......................... 9
Employee benefit programs..... 3 4 credit)........................ 2 03115 (change accounting
Employees’ pay.................. 3 4 8903 (domestic production)...... 3method) ...................... 1 6
8906 (distilled spirits credit)..... 1 9Employer identification number 3468 (investment credit)........ 1 9
8907 (nonconventional fuel(EIN)............................. 53800 (general business
credit)........................ 2 0credit)....................18, 20Employment taxes:
8908 (energy efficient home4562 (depreciation)............. 3 3About ............................ 9
credit)........................ 1 94684 (casualty and theft)....... 1 8Deduction for................... 3 7
8909 (appliance credit)......... 1 94797 (sale of businessEmpowerment zone employment
8910 (alternative vehicleproperty).................18, 24credit........................... 1 9
credit)....................18, 314868 (extension)................. 8Energy efficient appliance 8911 (alternative fuel refueling5884 (work opportunitycredit........................... 1 9 property credit)............... 1 8credit)........................ 2 0Energy efficient home credit.... 1 9 940 (unemployment tax)......... 95884-A (credits for employersEnhanced oil recovery 941 (quarterly employmentaffected by hurricanes)....... 1 9credit........................... 1 9 tax)............................ 96251 (alternative minimumEntertainment expenses (See 944 (annual employment tax).... 9tax).......................18, 20Travel expenses)............... 3 8 982 (discharge of6252 (installment sale).......... 1 8Escrow, payments placed in.... 2 7 indebtedness)................ 2 36478 (alcohol used as fuelEstimated tax..................... 8 Final............................ 1 1credit)........................ 1 9
Examinations (audits)........... 4 6 Information returns.............. 96765 (research credit).......... 1 9
Excise taxes: Schedule C (sole proprietor).....6 ,720 (excise tax return)........... 9
About ............................ 9 98109 (deposit coupon)........... 9
Deduction for................... 3 7 Schedule C-EZ (sole8300 (cash payments over
Executor ......................... 2 5 proprietor)..................... 6$10,000)..................... 1 1
Schedule SE (self-employmentExpenses: 8453 (e-file signature)........... 6
tax)............................ 9Bad debts....................... 3 18453-OL (e-file signature)....... 6
SS-4 (application for EIN)........ 5C a r ............................. 3 18586 (low-income housing
SS-5 (application for SSN)....... 5Depreciation.................... 3 3credit)........................ 1 9
W-2 (report wages).......... 9 ,  1 0Employees’ pay................. 3 48594 (asset acquisition)........ 1 7
W-3 (transmittal of W-2)......... 9Entertainment................... 3 78820 (orphan drug credit)....... 2 0
W-4 (employee withholding)..... 5Home, business use............ 3 98824 (like-kind exchange)..... 1 7 ,
W-7 (application for ITIN)........ 5Insurance....................... 3 4 1 8
W-9 (request for TIN)............ 6Interest......................... 3 58826 (disabled access
When to file...................... 9Legal and professional fees.... 3 6 credit)........................ 1 9
Which to file..................... 9Meals ........................... 3 78829 (business in home)....... 4 0
Nondeductible.................. 4 08830 (oil recovery credit)....... 1 9Fringe benefits................... 3 4
Publication 334 (2006) Page 51

Page 52 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fuel taxes........................ 3 7Nondeductible premiums....... 3 5Nondeductible insurance
Prepayment .................... 3 5premiums ...................... 3 5
Proceeds ....................... 2 7NonemployeeG Self-employed health........... 3 5compensation ................. 2 0Gains and losses................ 2 3Insurance agent: Nontaxable exchanges.......... 1 7General business credits........ 1 8 Former.......................... 2 6Not income:Gross profit: Retired.......................... 2 6Appreciation.................... 2 4Accuracy ....................... 3 0Interest: Consignments.................. 2 4Additions to..................... 3 0Expenses ....................... 3 5Constructions allowances....... 2 4Guidelines for selected Income ......................... 2 2Exchange of like-kindoccupations (See also Inventories....................... 1 5property...................... 2 5Occupations, selected)......... 2 5 Leasehold improvements....... 2 5Investment credit................ 1 9
Loans ........................... 2 5IRS mission....................... 3
H Sales tax....................... 2 5
Health insurance, deduction for Not-for-profit activities.......... 4 1Kself-employed................. 3 5 Notary public................26, 41Kickbacks ....................24, 40Home, business use of.......... 3 9
Hotels, boarding houses, and Oapartments .................... 2 1L Occupations, selected:Husband and wife business...... 2 Lease bonus ..................... 2 2Administrator................... 2 5Lease cancellation Direct seller.................25, 26payments ...................... 2 2I Executor........................ 2 5
Legal fees........................ 3 6Identification numbers........... 5 Fishing crew member........... 2 5
Like-kind exchanges........17, 25 Insurance agent, former........ 2 6Income: (See also Not
Limited liability company........ 2 Insurance agent, retired........ 2 6income)......................... 2 4
Listed property.................. 2 4Newspaper carrier orAccounting for your............. 2 7
distributor.................... 2 6Barter........................... 2 0Lobbying expense ............... 4 0
Business........................ 2 0 Newspaper or magazineLocal transportation
Damages ....................... 2 4 vendor........................ 2 6expenses ...................... 3 1
Gains and losses............... 2 3 Notary public................... 2 6Lodging .......................... 3 8
Kickbacks....................... 2 4 Public official................... 2 6Long-term capital gain orKinds of income................ 2 0 Real estate agent............... 2 6loss ............................ 1 8Lost income payments.......... 2 3 Securities dealer................ 2 6Lost income payments.......... 2 3Other ........................... 2 3 Securities trader................ 2 6Low sulfur diesel fuel productionPaid to a third party............. 2 7 Office in the home (See alsocredit........................... 1 9Personal property rent.......... 2 2 Business use of your home).... 3 2Low-income housing credit..... 1 9Promissory notes............... 2 3 Optional methods, using
Recapture of depreciation...... 2 4 both ............................ 4 4
Recovery of items previously M Ordinary gain or loss............ 1 8deducted..................... 2 4Meals (See Travel expenses)..... 3 8Orphan drug credit.............. 2 0Rental......................21, 22 Methods for figuring netRestricted property............. 2 3earnings ....................... 4 2PIncome tax: Mileage rate for vehicles........ 3 2About ............................ 6 Parking fees..................... 3 2Mine rescue team trainingDeduction for................... 3 7 Partners, husband and wife...... 2credit........................... 1 9How to pay...................... 8 Partnerships...................... 3Motor vehicle, alternativeUnderpayment penalty........... 8 Passive activities................. 3credit........................... 1 8Income tax return, who must Pay, kinds of..................... 3 4file............................... 6 Paying:Independent contractor....2 ,  9 ,  4 1N Business taxes.................. 5
Indian employment credit....... 1 9Net operating losses............ 4 0Income tax....................... 8
Individual taxpayer identification Net profit or loss................. 4 0Payments to third parties....... 2 2
number (ITIN)................... 5New markets credit.............. 1 9Penalties and fines.............. 4 0
Information returns.............. 1 0Newspaper carrier or Penalty:
Information, How to get distributor ..................... 2 6Failure to file Form 8300........ 1 1
more ........................... 4 7Newspaper or magazine Failure to file information
Innocent spouse relief........... 4 6vendor ......................... 2 6returns....................... 1 1
Installment sales................. 1 7Nonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 1Failure to furnish correct payee
statements................... 1 1Insurance: Nonconventional source fuel
Expense ........................ 3 4credit........................... 2 0Underpayment of tax............ 8
Page 52 Publication 334 (2006)

Page 53 of 53 of Publication 334 9:40 - 12-DEC-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalty: (Cont.) Schedule SE (Form 1040)........ 9Sport utility vehicle.............. 3 3
Waiver of....................... 1 1Schedule SE, filing Standard mileage rate:
Pension plans.................... 3 6requirement.................... 4 5For 2006......................... 3
For 2007......................... 3Personal property tax........... 3 7SE tax:
About ............................ 8Statutory employee............... 2Prepaid expense:
Aliens........................... 4 1Extends useful life.............. 3 5 Suggestions for publication..... 3
Church employee............... 4 1Rent ............................ 3 6 SUV ............................... 3 3
Community property income.... 4 2Professional fees................ 3 6
Deduction for................... 3 7Promissory notes................ 2 3 TEarning credits.................. 8Public official.................... 2 6 Tax help (See Information, How toEffects of using an optionalPunitive damages................ 2 4 get more)method ....................... 4 2Tax home ....................32, 37Farm optional method.......... 4 4
Q Tax preparation fees............. 3 6Fiscal year filer................. 4 5
Qualified railroad track Tax refund:Fishing crew member........... 4 1
maintenance credit............ 2 0 Claim for........................ 4 6Gain or loss..................... 4 2
Offset against debts............. 7Qualified real property business Government employee.....41, 42
debt ............................ 2 3 Tax return:Joint return..................... 4 5
How to file....................... 6Lost income payments.......... 4 2
Who must file.................... 6Maximum earnings:R
Tax year.......................... 1 2For 2006....................3 ,  9Real estate:
Calendar........................ 1 2For 2007...................... 3Agent ........................... 2 6
Change in...................... 1 2Subject to.................... 4 1Dealer.......................... 2 1
Fiscal........................... 1 2Methods for figuring netRent ............................ 2 1
earnings...................... 4 2Taxes:Taxes ........................... 3 7
More than one business....42, 45 Deduction for................... 3 7Recordkeeping.................... 3Nonfarm optional method....... 4 3 Employment ................. 9 ,  3 7Recovery of items previously Notary public................... 4 1Excise....................... 9 ,  3 7deducted ....................... 2 4Optional methods: Fuel............................. 3 7Refund: Farm ......................... 4 4Income ...................... 6 ,  3 7Inquiries......................... 7Nonfarm ...................... 4 3Paid on certain employeeOffsets against debts............ 7 Rate ............................ 4 1tips........................... 1 9Related persons: Regular method................ 4 2Personal property............... 3 7Unreasonable rent.............. 3 6Residing abroad................ 4 2Real estate..................... 3 7Renewable electricity, refined coal,Special rules and Sales ........................... 3 7and Indian coal production exceptions.................... 4 1Self-employment............. 8 ,  3 7credit........................... 2 0Tax rate......................... 9Taxpayer Advocate.............. 4 7Rent expense .................... 3 6Time limit for posting income.... 9 Taxpayer rights.................. 4 5Rental income................... 2 1Who must pay.................. 4 1Third parties, Payments to...... 2 2Repayment of income ........... 1 3Why use an optional Tolls.............................. 3 2method ....................... 4 2Reportable transaction disclosure Trade discount...............27, 28statement....................... 3Section 179: Trade or business................ 2Deduction....................... 3 3Reporting self-employment Trailer park owner............... 2 1Increased deduction limit........ 3tax.............................. 4 5 Transportation expenses........ 3 1Property........................ 2 4Research credit.................. 1 9 Travel expenses................. 3 7Securities:Restricted property.............. 2 3
Dealer.......................... 2 6Retirement plans (See Pension
UTrader.......................... 2 6plans)
Underpayment of tax penalty.... 8Self-employed health insurance
deduction...................... 3 5Uniform capitalization rules..... 1 6S Self-employment tax (See SE tax)S corporations.................... 3Settlement payments............ 2 2WSalaries.......................... 3 4Short-term capital gain or Wages ............................ 3 4Sale of a business............... 1 7loss ............................ 1 8Welfare-to-work credit........... 2 0Sale of property (See also Signature, electronic............. 6Work opportunity credit......... 2 0Disposition of property)......... 1 7Small BusinessSales of assets.................. 1 6 ■Administration................. 4 9Sales tax......................... 3 7Social security coverage......... 8Schedule C........................ 6Social security number (SSN).... 5Schedule C-EZ.................... 6Sole proprietor................ 2 ,  4 1
Publication 334 (2006) Page 53