Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -35% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.sgm (21-Dec-2001) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
Important Change ................ 1Department
of the Important Reminders .............. 2Travel,Treasury
Introduction ..................... 2Internal
Revenue Entertainment, 1. Travel ....................... 2Service Tax Home .................... 3
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreGift, and Car
Deductible? ................ 4
Meals .................... 4
Travel in the United States ...... 6Expenses Travel Outside the United
States ................. 6
Luxury Water Travel .......... 8
Conventions ............... 8For use in preparing
2. Entertainment .................. 9
What Entertainment Expenses2001 Returns Are Deductible? ............. 9
Directly-Related Test ......... 11
Associated Test ............. 11
50% Limit .................... 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit ..... 12
3. Gifts ........................ 13
4. Transportation ................. 13
Car Expenses ................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate ........ 15
Actual Car Expenses ......... 16
Leasing a Car .............. 22
Disposition of a Car ............. 22
5. Recordkeeping ................. 23
How To Prove Expenses .......... 23
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 23
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 24
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 25
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts ...... 25
Examples of Records ......... 25
6. How To Report ................. 25
Where To Report ............... 25
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 26
Reimbursements ............... 26
Accountable Plans ........... 26
Nonaccountable Plans ........ 29
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients ..... 29
Completing Forms 2106 and
2 1 0 6 – E Z ................. 30
Special Rules .............. 31
Illustrated Examples .......... 32
7. How To Get Tax Help ............ 37
Appendices ..................... 38
Index .......................... 47
Important Change
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car in
2001 is 34
1/2 cents a mile for all business miles.

Page 2 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Car expenses and use of the standard mile- • Entertainment,
age rate are explained in chapter 4. • Gifts, or Volunteers. If you perform services as a
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may• Transportation. be able to deduct some of your costs as a
An ordinary expense is one that is common charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-
Important Reminders and accepted in your field of trade, business, or penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,
profession. A necessary expense is one that is Charitable Contributions, for information on the
helpful and appropriate for your business. An expenses you can deduct.Depreciation limits on cars. Generally, total
expense does not have to be indispensable tosection 179 and depreciation deductions for a Comments and suggestions. We welcomebe considered necessary.car first placed in service in 2001 cannot be your comments about this publication and yourmore than $3,060. Depreciation on cars and the This publication explains what expenses are suggestions for future editions.section 179 deduction are covered in chapter 4. deductible, how to report them on your return, You can e-mail us while visiting our web siteException for electric cars. The limit for what records you need to prove your expenses, at www.irs.gov.electric cars placed in service in 2001 is $9,280. and how to treat any expense reimbursements You can write to us at the following address:See Exceptions for clean-fuel cars under Depre- you may receive.
ciation Limits in chapter 4. Internal Revenue ServiceWho should use this publication. You Technical Publications Branchshould read this publication if you are an em-Standard meal allowance. The standard W:CAR:MP:FP:Pployee or a sole proprietor who has business-re-meal allowance [also referred to as the limit on 1111 Constitution Ave. NWlated travel, entertainment, gift, or transportationmeals and incidental expenses (M&IE rate)] for Washington, DC 20224expenses.most small localities in the United States is $30.
However, the standard meal allowance is higher Users of employer-provided vehicles. If We respond to many letters by telephone.for most major cities and many other localities in an employer-provided vehicle was available for Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-the continental United States. See Publication your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- clude your daytime phone number, including the1542, Per Diem Rates . These rates (al- ally, your employer must include the value of the area code, in your correspondence.lowances/limits) are also listed in Appendix A of use or availability in your income as pay. How-Chapter 41, Part 301 of the Code of Federal ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi- Useful ItemsRegulations. If you have a computer, you can cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit You may want to see:find them on the Internet at (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use
www.policyworks.gov/perdiem. Click on “Do- vehicle). Publicationmestic per diem rates.” Use of the standard meal A working condition fringe benefit is any
allowance is explained in chapter 1. ❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guideproperty or service provided to you by your em-
ployer for which you could deduct the cost as an ❏ 529 Miscellaneous DeductionsMeal expenses when subject to “hours of employee business expense if you had paid forservice” limits. Generally, you can deduct ❏ 535 Business Expensesit.only 50% of your business-related meal ex- A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertypenses while traveling away from your tax home that is not likely to be used more than minimallyfor business purposes. You can deduct a higher ❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesfor personal purposes because of its design.percentage if the meals take place during or For information on how to report your carincident to any period subject to the Department Form (and Instructions)expenses that your employer did not provide orof Transportation ’s “hours of service ” limits. reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gas ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized(These limits apply to certain workers who are and maintenance for a car your employer pro- Deductionsunder certain federal regulations.) The percent- vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employerage is 60% for 2001. Business meal expenses ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Lossin chapter 6.are covered in chapter 1. From BusinessWho does not need to use this publication.
Limits that apply to employee deductions. ❏ Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) Net ProfitOther businesses (such as partnerships, corpo-
If you are an employee, deduct your work-re- From Businessrations, and trusts) and employers who reim-
lated expenses discussed in this publication as burse their employees for business expenses ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Lossa miscellaneous itemized deduction on Sched- should refer to their tax form instructions and From Farmingule A (Form 1040). Generally, the amount of chapter 13 of Publication 535, Business Ex-
❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesmiscellaneous itemized deductions you can de- penses, for information on deducting travel, en-
duct is limited to the amount that is more than tertainment, and transportation expenses. ❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee2% of your adjusted gross income. It may be If you are an employee, you will not need to Business Expensesfurther limited if your adjusted gross income is read this publication if all of the following are
❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationmore than $132,950 ($66,475 if you are married true.
filing separately). How to report your expenses See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for1) You fully accounted to your employer foris covered in chapter 6. information about getting these publications andyour work-related expenses. forms.Photographs of missing children. The Inter- 2) You received full reimbursement for yournal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the expenses.National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected 3) Your employer required you to return any
by the Center may appear in this publication on excess reimbursement and you did so.
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 4) Box 12 of your Form W – 2, Wage and Taxhelp bring these children home by looking at the Statement, shows no amount with a code 1.photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST L.(1–800–843–5678)  if you recognize a child.
If you meet these four conditions, there is no
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
Travel
ments on your return. If you would like more
information on reimbursements and accounting
Introduction If you temporarily travel away from your taxto your employer, see chapter 6. home, you can use this chapter to determine ifYou may be able to deduct the ordinary and If you meet these conditions and your you have deductible travel expenses. This chap-necessary business-related expenses you have employer included reimbursements on ter defines “travel expenses,” “tax home,” “tem-for:  your Form W–2 in error, ask your em- porary assignment, ” and the “standard meal
TIP
• Travel, ployer for a corrected Form W–2. allowance.” It also discusses the rules for travel
Page 2 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 3 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
inside and outside the United States, luxury cludes the entire city or general area in which executive training program. You do not expect to
water travel, and deductible convention ex- your business or work is located. return to work in Boston after you complete your
penses. If you have more than one regular place of training.
business, your tax home is your main place of During your training, you do not do any work
Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes, business. See Main place of business or work, in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary later. on-the-job training throughout the United States.
expenses of traveling away from home for your If you do not have a regular or a main place You keep your apartment in Boston and return to
business, profession, or job. of business because of the nature of your work, it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct
An ordinary expense is one that is common then your tax home may be the place where you your personal business. You also keep up your
and accepted in your field of trade, business, or regularly live. See No main place of business or community contacts in Boston. When you com-
profession. A necessary expense is one that is work, later. plete your training, you are transferred to Los
helpful and appropriate for your business. An If you do not have a regular place of business Angeles.
expense does not have to be indispensable to or post of duty and there is no place where you You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did
be considered necessary. regularly live, you are considered a transient not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
You will find examples of deductible travel (an itinerant)  and your tax home is wherever cause you had duplicate living expenses. You
expenses in Table 1, later. you work. As a transient, you cannot claim a also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
travel expense deduction because you are don your apartment in Boston as your main
Traveling away from home. You are travel- never considered to be traveling away from home, you kept your community contacts, and
ing away from home if: home. you frequently returned to live in your apartment.
You have a tax home in Boston.1) Your duties require you to be away from Main place of business or work. If you have
the general area of your tax home (defined more than one place of work, consider the fol- Example 2. You are an outside salespersonlater) substantially longer than an ordinary lowing when determining which one is your main with a sales territory covering several states.day’s work, and place of business or work. Your employer ’s main office is in Newark, but
you do not conduct any business there. Your2) You need to sleep or rest to meet the de- 1) The total time you ordinarily spend in each work assignments are temporary, and you havemands of your work while away from place. no way of knowing where your future assign-home.
ments will be located. You have a room in your2) The level of your business activity in eachThis rest requirement is not satisfied by merely married sister’s house in Dayton. You stay thereplace.napping in your car. You do not have to be away for one or two weekends a year, but you do nofrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusk 3) Whether your income from each place is work in the area. You do not pay your sister forto dawn as long as your relief from duty is long significant or insignificant. the use of the room.enough to get necessary sleep or rest. You do not satisfy any of the three factors
listed earlier. You are a transient and have noExample. You live in Cincinnati where youExample 1. You are a railroad conductor. tax home.have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andYou leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $25,000. You work the other 4 months inscheduled round-trip run between two cities and Travel to family home. If you (and your fam-Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.return home 16 hours later. During the run, you ily) do not live at your tax home (defined earlier),Cincinnati is your main place of work becausehave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you cannot deduct the cost of traveling betweenyou spend most of your time there and earnyou eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get your tax home and your family home. You alsomost of your income there.necessary sleep before starting the return trip. cannot deduct the cost of meals and lodging
You are considered to be away from home. while at your tax home. See Example 1 thatNo main place of business or work. You
follows.may have a tax home even if you do not have aExample 2. You are a truck driver. You If you are working temporarily in the sameregular or main place of work. Your tax homeleave your terminal and return to it later the city where you and your family live, you may bemay be the home where you regularly live.same day. You get an hour off at your turn- considered as traveling away from home. See
Factors used to determine tax home. Ifaround point to eat. Because you are not off to Example 2, below.
you do not have a regular or main place ofget necessary sleep and the brief time off is not
business or work, use the following three factorsan adequate rest period, you are not traveling Example 1. You are a truck driver and you
to determine where your tax home is. away from home. and your family live in Tucson. You are em-
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in1) You perform part of your business in theMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are a Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnarea of your main home and use thatmember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend onehome for lodging while doing business innent duty assignment overseas, you are not night there before returning home. You cannotthe area.traveling away from home. You cannot deduct deduct any expenses you have for meals and
your expenses for meals and lodging. You can- lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from2) You have living expenses at your main
not deduct these expenses even if you have to Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix ishome that you duplicate because your
maintain a home in the United States for your your tax home.business requires you to be away from
family members who are not allowed to accom- that home.
pany you overseas. If you are transferred from Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-3) You have not abandoned the area in whichone permanent duty station to another, you may burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. Theboth your historical place of lodging andhave deductible moving expenses, which are rest of the year you work for the same employeryour claimed main home are located; youexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses. in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantshave a member or members of your familyA naval officer assigned to permanent duty and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is theliving at your main home; or you often useaboard a ship that has regular eating and living same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-that home for lodging.facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel more.
expense purposes. Because you spend most of your workingIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,is the home where you regularly live. If you
that city is your tax home. You cannot deductsatisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
any expenses you have for meals and lodginghome depending on all the facts and circum-
there. However, when you return to work inTax Home stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are a
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax hometransient; your tax home is wherever you work
To determine whether you are traveling away even though you stay at your family home. Youand you cannot deduct travel expenses.
from home, you must first determine the location can deduct the cost of your round trip between
of your tax home. Example 1. You are single and live in Bos- Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct
Generally, your tax home is your regular ton in an apartment you rent. You have worked your part of your family ’s living expenses for
place of business or post of duty, regardless of for your employer in Boston for a number of meals and lodging while you are livi ng and work-
where you maintain your family home. It in- years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month ing in Pittsburgh.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually there, depending on the facts and your circum-
lasted 10 months. stances.Temporary
You realistically expected the job in Fresno When you travel away from home onto last 8 months. The job actually did last lessAssignment or Job business, you should keep records ofthan 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
home is still in Los Angeles.You may regularly work at your tax home and advances you receive from your employer. Youalso work at another location. It may not be can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherExample 2. The facts are the same as inpractical to return to your tax home from this written record to keep track of your expenses.Example 1, except that you realistically ex-other location at the end of each work day. The types of expenses you need to record,pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The along with supporting documentation, are de-Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- job actually was completed in 10 months. scribed in Table 4 (see chapter 5).ment. If your assignment or job away from Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you
your main place of work is temporary, your tax realistically expected the work to last longer than
home does not change. You are considered to 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1
be away from home for the whole period you are Separating costs. If you have one expenseyear. You cannot deduct any travel expenses
away from your main place of work. You can that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,you had in Fresno because Fresno became your
deduct your travel expenses, if they otherwise and other services (such as lodging or transpor-tax home.
qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary tation), you must allocate that expense between
assignment in a single location is one that is Example 3. The facts are the same as in the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost
realistically expected to last (and does in fact Example 1, except that you realistically ex- of other services. You must have a reasonable
last) for one year or less. pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After basis for making this allocation. For example,
However, if your assignment or job is indefi- 8 months, however, you were asked to remain you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
nite, the location of the assignment or job be- for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 cludes one or more meals in its room charge.
comes your new tax home and you cannot months).
Travel expenses for another individual. If adeduct your travel expenses while there.  An Initially, you realistically expected the job in
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withassignment or job in a single location is consid- Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due
you (or your employee) on a business trip or to aered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last to changed circumstances occurring after 8
business convention, you generally cannot de-for more than one year, whether or not it actually months, it was no longer realistic for you to
duct his or her travel expenses.lasts for more than one year. expect that the job in Fresno would last for one
If your assignment is indefinite, you must year or less. You can only deduct your travel Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-include in your income any amounts you receive expenses for the first 8 months. You cannot penses of someone who goes with you if thatfrom your employer for living expenses, even if deduct any travel expenses you had after that person:they are called travel allowances and you ac- time because Fresno became your tax home
count to your employer for them. You may be when the job became indefinite. 1) Is your employee,
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new 2) Has a bona fide business purpose for theGoing home on days off. If you go back totax home as a moving expense. See Publication travel, andyour tax home from a temporary assignment on521 for more information.
your days off, you are not considered away from 3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct theException for federal crime investigations or home while you are in your hometown. You travel expenses.prosecutions. If you are a federal employee cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-
participating in a federal crime investigation or ing there. However, you can deduct your travel Business associate. If a business associ-prosecution, you are not subject to the one-year expenses, including meals and lodging, while ate travels with you and meets the conditions inrule. This means you may be able to deduct traveling between your temporary place of work (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the traveltravel expenses even if you are away from your and your tax home. You can claim these ex- expenses you have for that person. A businesstax home for more than one year. penses up to the amount it would have cost you associate is someone with whom you could rea-For you to qualify, the Attorney General must to stay at your temporary place of work. sonably expect to actively conduct business. Acertify that you are traveling: If you keep your hotel room during your visit business associate can be a current or prospec-
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,1) For the federal government, room. In addition, you can deduct your ex- employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
penses of returning home up to the amount you2) In a temporary duty status, and sor.
would have spent for meals had you stayed at3) To investigate or prosecute, or provide Bona fide business purpose. A bona fideyour temporary place of work.support services for the investigation or business purpose exists if you can prove a real
prosecution of, a federal crime. business purpose for the individual ’s presence.Probationary work period. If you take a job
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-that requires you to move, with the understand-You can deduct your otherwise allowable travel
sisting in entertaining customers, are noting that you will keep the job if your work isexpenses throughout the period of certification.
enough to make the expenses deductible.satisfactory during a probationary period, the job
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourDetermining temporary or indefinite. You
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-must determine whether your assignment is
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda isbationary period.temporary or indefinite when you start work. If
not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally typesyou expect an assignment or job to last for one
notes, performs similar services, and accompa-year or less, it is temporary unless there are
nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.
formance of these services does not establishAn assignment or job that is initially temporary What Travel Expenses
that her presence on the trip is necessary to themay become indefinite due to changed circum-
conduct of Jerry ’s business. Her expenses areAre Deductible?stances. A series of assignments to the same
not deductible.location, all for short periods but that together
Jerry pays $115 a day for a double room. AOnce you have determined that you are travel-cover a long period, may be considered an in-
single room costs $90 a day. He can deduct theing away from your tax home, you can determinedefinite assignment.
total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,what travel expenses are deductible.The following examples illustrate whether an
but only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he usesYou can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.
public transportation, he can deduct only hispenses you have when you travel away from
fare.Example 1. You are a construction worker. home on business. The type of expense you can
You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles stances.
Meals
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. Table 1 summarizes travel expenses you
Because of a shortage of work, you took a job on may be able to deduct. You may have other You can deduct the cost of meals in ei ther of the
a construction project in Fresno. Your job was deductible travel expenses that are not covered following two situations.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tual costs. The set amount varies depending on
where and when you travel.  In this publication,
“standard meal allowance” refers to the federal
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of
standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-
ords to prove the time, place, and business
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeeping
rules for travel in chapter 5.
Incidental expenses. These include, but are
not limited to, your costs for the following items.
1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing.
2) Fees and tips for persons who provide ser-
vices, such as porters and baggage carri-
ers.
Incidental expenses do not include taxicab
fares, lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams or
telephone calls.
Federal employees should refer to the
Federal Travel Regulations at
www.policyworks.gov/ftr  for
CAUTION
!
changes affecting their claims for reimburse-
ment of these expenses.
50% limit may apply. If you use this method
for meal expenses and you are not reimbursed
or you are reimbursed under a nonaccountable
plan, you can generally deduct only 50% of the
standard meal allowance. If you are reimbursed
under an accountable plan and you are deduct-
ing amounts that are more than your reimburse-
ments, you can deduct only 50% of the excess
amount. The 50% limit is discussed in more
detail in chapter 2, and accountable and nonac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
There is no optional standard lodging
amount similar to the standard meal
allowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
!
pense deduction is your actual cost.
Who can use the standard meal allowance.
You can use the standard meal allowance
Table 1.
IF you have
expenses for:
Transportation
THEN you can deduct the costs of:
Fares for these and other types of transportation that take you
between:
Tips
Other
Taxi, commuter
bus, and airport
limousine
Baggage and
shipping
Car
Lodging and meals
Cleaning
Telephone
Sending baggage and sample or display material between your
regular and temporary work locations.
Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the
standard mileage rate, as well as business-related tolls and
parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business, you
can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform
your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages,
taxes, and related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits.
Dry cleaning and laundry.
Business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program,
your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel
and Cruise ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and
limits.
Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
for business purposes.
1) The airport or station and your hotel, and
2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients,
your business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
whether you are an employee or self-employed,can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
1) It is necessary for you to stop for substan- and whether or not you are reimbursed for yourof your meals.
tial sleep or rest to properly perform your traveling expenses.If you are reimbursed for the cost of yourduties while traveling away from home on meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on Who cannot use the standard meal allow-business. whether your employer ’s reimbursement plan ance. You cannot use the standard meal al-
2) The meal is business-related entertain- was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are lowance if you are related to your employer as
ment. not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether defined next.
the unreimbursed meal expense is for businessBusiness-related entertainment is discussed in Related to employer. You are related totravel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-chapter 2. The following discussion deals only your employer if: cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chapterwith meals that are not business-related enter- 6 discusses accountable and nonaccountabletainment. 1) Your employer is your brother or sister,plans. half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct tor, or lineal descendant,expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
2) Your employer is a corporation in whichActual Costgant. An expense is not considered lavish or
you own, directly or indirectly, more thanextravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts
You can use the actual cost of your meals to 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-
figure the amount of your expense before reim-lowed merely because they are more than a 3) Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-bursement and application of the 50% deductionfixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you,limit. If you use this method, you must keeptaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. a trust, and your employer.records of your actual cost.
50% limit on meals. You can figure your You may be considered to indirectly own stock,
meals expense using either of the following two for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a
Standard Meal Allowancemethods. corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that
owns the stock or if a member of your family orGenerally, you can use the “standard meal al-1) Actual cost. your partner owns the stock.lowance” method as an alternative to the actual2) The standard meal allowance. cost method. It allows you to use a set amount Use of the standard meal allowance for other
Both of these methods are explained below. But, for your daily meals and incidental expenses travel. You can use the standard meal allow-
regardless of the method you use, you generally (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac- ance to figure your meal expenses when you
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
travel in connection with investment and other mine the standard meal allowance for every bile, you would have been gone only 6 d ays, and
income-producing property. You can also use it area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you your total cost would have been $580 . You can
to figure your meal expenses when you travel for choose to use the special rate for any trip, you deduct $580 for your trip, incl uding the cost of
qualifying educational purposes. You cannot must use the special rate (and not use the regu- round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-
use the standard meal allowance to figure the lar standard meal allowance rates) for all trips ans. The deduction for your meals is subject to
cost of your meals when you travel for medical you take that year. the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
or charitable purposes.
Travel for days you depart and return. For
both the day you depart for and the day youAmount of standard meal allowance. The
Trip Primarily for
return from a business trip, you must prorate thestandard meal allowance is the federal M&IE Personal Reasons
standard meal allowance (figure a reducedrate. For travel in 2001, the rate is $30 a day for
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,amount for each day). You can do so by one ofmost small localities in the United States. Most
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is atwo methods.major cities and many other localities in the
nondeductible personal expense. However, youUnited States are designated as high-cost • Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- can deduct any expenses you have while at yourareas, qualifying for higher standard meal dard meal allowance. destination that are directly related to your busi-allowances. Locations qualifying for rates of
ness.$34, $38, $42, or $46 a day are listed in • Method 2: You can prorate using any
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aPublication 1542. method that you consistently apply and
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isIf you travel to more than one location in one that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-day, use the rate in effect for the area where you ness practice.
dental business activities during a trip, such asstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingtation industry, however, see Special rate for Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans with general subjects, will not change what istransportation workers, later. as a convention planner. In March, her employer really a vacation into a business trip.Standard meal allowance for areas outside sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to
the continental United States. The standard attend a planning seminar. She left her home in
meal allowance rates do not apply to travel in New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and Part of Trip OutsideAlaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outside arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After the United Statesthe continental United States. The federal per spending two nights there, she flew back to New
diem rates for these locations are published Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at If part of your trip is outside the United States,
monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al- 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amount use the rules described later in this chapter
lowances for Foreign Areas. to cover her expenses and included it with her under Travel Outside the United States for that
wages. part of the trip. For the part of your trip that isYour employer may have these rates inside the United States, use the rules for travelUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days ofavailable, or you can purchase the in the United States. Travel outside the Unitedthe standard meal allowance for Washington,publication from the: States does not include travel from one point inDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and
the United States to another point in the UnitedFriday (the days she departed and returned),
States. The following discussion can help youand the full daily rate for Thursday.Superintendent of Documents determine whether your trip was entirely withinUnder Method 2 , Jen could also use anyU.S. Government Printing Office the United States.method that she applies consistently and that isP.O. Box 371954
in accordance with reasonable business prac-Pittsburgh, PA 15250– 7954. Public transportation. If you travel by publictice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the transportation, any place in the United Statesstandard meal allowance even though a federalYou can also order it by calling the where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aemployee would have to use Method 1 and beGovernment Printing Office at point in the United States. Once the vehiclelimited to only 21/2 days.1 – 202 – 512 – 1800 (not a toll-free leaves the last scheduled stop in the Unitednumber). States on its way to a point outside the UnitedTravel in the United States States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
the United States.Per diem rates are also available on The following discussion applies to travel in the
the Internet. If you have a computer United States. For this purpose, the United Example. You fly from New York to Puertoand a modem, you can access domes- States includes the 50 states and the District of Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returntic per diem rates at: Columbia.  The treatment of your travel ex- to New York nonstop. The flight from New Yorkwww.policyworks.gov/perdiem penses depends on how much of your trip was to Miami is in the United States, so only the flightbusiness related and on how much of your trip from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the UnitedYou can access foreign per diem rates occurred within the United States. See Part of States. Because there are no scheduled stopsat: Trip Outside the United States, later. between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
return trip is outside the United States.
Trip Primarily for Businesswww.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm Private car. Travel by private car in the United
States is travel between points in the UnitedYou can deduct all of your travel expenses ifSpecial rate for transportation workers. States, even though you are on your way to ayour trip was entirely business related. If yourYou can use a special standard meal allowance destination outside the United States.trip was primarily for business and, while at yourif you work in the transportation industry. You
business destination, you extended your stay forare in the transportation industry if your work: Example. You travel by car from Denver toa vacation, made a personal side trip, or had Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver1) Directly involves moving people or goods other personal activities, you can deduct your to the border and from the border back to Den-by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or business-related travel expenses. These ex- ver is travel in the United States, and the rules intruck, and penses include the travel costs of getting to and this section apply. The rules under Travelfrom your business destination and any2) Regularly requires you to travel away from Outside the United States apply to your trip frombusiness-related expenses at your businesshome and, during any single trip, usually the border to Mexico City and back to the border.destination.involves travel to areas eligible for different
standard meal allowance rates. Travel OutsideExample. You work in Atlanta and take a
If this applies to you, you can claim a $38 a day business trip to New Orleans. On your way the United States
standard meal allowance ($42 for travel outside home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
the continental United States). You spend $630 for the 9 days you are away If any part of your business travel is outside the
from home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherUsing the special rate for transportation United States, some of your deductions for the
travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-workers eliminates the need for you to deter- cost of getting to and from your destination may
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
be limited. For this purpose, the United States Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi- presence was required, days you spe nt on busi-
includes the 50 states and the District of Colum- ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost of ness, and certain weekends and hol idays.
bia. your stay in Brussels from Saturday through Transportation day. Count as a businessHow much of your travel expenses you can Tuesday because those days were spent on day any day you spend traveling to or from adeduct depends in part upon how much of your nonbusiness activities. business destination. However, if because of atrip outside the United States was business re- Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time on nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directlated. personal activities. Your trip is considered route, your business days are the days it would
entirely for business if: take you to travel a reasonably direct route to
your business destination. Extra days for sideTravel Entirely for Business or 1) You were outside the United States for trips or nonbusiness activities cannot beConsidered Entirely for Business more than a week, and counted as business days.
You can deduct all your travel expenses of get- 2) You spent less than 25% of the total time Presence required. Count as a business
ting to and from your business destination if your you were outside the United States on day any day your presence is required at a
trip is entirely for business or considered entirely nonbusiness activities. particular place for a specific business purpose.
for business. Count it as a business day even if you spendFor this purpose, count both the day your trip most of the day on nonbusiness activities.began and the day it ended.Travel entirely for business. If you travel
Day spent on business. If your principaloutside the United States and you spend the Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, activity during working hours is pursuit of yourentire time on business activities, you can de- where you spent 14 days on business and 5 trade or business, count the day as a businessduct all of your travel expenses. days on personal matters. You then flew back to day. Also, count as a business day any day you
Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc- are prevented from working because of circum-Travel considered entirely for business.
tion. stances beyond your control.Even if you did not spend your entire time on
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en- Certain weekends and holidays. Counttotal time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,tirely for business if you meet at least one of the weekends, holidays, and other necessaryyou can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldfollowing four exceptions. standby days as business days if they fall be-have cost you to make the trip if you had notException 1 – No substantial control. tween business days. But if they follow yourengaged in any nonbusiness activity. TheYour trip is considered entirely for business if business meetings or activity and you remain atamount you can deduct is the cost of theyou did not have substantial control over arrang- your business destination for nonbusiness orround-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of personal reasons, do not count them as busi-ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relatedyour trip does not, by itself, mean that you have ness days.expenses.substantial control over arranging your trip.
Exception 4 – Vacation not a major con- Example 1. Your tax home is New YorkYou do not have substantial control over
sideration. Your trip is considered entirely for City. You travel to Quebec, where you have ayour trip if you:
business if you can establish that a personal business appointment on Friday. You have an-
1) Are an employee who was reimbursed or vacation was not a major consideration, even if other appointment on the following Monday. Be-
paid a travel expense allowance, you have substantial control over arranging the cause your presence was required on both
trip. Friday and Monday, they are business days.2) Are not related to your employer, and
Because the weekend is between business
3) Are not a managing executive. days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as
Travel Primarily for Business business days. This is true even though you use“Related to your employer” was defined ear-
the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, orlier in this chapter under Standard Meal Allow- If you travel outside the United States primarily other nonbusiness activity.ance. for business but spend some of your time onA “managing executive” is an employee who other activities, you generally cannot deduct all Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had nohas the authority and responsibility, without be- of your travel expenses. You can only deduct the business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed untiling subject to the veto of another, to decide on business portion of your cost of getting to and Monday before starting home, Saturday andthe need for the business travel. from your destination. You must allocate the Sunday would be nonbusiness days.A self-employed person generally has sub- costs between your business and other activitiesstantial control over arranging business trips. to determine your deductible amount. See Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from
Travel allocation rules, below.Exception 2 – Outside United States no your business destination. If you stopped
more than a week. Your trip is considered for a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-You do not have to allocate your travelentirely for business if you were outside the ther on the way from the United States to yourexpenses if you meet one of the fourUnited States for a week or less, combining business destination, or on the way back to theexceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
business and nonbusiness activities. One week United States from your business destination,considered entirely for business. In those cases,means seven consecutive days. In counting the you must allocate part of your travel expenses toyou can deduct the total cost of getting to anddays, do not count the day you leave the United the nonbusiness activity.from your destination.States, but do count the day you return to the The part you must allocate is the amount it
United States. would have cost you to travel between the point
where travel outside the United States begins
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside theExample. You traveled to Brussels primarily and your nonbusiness destination and a return
United States was primarily for business, youfor business. You left Denver on Tuesday and to the point where travel outside the United
must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayflew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from States ends.
basis between business days and nonbusinessNew York to Brussels, arriving the next morning. You determine the nonbusiness portion of
days. The days you depart from and return to theOn Thursday and Friday, you had business dis- that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
United States are both counted as days outsidecussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you numerator of the fraction is the number of non-
the United States.were sightseeing. You flew back to New York, business days during your travel outside the
arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, United States and the denominator is the totalTo figure the deductible amount of your
you flew back to Denver. number of days you spend outside the Unitedround-trip travel expenses, use the following
Although you were away from your home in States.fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total
Denver for more than a week, you were not number of business days outside the United
outside the United States for more than a week. Example. You live in New York. On May 4States. The denominator (bottom number) is the
This is because the day you depart does not you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-total number of travel days outside the United
count as a day outside the United States. ence that began on May 5. The conferenceStates.
You can deduct your cost of the round-trip ended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew
flight between Denver and Brussels. You can Counting business days. Your business to Dublin where you visited with friends until the
also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels for days include transportation days, days your afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Highest Daily Limithome to New York. The primary purpose for the Other methods. You can use another method
2001 Federal on Luxurytrip was to attend the conference. of counting business days if you establish that it Dates Per Diem Water Travelmore clearly reflects the time spent on otherIf you had not stopped in Dublin, you would Jan. 1 – Jun. 14 $ 244 $ 488than business activities outside the Unitedhave arrived home the evening of May 14. You Jun. 15 – Sep. 15 253 506States.did not meet any of the exceptions that would Sep. 16 – Dec. 31 244 448
allow you to consider your travel entirely for
business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveledTravel Primarily for Personalbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 by ocean liner from New York to London, En-Reasonsdays) are nonbusiness days. gland, on business in May. Her expense for the
If you travel outside the United States primarilyYou can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- 6-day cruise was $3,000. Caroline ’s deduction
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other for the cruise cannot exceed $2,928 (6 days ×
tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalbusiness-related travel expenses while in Paris. $488 daily limit).
expense. If you spend some time attending briefYou cannot deduct your expenses while in professional seminars or a continuing education Meals and entertainment. If your expensesDublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it program, you can deduct your registration fees for luxury water travel include separately statedwould have cost you to travel round-trip between and other expenses you have that are directlyNew York and Dublin. amounts for meals or entertainment, thoserelated to your business. amounts are subject to the 50% limit on mealsYou paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris,
and entertainment before you apply the daily$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to fly Example. The university from which you limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, seefrom Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare graduated has a continuing education program
chapter 2.from New York to Dublin would have been $850. for members of its alumni association. This pro-
gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-You figure the deductible part of your air Example. In the previous example,tries where academic exercises andtravel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the Caroline’s luxury water travel had a total cost ofconferences are set up to acquaint individuals inround-trip fare and other expenses you would $3,000. Of that amount, $1,600 was separatelymost occupations with selected facilities in sev-have had in traveling directly between New York stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline,eral regions of the world. However, none of theand Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your total who is self-employed, is not reimbursed for anyconferences are directed toward specific occu-expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to of her travel expenses. Caroline computes herpations or professions. It is up to each partici-Dublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 + deductible travel expenses as follows.pant to seek out specialists and organizational$500 = $1,150). settings appropriate to his or her occupational Meals and entertainment ...... $1,600Your deductible air travel expense is $819 interests. 50% limit ................ × .50($1,150 − $331). Three-hour sessions are held each day over Allowable meals & entertainment $  800
Other travel expenses ........ +  1,400a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond Allowable cost before the daily limit ...... $2,200facilities where participants can meet with indi-
business destination. If you had a vacation vidual practitioners. These sessions are com- Daily limit for May 2001 ....... $4 8 8
or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond Times number of days ........ × 6posed of a variety of activities including
Maximum luxury water travel deduction . . . $2,928your business destination, you must allocate workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-
part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness Amount of allowable deduction ....... $2,200velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-
activity. ence directors schedule and conduct the Caroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited tosessions. Participants can choose those ses-The part you must allocate is the amount it $2,200, even though the limit on luxury watersions they wish to attend.would have cost you to travel between the point travel is higher.where travel outside the United States begins You can participate in this program since you
Not separately stated. If your meal or en-and your business destination and a return to are a member of the alumni association. You
the point where travel outside the United States tertainment charges are not separately stated orand your family take one of the trips. You spend
ends. about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions. are not clearly identifiable, you do not have to
The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee- allocate any portion of the total charge to mealsYou determine the nonbusiness portion of ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1 or entertainment.that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The week.numerator of the fraction is the number of non-
Your travel expenses for the trip are notbusiness days during your travel outside the Exceptionsdeductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-United States and the denominator is the total
tion. However, registration fees and any othernumber of days you spend outside the United The daily limit on luxury water travel (discussedincidental expenses you have for the fiveStates. earlier) does not apply to expenses you have toplanned sessions you attended that are directlyNone of your travel expenses for nonbusi- attend a convention, seminar, or meeting onrelated and beneficial to your business are de-ness activities at, near, or beyond your business board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  underductible business expenses. These expensesdestination are deductible. Conventions Held Outside the North Americanshould be specifically stated in your records to
Area.ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-Example. Assume that the dates are the ness expenses.same as in the previous example but that in- Conventionsstead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you fly
Luxury Water Travelto Venice, Italy, for a vacation. You can deduct your travel expenses when you
attend a convention if you can show that yourYou cannot deduct any part of the cost of If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other
your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris. attendance benefits your trade or business. Youform of luxury water transportation for business
In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-purposes, there is a daily limit on the amount
and other expenses from New York to Paris and ily.you can deduct. The limit is twice the highest
back to New York. federal per diem rate allowable at the time of If the convention is for investment, political,
your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is social, or other purposes unrelated to your tradeYou can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane
the amount paid to federal government employ- or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.fare and other travel expenses from New York to
ees for daily living expenses when they travelParis, plus your meals, lodging, and any other Your appointment or election as a dele-away from home, but in the United States, forbusiness expenses you had in Paris. (Assume gate does not, in itself, determinebusiness purposes.)these expenses total $900). If the round-trip whether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
plane fare and other travel-related expenses penses. You can deduct your travel expenses(such as food during the trip) are $800 from New Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high- only if your attendance is connected to your ownYork to Paris, you can deduct travel costs of est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily trade or business.$489 ( 11/18 × $800), plus the full $900 for the limit for luxury water travel in 2001 is shown in
expenses you had in Paris. the following table.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Convention agenda. The convention agenda 2) The cruise ship is a vessel registered in This rule applies to any membership organiza-
the United States. tion if one of its principal purposes is either:or program generally shows the purpose of the
convention. You can show your attendance at 3) All of the cruise ship ’s ports of call are in 1) To conduct entertainment activities forthe convention benefits your trade or business the United States or in possessions of the members or their guests, orby comparing the agenda with the official duties United States.and responsibilities of your position. The agenda 2) To provide members or their guests with
4) You attach to your return a written state-does not have to deal specifically with your offi- access to entertainment facilities, dis-
ment signed by you that includes informa-cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough cussed later.
tion about:if the agenda is so related to your position that it The purposes and activities of a club, not itsshows your attendance was for business pur- a) The total days of the trip (not including name, will determine whether or not you canposes. the days of transportation to and from deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
the cruise ship port), to:
Conventions Held Outside b) The number of hours each day that you 1) Country clubs,the North American Area devoted to scheduled business activi-
2) Golf and athletic clubs,ties, andYou cannot deduct expenses for attending a 3) Airline clubs,c) A program of the scheduled businessconvention, seminar, or similar meeting held
activities of the meeting.outside the North American area unless: 4) Hotel clubs, and
5) Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-5) You attach to your return a written state-1) The meeting is directly related to your cumstances generally considered to bement signed by an officer of the organiza-trade or business, and conducive to business discussions.tion or group sponsoring the meeting that2) It is as reasonable to hold the meeting includes:outside the North American area as in it. Entertainment facilities. Generally, you can-a) A schedule of the business activities ofIf the meeting meets these requirements, you not deduct any expenses for the cost of using aneach day of the meeting, andalso must satisfy the rules for deducting ex- entertainment facility. This includes expenses
penses for business trips in general, discussed for depreciation and operating costs such asb) The number of hours you attended the
earlier under Travel Outside the United States. rent, utilities, maintenance, and protection.scheduled business activities.
An entertainment facility is any property you
North American area. The North American own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp,area includes the following locations.
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car,
American Samoa Kingman Reef airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in aBaker Island Marshall Islands vacation resort.Barbados Mexico
Bermuda Micronesia Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct2.Canada Midway Islands out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food andCosta Rica Northern Mariana
beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, thatDominica Islands
you provided during entertainment at a facility.Dominican Republic Palau
Grenada Palmyra These are not expenses for the use of an enter-Entertainment
Guam Puerto Rico tainment facility. However, these expenses areGuyana Saint Lucia subject to the directly-related and associatedYou may be able to deduct business-relatedHonduras Trinidad and Tobago tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed later.Howland Island USA entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
Jamaica U.S. Virgin Islands ing a client, customer, or employee. The rules
Jarvis Island Wake Island Gift or entertainment. Any item that might beand definitions are summarized in Table 2.Johnston Island considered either a gift or entertainment gener-You can deduct entertainment expenses ally will be considered entertainment. However,only if they are both ordinary and necessary and if you give a customer packaged food or bever-meet one of the following two tests.Reasonableness test. The following factors ages that you intend the customer to use at aare taken into account to determine if it was later date, treat it as a gift.1) Directly-related test.reasonable to hold the meeting outside the If you give a customer tickets to a theaterNorth American area. 2) Associated test. performance or sporting event and you do not go
Both of these tests are explained later under with the customer to the performance or event,1) The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
What Entertainment Expenses Are Deductible. you have a choice. You can treat the cost of theties taking place at the meeting.
An ordinary expense is one that is common tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
2) The purposes and activities of the spon- and accepted in your field of trade, business, or ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
soring organizations or groups. profession. A necessary expense is one that is You can change your treatment of the tickets
helpful and appropriate for your business. An at a later date by filing an amended return.3) The homes of the active members of the
expense does not have to be indispensable to Generally, an amended return must be filedsponsoring organizations and the places at
be considered necessary. within 3 years from the date the original returnwhich other meetings of the sponsoring or-
was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxganizations or groups have been or will be The amount you can deduct for enter- was paid, whichever is later.held. tainment expenses may be limited. If you go with the customer to the event, youGenerally, you can deduct only 50% ofCAUTION
!
4) Other relevant factors you may present. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-your unreimbursed entertainment expenses. ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit. to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Cruise Ships
Club dues and membership fees. You can-You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) forexpenses of attending conventions, seminars, What Entertainmentmembership in any club organized for:or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All
ships that sail are considered cruise ships. Expenses1) Business,You can deduct these expenses only if all
2) Pleasure, Are Deductible?five of the following requirements are met.
3) Recreation, or1) The convention, seminar, or meeting is di- This section explains different types of entertain-
rectly related to your trade or business. 4) Other social purpose. ment expenses that you may be able to deduct.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
It also explains the directly-related test and the
associated test.
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any
activity generally considered to provide enter-
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
ing, vacation, and similar trips.
Entertainment also may include meeting per-
sonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such
as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to
customers or their families.
A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-
tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
to a customer or client, whether the meal is a
part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
expense includes the cost of food, beverages,
taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an
entertainment-related meal, you or your em-
ployee must be present when the food or bever-
ages are provided.
You cannot claim the cost of your meal
both as an entertainment expense and
as a travel expense.
CAUTION
!
Meals sold in the normal course of your
business are not considered entertain-
ment.
TIP
Deduction may depend on your type of
business. Your kind of business may deter-
mine if a particular activity is considered enter-
tainment. For example, if you are a dress
designer and have a fashion show to introduce
your new designs to store buyers, the show
generally is not considered entertainment. This
is because fashion shows are typical in your
Table 2. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily indispensable, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
business. But, if you are an appliance distributor tween business and nonbusiness. You can de- count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if it
and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your duct only the business part. If you cannot is more than the face value, if all of the followingretailers, the show generally is considered en- establish the part of the expense for each per- conditions apply. tertainment. son participating, allocate the expense to each
participant on a pro rata basis. 1) The event ’s main purpose is to benefit aSeparating costs. If you have one expense qualified charitable organization.that includes the costs of entertainment, and Example. You entertain a group of individu-other services (such as lodging or transporta- 2) The entire net proceeds go to the charity.als that includes yourself, three business pros-tion), you must allocate that expense between pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of the 3) The event uses volunteers to perform sub-the cost of entertainment and the cost of other expense qualifies as a business entertainment stantially all the event’s work.services. You must have a reasonable basis for expense. You cannot deduct the expenses formaking this allocation. For example, you must the seven social guests because those costs are The 50% limit on entertainment doesallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter- nonbusiness expenses. not apply to any expense for a packagetainment in its lounge on the same bill with your deal that includes a ticket to such a
TIP
room charge. Trade association meetings. You can de- charitable sports event.
duct entertainment expenses that are directlyTaking turns paying for meals or entertain-
related to and necessary for attending businessment. If a group of business acquaintances
meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter- Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golfnizations if the expenses of your attendance aretainment checks without regard to whether any tournament organized by the local volunteer firerelated to your active trade or business. Thesebusiness purposes are served, no member of company. All net proceeds will be used to buyorganizations include business leagues, cham-the group can deduct any part of the expense. new fire equipment. The volunteers will run thebers of commerce, real estate boards, trade
Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can- tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofassociations, and professional associations.
not deduct expenses for entertainment that are the tickets as a business expense if they other-
lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For Example 2. You purchase tickets to a col-
penses will not be disallowed just because they example, you cannot deduct service fees you lege football game through a ticket broker. After
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount having a business discussion, you take a client
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs, over the face value of the tickets you pay to to the game. Net proceeds from the game go toor resorts. scalpers. colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.
However, since the colleges also pay individualsAllocating between business and Exception for events that benefit charita-
to perform services, such as coaching andnonbusiness. If you entertain business and ble organizations. Different rules apply when
recruiting, you can only use the face value of thenonbusiness individuals at the same event, you the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits a
must divide your entertainment expenses be- charitable organization. You can take into ac- tickets in determining your business d eduction. 
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. If You do not have to show that business the facts of each case. A business discussion
income or other business benefit actu- will not be considered substantial unless youyou rent a skybox or other private luxury box for
ally resulted from each entertainment can show that you actively engaged in the dis-more than one event at the same sports arena,
TIP
expense. cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businessyou generally cannot deduct more than the price
transaction to get income or some other specificof a nonluxury box seat ticket.
business benefit.To determine whether a skybox has been
Clear business setting. If the entertainment The meeting does not have to be for anyrented for more than one event, count each takes place in a clear business setting and is for specified length of time, but you must show thatgame or other performance as one event. For your business or work, the expenses are consid- the business discussion was substantial in rela-example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff ered directly related to your business or work. tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-games is considered renting it for more than one The following situations are examples of enter- sary that you devote more time to business thanevent. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena, tainment in a clear business setting. to entertainment. You do not have to discussalong with any rentals by related parties, are business during the meal or entertainment.considered in making this determination. 1) Entertainment in a hospitality room at a
Meetings at conventions. You are consid-Related parties include: convention where business goodwill is cre-
ered to have a substantial business discussion ifated through the display or discussion of
1) Family members (spouses, ancestors, and you attend meetings at a convention or similarbusiness products.
lineal descendants), event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-2) Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate sored and conducted by a business or profes-2) Parties who have made a reciprocal ar- on the sale of your products (such as a sional organization. However, your reason forrangement involving the sharing of restaurant owner providing an occasional attending the convention or meeting must be toskyboxes, free meal to a loyal customer). further your trade or business. The organization
that sponsors the convention or meeting must3) Related corporations, 3) Entertainment of a clear business nature
schedule a program of business activities that isoccurring under circumstances where4) A partnership and its principal partners, the main activity of the convention or meeting.there is no meaningful personal or socialand relationship between you and the persons Directly before or after business discussion.5) A corporation and a partnership with com- entertained. An example is entertainment If the entertainment is held on the same day asmon ownership. of business and civic leaders at the open- the business discussion, it is considered to be
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur- held directly before or after the business discus-
pose is to get business publicity ratherExample. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat sion.
than to create or maintain the goodwill of If the entertainment and the business discus-skybox at Team Stadium for three baseball the persons entertained. sion are not held on the same day, you mustgames. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats
consider the facts of each case to see if theat each event is $20 a seat. You can deduct Expenses not considered directly related. associated test is met. Among the facts to con-(subject to the 50% limit) $600 [(10 seats × $20 Entertainment expenses generally are not con- sider are the place, date, and duration of theeach) × 3 events]. sidered directly related if you are not there or in business discussion. If you or your businessFood and beverages in skybox seats. If situations where there are substantial distrac- associates are from out of town, you must alsoexpenses for food and beverages are separately tions that generally prevent you from actively consider the dates of arrival and departure, andstated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- conducting business. The following are exam- the reasons the entertainment and the discus-tion to the amounts allowable for the skybox, ples of situations where there are substantial sion did not take place on the same day.subject to the requirements and limits that apply. distractions. 
The amounts separately stated for food and Example. A group of business associates1) A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in- comes from out of town to your place of busi-theater, or sporting event.flate the charges for food and beverages to ness to hold a substantial business discussion.
avoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals. 2) A meeting or discussion during what is es- If you entertain those business guests on the
sentially a social gathering, such as a evening before the business discussion, or on
cocktail party.Directly-Related Test the evening of the day following the business
discussion, the entertainment generally is con-3) A meeting with a group that includes per-To meet the directly-related test for entertain- sidered to be held directly before or after thesons who are not business associates atment expenses (including entertainment-related discussion. The expense meets the associatedplaces such as cocktail lounges, countrymeals), you must show that: test.clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation
resorts. Expenses for spouses. You generally cannot1) The main purpose of the combined busi-
deduct the cost of entertainment for your spouseness and entertainment was the active
or for the spouse of a customer. However, youconduct of business, Associated Test can deduct these costs if you can show that you2) You did engage in business with the per- had a clear business purpose, rather than aEven if your expenses do not meet theson during the entertainment period, and personal or social purpose, for providing thedirectly-related test, they may meet the associ- entertainment.3) You had more than a general expectation ated test.
of getting income or some other specific To meet the associated test for entertain- Example. You entertain a customer. Thebusiness benefit at some future time. ment expenses (including entertainment-related cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-meals), you must show that the entertainment is:Business is generally not considered to be pense and is allowed under the entertainment
the main purpose when business and entertain- rules. The customer’s spouse joins you because1) Associated with the active conduct of yourment are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or it is impractical to entertain the customer withouttrade or business, andon yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-2) Directly before or after a substantial busi-show that business was the main purpose, you taining the customer ’s spouse. If your spouseness discussion (defined later).generally cannot deduct the expenses for the joins the party because the customer ’s spouse
use of an entertainment facility. See Entertain- is present, the cost of the entertainment for yourAssociated with trade or business. Gener-ment facilities earlier in this chapter. spouse is also deductible.ally, an expense is associated with the activeYou must consider all the facts, including the conduct of your trade or business if you cannature of the business transacted and the rea- show that you had a clear business purpose forsons for conducting business during the enter- having the expense. The purpose may be to gettainment. It is not necessary to devote more time 50% Limitnew business or to encourage the continuationto business than to entertainment. However, if of an existing business relationship.the business discussion is only incidental to the In general, you can deduct only 50% of your
entertainment, the entertainment expenses do Substantial business discussion. Whether business-related meal and entertainment ex-
not meet the directly-related test. a business discussion is substantial depends on penses. (If you are subject to the Department of
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $60 (.50 × $120).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 – Employee’s reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 – Self-employed. If you are self-em-
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment
expenses are not subject to the 50% limit if all
three of the following requirements are met.
1) You have these expenses as an indepen-
dent contractor.
2) Your customer or client reimburses you or
gives you an allowance for these ex-
penses in connection with services you
perform.
3) You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See
chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is sub-
ject to the 50% limit on the expenses.
Example. You are a self-employed attorney
who adequately accounts for meal and enter-
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099 –MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
tainment expenses to a client who reimbursesTransportation’s “hours of service ” limits, you 4) Amounts paid for parking at a sports you for these expenses. You are not subject tocan deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals arena. the directly-related or associated test, nor aresubject to “hours of service” limits, later.) you subject to the 50% limit. If the client canHowever, the cost of transportation to and fromThe 50% limit applies to employees or their deduct the expenses, the client is subject to thea business meal or a business-related entertain-employers, and to self-employed persons (in- 50% limit.ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.cluding independent contractors) or their clients, If you (the contractor) have expenses for
depending on whether the expenses are reim- meals and entertainment related to providingApplication of 50% limit. The 50% limit onbursed. services for a client but do not adequately ac-meal and entertainment expenses applies if the
Figure A summarizes the general rules ex- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-
plained in this section. ent for those expenses, you are subject to theered by one of the exceptions discussed later.
directly-related or associated test and to theThe 50% limit applies to business meals or The 50% limit also applies to certain meal 50% limit.entertainment expenses you have while: and entertainment expenses that are not busi-
ness related. It applies to meal and entertain- 3 – Advertising expenses. You are not1) Traveling away from home (whether eating ment expenses you have for the production of subject to the 50% limit if you provide meals,alone or with others) on business, income, including rental or royalty income. It entertainment, or recreational facilities to the
also applies to the cost of meals included in2) Entertaining customers at your place of general public as a means of advertising or
deductible educational expenses.business, a restaurant, or other location, or promoting goodwill in the community. For exam-
ple, neither the expense of sponsoring a televi-3) Attending a business convention or recep- sion or radio show nor the expense ofWhen to apply the 50% limit. You apply thetion, business meeting, or business lunch- distributing free food and beverages to the gen-50% limit after determining the amount thateon at a club. eral public is subject to the 50% limit.would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en- 4 – Sale of meals or entertainment. Youtertainment expenses that would be deductibleIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the are not subject to the 50% limit if you actuallyunder the other rules discussed in this publica-50% limit include: sell meals, entertainment, goods and services,tion. or use of facilities to the public. For example, if1) Taxes and tips relating to a business meal you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-Example 1. You spend $100 for aor entertainment activity, tainment you furnish to your customers, such asbusiness-related meal. If $40 of that amount is2) Cover charges for admission to a night- a floor show, is subject to the 50% limit.not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-club, gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50% 5 – Charitable sports event. You are not
limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $303) Rent paid for a room in which you hold a subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package
(.50 × $60).dinner or cocktail party, and deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita-
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ble sports event. For the conditions the sports for their business. They paid $80 for each pack- Transportation expenses include the ordi-
event must meet, see Exception for events that age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company ’s nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
benefit charitable organizations under Entertain- executives took the packages home for their • Getting from one workplace to another inment tickets, earlier. families ’ use. Bob and Jan have no independent the course of your business or professionbusiness relationship with any of the executives’Individuals subject to “hours of service ” when you are traveling within the city orother family members. They can deduct a totallimits. You can deduct a higher percentage of general area that is your tax home. Taxof $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.your meal expenses if the meals take place home is defined in chapter 1.
during or incident to any period subject to the Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as • Visiting clients or customers.Department of Transportation ’s “hours of ser- engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,vice” limits. The percentage is 60% for 2001, • Going to a business meeting away fromand mailing, are generally not included in deter-and it gradually increases to 80% by the year your regular workplace.mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $252008. limit. • Getting from your home to a temporaryIndividuals subject to the Department of A cost is incidental only if it does not add workplace when you have one or moreTransportation’s “hours of service” limits include substantial value to the gift. For example, the regular places of work. These temporarythe following persons. cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How- workplaces can be either within the area
ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for of your tax home or outside that area.1) Certain air transportation workers (such as
packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if thepilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and Transportation expenses do not include ex-value of the basket is substantial compared tocontrol tower operators) who are under penses you have while traveling away fromthe value of the fruit.Federal Aviation Administration regula- home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
tions. penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-Exceptions. The following items are not con- ever, if you use your car while traveling away2) Interstate truck operators and bus drivers sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-who are under Department of Transporta-
ter to figure your car expense deduction. See1) An item that costs $4 or less and:tion regulations.
Car Expenses, later.
3) Certain railroad employees (such as engi- a) Has your name clearly and perma-
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- nently imprinted on the gift, and Illustration of transportation expenses. Fig-
ers, and control operations personnel) who ure B illustrates the rules for when you canb) Is one of a number of identical itemsare under Federal Railroad Administration deduct transportation expenses when you haveyou widely distribute.regulations. a regular or main job away from your home. You
Examples include pens, desk sets, and may want to refer to it when deciding whether4) Certain merchant mariners who are under plastic bags and cases. you can deduct your transportation expenses.Coast Guard regulations.
2) Signs, display racks, or other promotional Temporary work location. If you have one ormaterial to be used on the business prem- more regular places of business away from yourises of the recipient. home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
considered either a gift or entertainment gener- transportation between your home and the tem-
3. ally will be considered entertainment. However, porary location.
if you give a customer packaged food or bever- If your employment at a work location is
ages that you intend the customer to use at a realistically expected to last (and does in fact
later date, treat it as a gift. last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo- Gifts If you give a customer tickets to a theater rary unless there are facts and circumstances
performance or sporting event and you do not go that would indicate otherwise.If you give gifts in the course of your trade or with the customer to the performance or event, If your employment at a work location isbusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost. you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the realistically expected to last for more than 1 yearThis chapter explains the limits and rules for tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- or if there is no realistic expectation that thededucting the costs of gifts. ment expense, whichever is to your advantage. employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
You can change your treatment of the tickets ployment is not temporary, regardless of$25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25
at a later date by filing an amended return. whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. Iffor business gifts you give directly or indirectly to
Generally, an amended return must be filed employment at a work location initially is realisti-any one person during your tax year. A gift to a
within 3 years from the date the original return cally expected to last for 1 year or less, but atcompany that is intended for the eventual per-
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax some later date the employment is realisticallysonal use or benefit of a particular person or a
was paid, whichever is later. expected to last more than 1 year, that employ-limited class of people will be considered an
ment will be treated as temporary (unless thereIf you go with the customer to the event, youindirect gift to that particular person or to the
are facts and circumstances that would indicatemust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-individuals within that class of people who re-
otherwise) until your expectation changes. It willment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,ceive the gift.
not be treated as temporary after the date youto treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.If you give a gift to a member of a customer’s
determine it will last more than 1 year.family, the gift is generally considered to be an
If the temporary work location is beyond theindirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
general area of your regular place of work andapply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
you stay overnight, you are traveling away fromness connection with that family member and
home. You may have deductible travel ex-the gift is not intended for the customer ’s even-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.tual use.
4.If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
No regular place of work. If you have noyou are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
regular place of work but ordinarily work in thematter whether you have separate businesses,
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-are separately employed, or whether each of Transportation duct daily transportation costs between homeyou has an independent connection with the
and a temporary work site outside that metro-recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
politan area.This chapter discusses expenses you can de-ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
Generally, a metropolitan area includes theduct for business transportation when you arepayer.
area within the city limits and the suburbs thatnot traveling away from home as defined in
are considered part of that metropolitan area.chapter 1. These expenses include the cost ofExample. Bob Jones sells products to Local
transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the You cannot deduct daily transportation costsCompany. He and his wife, Jan, gave Local
cost of driving and maintaining your car. between your home and temporary work sitesCompany three cheese packages to thank them
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 13

Page 14 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
make business calls while commuting to and
from work. Sometimes business associates ride
with you to and from work, and you have a
business discussion in the car. These activities
do not change the trip from personal to busi-
ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
at your place of business are nondeductible
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visiting
a customer or client.
Advertising display on car. Putting display
material that advertises your business on your
car does not change the use of your car from
personal use to business use. If you use this car
for commuting or other personal uses, you still
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not
include payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are con-
sidered reimbursements of your expenses.
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,
you must include payments from passengers in
your income. You can then deduct your car
expenses (using the rules in this publication).
Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling
tools or instruments in your car while commuting
to and from work does not make your car ex-
penses deductible. However, you can deduct
any additional costs you have for hauling tools or
instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow
with your car).
Union members’ trips from a union hall. If
you get your work assignments at a union hall
and then go to your place of work, the costs of
getting from the union hall to your place of work
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you need the union to get your work
assignments, you are employed where you
work, not where the union hall is located.
Office in the home. If you have an office in
your home that qualifies as a principal place of
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
tion costs between your home and another work
location in the same trade or business. (See
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home,within your metropolitan area. These are non- transportation generally is a nondeductible com- for information on determining if your home of-deductible commuting costs. muting cost. However, you can deduct your fice qualifies as a principal place of business.)transportation expenses if the location of the
Two places of work. If you work at two places If your home office does not qualify as ameeting is temporary and you have one or more
in one day, whether or not for the same em- principal place of business, follow the generalregular places of work.
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting rules explained earlier in this chapter. Also, seeIf you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
from one workplace to the other. However, if for Example 1 and Example 3, next.itan area but not at any specific location and the
some personal reason you do not go directly reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
Examples of deductible transportation. Thefrom one location to the other, you cannot de- outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
following examples show when you can deductduct more than the amount it would have cost your transportation expenses.
transportation expenses based on the locationyou to go directly from the first location to the If you travel away from home overnight to
of your work and your home.second. attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
Transportation expenses you have in going deduct your travel expenses. These expenses Example 1. You regularly work in an officebetween home and a part-time job on a day off are discussed in chapter 1. in the city where you live. Your employer sendsfrom your main job are commuting expenses.
you to a one-week training session at a differentCommuting expenses. You cannot deductYou cannot deduct them.
office in the same city. You travel directly fromthe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,
Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an your home to the training location and returnor of driving a car between your home and your
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailymain or regular place of work. These costs are
business if the meeting is held on a day on which round-trip transportation between your homepersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
you work at your regular job. You can deduct the and the training location.duct commuting expenses no matter how far
expense of getting from one workplace to the your home is from your regular place of work.
Example 2. Your principal place of businessother as just discussed under Two places of You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
is in your home. You can deduct the cost ofwork. you work during the commuting trip.
round-trip transportation between your qualify-You usually cannot deduct the expense if the
ing home office and your client ’s or customer’sreserve meeting is held on a day on which you Example. You had a telephone installed in
place of business.do not work at your regular job. In this case, your your car. You sometimes use that telephone to
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. You have no regular office, and Car Expenses for information on how to figureStandard Mileage Rate
you do not have an office in your home. In this your deduction.
case, the location of your first business contact You are not using two or more cars for busi-You may be able to use the standard mileage
is considered your office. Transportation ex- ness at the same time if you alternate using (userate to figure the deductible costs of operating
penses between your home and this first contact at different times) the cars for business.your car for business purposes. For 2001, the
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- The following examples illustrate the rulesstandard mileage rate is 341/2 cents a mile for all
portation expenses between your last business for when you can and cannot use the standardbusiness miles. This rate is adjusted periodi-
contact and your home are also nondeductible mileage rate for two or more cars.cally.
commuting expenses. Although you cannot de- If you use the standard mileage rate for Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns aduct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the a year, you cannot deduct your actual car and a van that she alternates using for call-costs of going from one client or customer to car expenses for that year. You cannotCAUTION
!
ing on her customers. She can use the standardanother. deduct depreciation or lease payments, mainte- mileage rate for the business mileage of the carnance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline and the van.taxes), oil, insurance, and vehicle registration
fees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate Example 2. Tony uses his own pickup truckCar Expenses and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later. in his landscaping business. During the year, he
traded in his old truck for a newer one. Tony canIf you use your car for business purposes, you use the standard mileage rate for the businessYou generally can use the standard mileagemay be able to deduct car expenses. You gener- mileage of both the old and the new trucks.rate whether or not you are reimbursed andally can use one of two methods to figure your
whether or not any reimbursement is more ordeductible expenses: actual expenses or the Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop andless than the amount figured using the standardstandard mileage rate. an insurance business. He uses his pickup truckmileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationIf you use actual expenses to figure your for the repair shop and his car for the insuranceon reimbursements.deduction for a car you lease, there are rules business. No one else uses either the truck orthat affect the amount of your lease payments Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you the car for business purposes. Chris can use thethat you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. want to use the standard mileage rate for a car standard mileage rate for the business use of In this publication, “car” includes a van, you own, you must choose to use it in the first the truck and the car.pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car” year the car is available for use in your business.
for depreciation purposes, see Car defined Then in later years, you can choose to use either Example 4. Maureen owns a car and a vanunder Actual Car Expenses, later. the standard mileage rate or actual expenses. that are both used in her housecleaning busi-
If you want to use the standard mileage rate ness. Her employees use the van and she usesYou may be entitled to a tax credit for
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire the car to travel to the various customers. Mau-an electric vehicle or a deduction from
lease period. For leases that began on or before reen cannot use the standard mileage rate forgross income for a part of the cost of a
TIP
December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate the car or the van. This is because both vehiclesclean-fuel vehicle that you place in service dur-
must be used for the entire portion of the lease are used in Maureen ’s business at the sameing the year. The vehicle must meet certain
period (including renewals) that is after that time. She must use actual expenses for bothrequirements, and you do not have to use it in
date. vehicles.your business to qualify for the credit or the
If you choose to use the standard mileagededuction. However, you must reduce your ba- Interest. If you are an employee, you cannotrate, you are considered to have chosen not tosis for depreciation of the electric vehicle or deduct any interest paid on a car loan. Thisuse the depreciation methods discussed later.clean-fuel vehicle property by the amount of the applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-This is because the standard mileage rate in-credit or deduction you claim. See Depreciation ness as an employee.cludes an allowance for depreciation that is notDeduction, later, under Actual Car Expenses. However, if you are self-employed and useexpressed in terms of years. If you change to theFor more information on electric or clean-fuel your car in your business, you can deduct thatactual expenses method in a later year, butvehicles, see chapter 12 of Publication 535. part of the interest expense that represents yourbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to business use of the car. For example, if you useestimate the remaining useful life of the car and your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60%use straight line depreciation. For more informa-Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mail of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). Yoution about depreciation included in the standardcarrier, you may be able to treat the amount of cannot deduct the rest of the interest expense.mileage rate, see Exception under Methods ofqualified reimbursement you received as the depreciation  under Depreciation Deduction, If you use a home equity loan toamount of your allowable expense. Because the later. purchase your car, you may be able toqualified reimbursement is treated as paid under deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP
Standard mileage rate not allowed. Youan accountable plan, your employer should not 936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, forcannot use the standard mileage rate if you: include the amount of reimbursement in your more information.income. And, since the reimbursement equals
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),the expense, you have no deduction to report on
your tax return. 2) Use two or more cars at the same time (as Personal property taxes. If you itemize yourA “qualified reimbursement” is the amount of in fleet operations), deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you canreimbursement you receive that meets both of deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop-3) Claimed a depreciation deduction for thethe following conditions. erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take thiscar using ACRS or MACRS (discussed
deduction even if you use the standard mileagelater) in an earlier year,1) It is given as an equipment maintenance rate or if you do not use the car for business.allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S. 4) Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- If you are self-employed and use your car inPostal Service. cussed later) on the car, your business, you can deduct the business part
2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col- of state and local personal property taxes on5) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997
lective bargaining agreement. Any later motor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C– EZ,for a car you leased, or
agreement cannot increase the qualified or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize your6) Are a rural mail carrier who received areimbursement amount by more than the deductions, you can include the remainder ofqualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailrate of inflation. your state and local personal property taxes oncarriers under Car Expenses, earlier.) the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).See your employer for information on your reim-
bursement. Two or more cars. If you own two or more Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using
cars that are used for business at the same time, the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyIf you are a rural mail carrier and re-
you cannot use the standard mileage rate for the business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingceived a qualified reimbursement, you
business use of any car. However, you may be fees that you pay to park your car at your placecannot use the standard mileage rate.CAUTION
!
able to deduct your actual expenses for operat- of work are nondeductible commuting ex-
ing each of the cars in your business. See Actual penses.)
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If you one year, you generally cannot deduct a capital However, you can claim a depreciation deduc-
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, expense. However, you can recover this cost by tion for the business use of the  car. See Depreci-
you may have a gain or loss on the transaction claiming a section 179 deduction (the deduction ation Deduction, later.
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car. allowed by section 179 of the Internal Revenue
Limits. There are limits on:See Disposition of a Car, later. Code) and/or a depreciation deduction. By using
depreciation, you recover the cost over more 1) The total cost of qualifying property youthan one year by deducting part of it each year.Actual Car Expenses can choose to treat as a section 179 de-The section 179 deduction and the depreciation duction, anddeduction are discussed later.If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you
2) The total amount of the section 179 deduc-may be able to deduct your actual car expenses. Generally, there are limits on both of these
tion plus the depreciation deduction (dis-deductions. Special rules apply if you use yourIf you qualify to use both methods, you cussed later) you can claim for a qualifyingcar 50% or less in your work or business.may want to figure your deduction both property.You can claim a section 179 deduction andways to see which gives you a larger
TIP
use a depreciation method other than straightdeduction. Limit on cost of qualifying property. Gen-line only if you do not use the standard mileage
erally, you can choose to treat up to $24,000 ofrate to figure your business-related car ex-
the cost of qualifying property as a section 179Actual car expenses include the costs of: penses in the year you first place a car in ser-
deduction in 2001. (There is pending legislationvice.Depreciation Lease Registration that may change this limit. For more information,If you claim either a section 179 deduction ordeduction payments fees get Publication 553, Highlights of 2001 Taxdepreciation using a method other than straightLicenses Insurance Repairs Changes.) The limit, depends on the percentageGas Oil Tires line for its estimated useful life in the year you of business use. You must use the propertyGarage rent Parking fees Tolls first place a car in service, you cannot use the more than 50% for business to claim any sec-standard mileage rate on that car in any futureIf you have fully depreciated a car that you tion 179 deduction. If you used the propertyyear.still use in your business, you can continue to more than 50% for business, multiply the cost ofclaim your other actual car expenses. Continue Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a the property by the percentage of business use.to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5. car is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a The result is the cost of the property that quali-
truck or van) that is made primarily for use on fies for the section 179 deduction.Business and personal use. If you use your
public streets, roads, and highways. Its un-car for both business and personal purposes,
loaded gross vehicle weight (gross vehicle Example. Peter purchased a car this yearyou must divide your expenses between busi-
weight in the case of a truck or van) must not be for $14,500 and he used it 60% for business.ness and personal use. You can divide your
more than 6,000 pounds. A car includes any The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifies for theexpense based on the miles driven for each
part, component, or other item that is physically section 179 deduction is $8,700 ($14,500 cost ×purpose.
attached to it or is usually included in the 60% business use). But see Limit on total sec-
purchase price. tion 179 and depreciation deductions, discussedExample. You are a sales representative
A car does not include: next.for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000
miles during the year: 12,000 miles for business Limit on total section 179 and depreciation1) An ambulance, hearse, or combinationand 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claim deductions. Generally, the total amount ofambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper- section 179 and depreciation deductions thatness, orating your car as a business expense. you can claim for a car that you place in service
2) A vehicle used directly in the business of in 2001 cannot be more than $3,060. The limit isEmployer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve- transporting persons or property for pay or reduced if your business use of the car is lesshicle provided by your employer for business hire. than 100%. See Depreciation Limits, later, forpurposes, you can deduct your actual un-
more information.reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use the See Publication 946 for more information on
standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by how to depreciate your vehicle. Example. Peter, in the previous example,Your Employer in chapter 6. had a car with a qualifying cost of $8,700 for his
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee, section 179 deduction. However, Peter is limitedSection 179 Deductionyou cannot deduct any interest paid on a car to a total section 179 deduction plus deprecia-
loan. This interest is treated as personal interest tion deduction of $1,836 ($3,060 limit × 60%The section 179 deduction allows you to treat
and is not deductible. If you are self-employed business use).part or all of the business cost of a car as a
and use your car in that business, see Interest, current expense rather than taking depreciation Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate. deductions over a number of years. deduction, the cost of the car does not include
Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em- The limit on total section 179 and de- any amount figured by reference to any other
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes preciation deductions (discussed later) property held by you at any time. For example, if
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter may reduce or eliminate any benefit you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car to
TIP
the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form from claiming the section 179 deduction. use in your business, your cost for purposes of
1040). the section 179 deduction does not include your
You cannot deduct luxury or sales taxes, adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the newYou can claim the section 179 deductioneven if you use your car 100% for business. car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.only in the year you place the car in service. ForLuxury and sales taxes are part of your car ’s this purpose, a car is placed in service when it Basis of car for depreciation. The amountbasis and are recovered through depreciation. is ready and available for a specific use, whether of the section 179 deduction reduces your basisSee Depreciation Deduction, later. in a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines personal activity, or for  the production of in- tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-
and collateral you pay for traffic violations. come. Even if you are not using the property, it is tion from the cost of your car. The resulting
in service when it is ready and available for its amount is the basis in your car that you use toCasualty and theft losses. If your car is dam- specific use. figure your depreciation deduction.aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to A car first used for personal purposes cannot Choosing a section 179 deduction can givededuct part of the loss that is not covered by qualify for the deduction in a later year when its you a larger total deduction (depreciation plusinsurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di- use changes to business. section 179 deduction) in the first year. Notsasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting choosing it can give you a larger depreciationa loss on your car. Example. In 2000 you bought a new car and deduction in later years.
Depreciation and section 179 deductions. placed it in service for personal purposes. This
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax, year, you began to use it for business. Changing Example. On January 2, 2001, Stella
luxury tax, and improvements, is a capital ex- its use to business use does not qualify the cost bought a car for $12,000, includ ing sales tax, to
pense. Because the benefits last longer than of your car for a section 179 deduction this year. use exclusively in her delivery b usiness. She
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid $9,000 cash and received $3,000 in trade your business and investment use to compute
1) Your basis in the car.for her old car (also used in her business). Her your depreciation deduction for the tax year.
adjusted basis in her old car was $3,000. 2) The date you place the car in service. Use of your car by another person. Do notOnly the $9,000 cash Stella paid qualifies for treat any use of your car by another person as3) The method of depreciation and recov-the section 179 deduction. The total of her sec- use in your trade or business unless that useery period you will use.tion 179 and depreciation deductions is limited meets one of the following three conditions. to $3,060, the first year maximum. If she does
Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-not choose to claim a section 179 deduction, her 1) It is directly connected with your business.ation is generally its cost. This includes anybasis for depreciation is $12,000. Her deprecia-
2) It is properly reported by you as income toamount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-tion deduction, using MACRS (discussed later),
the other person (and, if you have to, youerty, or services.is $2,400 [$12,000 basis × 20% (double declin-
withhold tax on the income).If you change the use of a car from personaling balance rate)] from Table 3, explained later.
to business, your basis is the lesser of the fair 3) It results in a payment of fair market rent.When to choose. If you want to take the sec- market value or your adjusted basis in the car on This includes any payment to you for thetion 179 deduction, you must make the choice in the date of conversion. Additional rules concern- use of your car.the tax year you both purchase the car and ing basis are discussed later in this chapter
place it in service for business or work. under Unadjusted basis. Business use changes. If you used your car
more than 50% in qualified business use in theHow to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to Placed in service. You generally place a car
year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in amake this choice and report the section 179 in service when it is available for use in your
later year (including the year of disposition), youdeduction. All others use Form 4562. Make your work or business, in an income-producing activ-
have to change to the straight line method ofchoice by taking the deduction on the appropri- ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins
depreciation. See Qualified business use 50%ate form and file it with your original tax return. when the car is placed in service for use in your
or less in a later year under Car Used 50% orIf you timely filed your return for the year work or business or for the production of income.
Less for Business, later.without making the election, you can still make For purposes of computing depreciation, if
the election by filing an amended return within you first start using the car only for personal use Property does not cease to be usedsix months of the due date of the return (exclud- and later convert it to business use, you place more than 50% in qualified businessing extensions). You cannot make the choice on the car in service on the date of conversion. use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
an amended tax return filed after the due date of Car placed in service and disposed of inyour return (including extensions). the same year. If you place a car in serviceIf you make the election on an amended and dispose of it in the same tax year, you Use for more than one purpose. If you usereturn, attach the appropriate election form cannot claim any depreciation deduction for that your car for more than one purpose during the(2106 or 4562) to it and print “Filed pursuant to car. tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-section 301.9100– 2” on the election statement. ous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-File the amended return at the same address Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig- age. Figure the percentage of qualified businessyou filed the original return. ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac- use by dividing the number of miles you driveOnce made, the choice can be changed only celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS). your car for business purposes during the yearwith the consent of the Internal Revenue Service MACRS rules for cars are discussed later in this by the total number of miles you drive the car(IRS). chapter. during the year for any purpose.
Reduction in business use. To be eligible to Exception. If you used the standard mile- Change from personal to business use. Ifclaim the section 179 deduction, you must use age rate in the first year of business use and you change the use of a car from 100% personalyour car more than 50% for business or work in change to the actual expenses method in a later use to business use during the tax year, youthe year you acquired it. If your business use of year, you cannot depreciate your car under the may not have mileage records for the timethe car is 50% or less in a later tax year during MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre- before the change to business use. In this case,the recovery period, you have to recapture (in- ciation over the estimated remaining useful life you figure the percentage of business use forclude in income) in that later year any excess of the car. the year as follows. depreciation. Any section 179 deduction To figure depreciation under the straight line
claimed on the car is included in calculating the method, you must reduce your basis in the car 1) Determine the percentage of business useexcess depreciation. For information on this cal- (but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all for the period following the change. Do thisculation, see Excess depreciation later in this miles for which you used the standard mileage by dividing business miles by total mileschapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi- rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the driven during that period.ness. year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For
2) Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustmentDispositions. If you dispose of a car on which The numerator (top number) is the numberwhen you used the standard mileage rate underyou had claimed the section 179 deduction, the of months the car is used for business andDisposition of a Car, later.amount of that deduction is treated as a depreci- the denominator (bottom number) is 12.This reduction of basis is in addition to thoseation deduction for recapture purposes. You basis adjustments described later under Unad-treat any gain on the disposition of the property justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis Example. You use a car only for personalas ordinary income up to the amount of the in your car to figure your depreciation deduction. purposes during the first 6 months of the year.section 179 deduction and any allowable depre- For additional information on the straight line During the last 6 months of the year, you driveciation (unless you establish the amount actually method of depreciation, see Publication 946. the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000allowed). For information on the disposition of a miles are for business. This gives you a busi-car, see Disposition of a Car, later. More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000)must use your car more than 50% for qualified for that period. Your business use for the year isbusiness use (defined next) during the year to 40% (80% × 6/12).Depreciation Deduction qualify for the section 179 deduction and
MACRS deduction. You must meet this Limits. The amount you can claim for sectionIf you use actual car expenses to figure your more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- 179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.deduction for a car you own and use in your ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. The maximum amount you can claim dependsbusiness, you can claim a depreciation deduc- If your business use is 50% or less, you must on the year in which you placed your car intion: that is, you can deduct a certain amount use the straight line method to depreciate your service. You have to reduce the maximumeach year as a recovery of your cost or other car. This is explained later under Car Used 50% amount if you did not use the car exclusively forbasis in the car. You cannot use the standard or Less for Business. business. See Depreciation Limits, later.mileage rate if you decide to take a depreciation
deduction in the year you first place the car in Qualified business use. A qualified business Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted
service. use is any use in your trade or business. It does basis to figure your depreciation using the
You generally need to know the following not include use for the production of income MACRS depreciation chart explained later
things about the car you intend to depreciate. (investment use). However, you do combine under Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1999 — 12,800 × .192 2,458tem (MACRS). Your unadjusted basis for figur- figured for 2001 for her old car. (See Disposition
(Limit: $3,050)ing depreciation is your original basis increased of a Car, later.) 1998 — 12,800 × .32 4,096or decreased by certain amounts. Marcia figures her basis in the new car as (Limit: $5,000)
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with follows. 1997 — 12,800 × .20 2,560
(Limit: $3,160)your car’s original basis, which generally is its
Cost of old car $26,000 Total $11,326cost. Cost includes sales and luxury taxes, des- Less: Total depreciation allowed Less: Actual depreciation allowed − 8,494tination charges, and dealer preparation. In- from 1998 through 2001 − 12,608 Excess of 100% over actual $ 2,832crease your basis by any substantial
Less: Lesser of Excess amount ($2,832)improvements you make to your car, such as Adjusted basis of old car and basis of or Adjusted basis of old van ($4,306) − 2,832part of new car that must be depreciatedadding air conditioning or a new engine. De-
over the remaining recovery period usingcrease your basis by any deductible casualty Unadjusted Basis of part of new vanthe same depreciation method $13,392loss, section 179 deduction, diesel fuel tax that must be depreciated over the
remaining recovery period usingcredit, gas guzzler tax, clean-fuel vehicle deduc- Additional basis (cash paid) for new car the same depreciation method $1,474tion, and qualified electric vehicle credit. See that is treated as newly purchased
MACRS property + 14,200Publication 535 for more information on the Additional basis (cash paid) for new vanclean-fuel vehicle deduction and the qualified that is treated as newly purchasedTotal basis of new car $27,592electric vehicle credit. MACRS property $9,800
If your business use later falls to 50% Traded car used partly in business. If you
or less, you may have to recapture trade in a car that you used partly in your busi-
Example 2. Rob paid $15,000 for a new car(include in your income) any excess ness for a new car that you will use in yourCAUTION
!
that he placed in service in 1998. He used itdepreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for business, you must make a “trade-in” adjust-
partly for business in 1998 (9,000 businessBusiness, later, for more information. ment for the personal use of the old car. This
miles of 15,000 total miles), 1999 (12,000 busi-adjustment has the effect of reducing your basis
ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2000in your old car, but not below zero, for purposesIf you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used theof figuring your depreciation deduction for thesee Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor- standard mileage rate in those years to claim thenew car. (This adjustment is not used, however,mation on your basis in the car. business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-when you determine the gain or loss on the later
justment when you used the standard mileageImprovements. A major improvement to a disposition of the new car. See Publication 544
rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)car is treated as a new item of 5-year recovery for information on how to report the disposition
On January 2, 2001, Rob traded in this carproperty. It is treated as placed in service in the of your car.)
and paid an additional $6,000 for his new car.year the improvement is made. It does not mat- To figure the unadjusted basis of your new Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new carter how old the car is when the improvement is car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted as shown next.added. Follow the same steps for depreciating basis in the old car any additional amount you
the improvement as you would for depreciating pay for the new car. Then subtract from that total Cost of old car $15,000the original cost of the car. However, you must the excess, if any, of: Less: Total depreciation allowed:
treat the improvement and the car as a whole 2000 — 14,400 mi. × .12 $1,728
1999 — 12,000 mi. × .12 1,440when applying the limits on the depreciation 1) The total of the amounts that would have
1998 — 9,000 mi. × .12 1,080 − 4,248deductions. Your car ’s depreciation deduction been allowable as depreciation during the
Adjusted basis of old car beforefor the year (plus the depreciation on any im- tax years before the trade if 100% of the trade-in adjustment $10,752provements) cannot be more than the deprecia- use of the car had been business and in-
tion limit that applies for that year. See vestment use, over Trade-in adjustment:
Depreciation at 100% business use:Depreciation Limits, later. 2) The total of the amounts actually allowable 2000 — 18,000 mi. × .12 $2,160
Effect of trade-in on basis. When you as depreciation during those years. 1999 — 16,000 mi. × .12 1,920
trade an old car for a new one, your original 1998 — 15,000 mi. × .12 1,800For information about figuring depreciation, see Total $5,880basis in the new car is generally your adjusted Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System Less: Actual depreciation allowed 4,248basis in the old car plus any additional payment (MACRS), which follows Example 2, later. Excess of 100% over actual $1,632you make.
Less: Lesser of Excess amount ($1,632)
Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 1997Traded car used only for business. If you or Adjusted basis of old car ($10,752) − 1,632
van (placed in service in 1997) for a new 2001trade in a car that you used only in your business
Unadjusted basis of part of new carmodel. He used the old van 75% for businessfor another car that will be used only in your
that must be depreciated over theand he used the new van 75% for business inbusiness, your original basis in the new car is remaining recovery period using2001. Mark claimed actual expenses (includingyour adjusted basis in the old car, plus any the same depreciation method $9,120
$8,494 depreciation expense) for the businessadditional amount you pay for the new car.
use of the old van since 1997. He did not claim a Additional basis (cash paid) for new car
that is treated as newly purchasedExample 1. Paul trades in a car that has an section 179 deduction for the old or the new van.
MACRS property  $6,000adjusted basis of $3,000 for a new car. In addi- Mark paid $12,800 for the 1997 van in June
tion, he pays cash of $17,000 for the new car. 1997. He paid an additional $9,800 when he
His original basis of the new car is $20,000 (his acquired the 2001 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System$3,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the the depreciation deduction amount (which is in- (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-$17,000 cash paid). Paul ’s unadjusted basis cluded in the $8,494 depreciation expense total) covery System (MACRS) is the name given towould be the same unless he claims the section for his old van for 2001, the year of disposition, the tax rules for getting back (recovering)179 deduction or has other increases or de- as explained later under Disposition of a Car. through depreciation deductions the cost ofcreases to his original basis. Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre- property used in a trade or business or to pro-
ciating his new van as shown next. duce income.Example 2. In July 1998, Marcia purchased The maximum amount you can deduct isa car for $26,000 and placed it in service for Cost of old van $12,800 limited, depending on the year you placed yourLess: Total depreciation allowed on the100% use in her business. She did not claim a car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.business cost of old van, $9,600section 179 deduction. Marcia’s unadjusted ba- ($12,800 × 75%), from 1997 – 2001 − 8,494sis for the car was $26,000. For 1998 through Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars areAdjusted basis of old van before
2000, Marcia figured her depreciation deduction classified as 5-year property. You actually de-trade-in adjustment $ 4,306
using the MACRS depreciation chart for those preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a
Trade-in adjustment:years. period of 6 calendar years. This is because your
Depreciation at 100% business use:In September 2001, Marcia traded that car in car is generally treated as placed in service in2001 — ($12,800 × .1152) × 1/2 yr $  737and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-(Limit: $1,775)
100% in her business. Marcia is allowed tion for one-half of both the first year and the2000 — 12,800 × .1152 1,475
one-half of the MACRS depreciation amount (Limit: $1,775) sixth year.
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation deduction for certain Indian b) You placed some property in service method to get the largest depreciation deduction
reservation property. Shorter recovery peri- from October through December. in the early years.
ods are provided under MACRS for qualified Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart inc) Your basis in the property you placed inIndian reservation property placed in service on 2000 to find his percentage. The unadjustedservice from October through Decem-Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2004. basis of his truck equals its cost because Philber (excluding nonresidential real prop-The recovery period that applies for a used it exclusively for business. He multipliederty, residential rental property, andbusiness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years. the unadjusted basis of his truck, $6,200, by theproperty placed in service and disposedHowever, the depreciation limits, discussed percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2000of in the same year) was more thanlater, will still apply. depreciation deduction of $1,240.40% of your total bases in all propertyFor more information on the qualifications for you placed in service during the year. In 2001, Phil used the truck for personalthis shorter recovery period and the percent- purposes when he repaired his father ’s cabin.ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc- His records show that the business use of histion, see chapter 3 of Publication 946. Exception. You can choose to treat a car truck was 90% in 2001. Phil used Table 3 to findplaced in service after September 30, 2001 andDepreciation methods. You can use one his percentage. Reading down the first columnbefore January 1, 2002, as being placed in ser-of the following three methods to depreciate for the date placed in service and across to thevice before October 1, 2001. This means thatyour car. 200% DB column, he locates his percentage,you would use the percentages in the 2001
32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of hisMACRS Depreciation Chart  for cars placed in1) The 200% declining balance method truck, $5,580 ($6,200 cost × 90% business use),service from January 1 through September 30,(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period by 32% to figure his 2001 depreciation deduc-2001, even if the conditions in 3) above apply. Ifthat switches to the straight line method
tion of $1,786.you make this choice, write “Election Pursuantwhen that method provides an equal or
to Notice 2001 – 70” across the top of eithergreater deduction.
Form 2106, or Form 4562. If you file electroni-2) The 150% declining balance method Depreciation Limitscally, you must type “Election Pursuant to Notice(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period 2001– 70” in the Election Explanation (ELC) re- There are limits on the amount you can deductthat switches to the straight line method cord when filing Form 4562 or Form 2106. for depreciation of your car. (The section 179when that method provides an equal or
Depreciation in future years. If you use deduction is treated as depreciation for pur-greater deduction.
the percentages from the chart, you generally poses of the limits.) The maximum amount you3) The straight line method (SL) over a must continue to use them for the entire recov- can deduct each year depends on the year you5-year recovery period. ery period of your car. However, you cannot place the car in service. These limits are shown
continue to use the chart if your basis in your car in the following table.If you use Table 3 (discussed later is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,under MACRS depreciation chart ) to Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Carsfor the year of the adjustment and the remainingdetermine your depreciation rate for
TIP
recovery period, figure the depreciation without 4th &2001, you do not need to determine in what year the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at Year Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Laterusing the straight line method provides an equal the end of the year of the adjustment and over In Service Year Year Year Yearsor greater deduction. This is because the chart the remaining recovery period. See How To Fig- 2000 – 2001 $3,060 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775has the switch to the straight line method built ure the Deduction Without Using the Tables  in 1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775into its rates. chapter 3 of Publication 946. 1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775
1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775In future years, do not use the chart in 1995 – 1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775Before choosing a method, you may wish to this edition of the publication. Instead,consider the following facts. use the chart in the publication or the
TIP
Exceptions for clean-fuel cars. There are
form instructions for those future years. two exceptions to the depreciation limits for1) Using the straight line method provides
cars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, forequal yearly deductions throughout the re-
cars that run on clean fuel. Clean-fuel cars arecovery period. Disposition of car during recovery period. discussed in chapter 12 of Publication 535. The2) Using the declining balance methods pro- If you dispose of the car before the end of the exceptions follow.vides greater deductions during the earlier recovery period, you are generally allowed a half
recovery years with the deductions gener- year of depreciation in the year of disposition 1) Amounts you pay for retrofit parts andally getting smaller each year. unless you purchased the car during the last components to modify a car to run onquarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction clean fuel are not subject to the deprecia-MACRS depreciation chart. A 2001 MACRS for the year of disposition under Disposition of a tion limit on cars. Only the cost of the carDepreciation Chart and instructions are included Car, later, for information on how to figure the before modification is subject to the limit.in this chapter as Table 3. Using this table will depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.
2) If you place a car in service after August 5,make it easy for you to figure the 2001 deprecia- How to use the 2001 chart. To figure your 1997, that was produced to run on electric-tion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- depreciation deduction for 2001, find the per- ity, your depreciation limit is increased.pears in the Instructions for Form 2106. centage in the column of the chart based on the The amounts are shown in the followingYou may have to use the tables in date that you first placed the car in service and table.Publication 946 instead of using this the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-
MACRS Depreciation Chart. tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (definedCAUTION
!
Maximum Depreciation Deduction Forearlier) by that percentage to determine the Electric Cars Placed in Serviceamount of your depreciation deduction. If you After August 5, 1997You must use the Depreciation Tables  in prefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-
Publication 946 rather than the 2001 MACRS out the help of the chart, see Publication 946. 4th &
Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one Year Placed 1st 2nd 3rd LaterYour deduction cannot be more thanof the following three conditions applies to you. In Service Year Year Year Years
the maximum depreciation limit for 2000 – 2001 $9,280 $14,800 $8,850 $5,3251) You file your return on a fiscal year basis. cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,325
1998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,4252) You file your return for a short tax year 1997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425(less than 12 months).
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- The examples throughout this chapter3) During the year, all of the following condi-
ary 2000 to use exclusively in his landscape illustrate gas-fueled cars.tions apply.
business. He paid $6,200 for the truck with no CAUTION
!
a) You placed some property in service trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de-
from January through September. duction, and he chose to use the 200% DB
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2001 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2001, you must use the same
method you used on last year ’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2001. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1 — Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Conventions in chapter 3 of Publication
946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $22,000) in May 2001 and a new van (basis of $14,000) in October 2001, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$14,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year [40% /H11003($22,000 + 14,000) = $14,400].
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1 
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1999
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1999
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1998
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1998
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1997
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1997
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1996
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1996
Prior to 1996
2
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
1
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2001 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2001.)
Car used less than full year. The deprecia- tion (from the Maximum Depreciation Deduction claim the section 179 deduction and he chooses
tion limits are not reduced if you use a car for for Cars  table) is $3,060. (See Deductions in the 200% DB method to figure his depreciation
less than a full year. This means that you do not years after the recovery period, later.) deduction.
reduce the limit when you either place a car in In 2001, Karl computes his MACRS deduc-
service or dispose of a car during the year. Reduction for personal use. The deprecia- tion to be $4,318 [($25,400 × 85%) × 20%].However, the depreciation limits are reduced if tion limits are reduced based on your percent- However, Karl’s deduction is limited to $2,601.you do not use the car exclusively for business age of personal use. If you use a car less than This is the depreciation limit ($3,060) multipliedand investment purposes. See Reduction for 100% in your business or work, you must deter- by the business use percentage (85%).personal use, later. mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi- Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-plying the limit amount by the percentage of ness. Depreciation in the next four years contin-Example. Marie purchased a car in June business and investment use during the tax ues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl2001 for $16,000 to use exclusively in her busi- year.
computes his depreciation limits for those yearsness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-
as follows.tion and she chooses the 200% DB method of Example. In June 2001, Karl, an outside
depreciation. dental supply salesman, purchased a car for Year Limit x Business Use DepreciationMarie’s depreciation (using the rate from Ta- $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that 2002 $ 4,900 × 85% $ 4,165
ble 3) is $3,200 ($16,000 × 20%). However, the extends 200 miles around his home base. He 2003 2,950 × 85% 2,508
2004, 2005 1,775 × 85% 1,509maximum amount she can deduct for deprecia- uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does not
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In 2006, using the rate from Table 3,  Karl ’s Example. In May 1995, Bob bought and Instead of making the computation yourself,
MACRS deduction is $1,244 [($25,400 × 85%) × you can use column (c) of Table 3 to find theplaced in service a car that he used exclusively
5.76%]. Since that amount is less than the de- percentage to use.in his business. The car cost $28,600. Bob did
preciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 × 85%), Karl’s not claim a section 179 deduction for the car. He
Example. On May 22, 2001, Dan bought adepreciation deduction for 2006 is $1,244. continued to use the car 100% in his business
car for $15,000. He used it 40% for his consult-throughout the recovery period (1995 throughIf Karl continues to use his car for business ing business. Because he did not use the car2000). For those years, Bob used Table 3 andafter 2006, he can continue to claim a deprecia- more than 50% for business, Dan cannot takethe Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Carstion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How- any section 179 deduction and he must use thetable (as explained earlier) to compute his de-ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775 straight line method over a 5-year recovery pe-preciation deductions as shown in the followingmultiplied by his business use percentage. See riod to recover the cost of his car.table.Deductions in years after the recovery period,
Dan deducts $600 in 2001. This is the lesserlater. MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec. of:
Year % Amount Deduction AllowedSection 179 deduction. The section 179 de- ’95 20.00 $5,720 $3,060 $ 3,060 1) $600 [($15,000 cost × 40% business use)duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If ’96 32.00 9,152 4,900 4,900 × 10% recovery percentage (from column’97 19.20 5,491 2,950 2,950you place a car in service in 2001, use it only for (c), Table 3)], or’98 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775business, and choose the section 179 deduc-
’99 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775tion, the combined section 179 and depreciation 2) $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit × 40% busi-2000 5.76 1,647 1,775 1,647deduction for that car for 2001 is limited to ness use).Total $16,235 $16,107
$3,060.
At the end of 2000, Bob had an unrecovered
Qualified business use 50% or less in a laterbasis in the car of $12,493. This was theExample. On September 4, 2001, Jack
year. If you use your car more than 50% in$28,600 original basis of his car less thebought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in
qualified business use in the tax year it is placed$16,107 depreciation deductions allowed duringservice. He used it 80% for his business and he
in service but the business use drops to 50% orchooses to take a section 179 deduction for the the recovery period.
less in a later year, you can no longer use ancar. Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi- accelerated depreciation method for that car.ness in 2001. He can claim a depreciation de-Before applying the limit, Jack figures his For the year the business use drops to 50%duction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed formaximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000. or less and all later years in the recovery period,each subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to you must use the straight line depreciationues to use the car 100% for business in 2002the maximum $24,000 amount) multiplied by his method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-business use ($10,000 × 80%). and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser of tion, for the year your business use drops to$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis inJack then figures that his section 179 deduc- 50% or less, you must recapture (include in youreach of those years until his deductions total thetion for 2001 is limited to $2,448 (80% of gross income) any excess depreciation (dis-$10,718 unrecovered basis ($12,493 − $1,775$3,060). He then has an unadjusted basis of cussed later). You also increase the adjustedclaimed in 2001).$5,552 [($10,000 × 80%) − $2,448] for determin- basis of your car by the same amount.If Bob ’s business use of the car was lessing his depreciation deduction. Since he has
already reached the maximum limit for 2001, than 100% during any year, his depreciation Example. In June 1998, you purchased a
Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure his deduction would be less than the maximum car for exclusive use in your business. You met
depreciation deduction for 2002. amount allowable for that year. However, in de- the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years
termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he of the recovery period (1998 through 2000) but
Deductions in years after the recovery would still reduce his original basis by the maxi- failed to meet it in the fourth year (2001). You
period. If the depreciation limits apply to your mum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba- determine your depreciation for 2001 using 20%
car, you may have unrecovered basis in your car sis at the beginning of 2001 would be $12,365 (from column (c) of Table 3). You also will have
at the end of the recovery period. If you continue ($28,600 –  $16,235) in this example. This is to determine and include in your gross income
to use your car for business, you can deduct that true even if his actual depreciation deduction for any excess depreciation, discussed next.
unrecovered basis after the recovery period any year was less than the maximum amount Excess depreciation. You must includeends. shown. any excess depreciation in your gross income
Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or and add it to your car ’s adjusted basis for the
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel first tax year in which you do not use the carCar Used 50% or Lessvehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit, and more than 50% in qualified business use. Usefor Businessdepreciation and section 179 deductions that Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,  to fig-
would have been allowable if you had used the ure and report the excess depreciation in yourIf you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedcar 100% for business and investment use. gross income.business use (defined earlier under Deprecia-
Excess depreciation is: The recovery period. For 5-year property, tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is
your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part placed in service or in a later year, special rules
1) The amount of the depreciation deductionsyear’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-
allowable for the car (including any sectiondar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed in tions are explained in the following paragraphs.
179 deduction claimed) for tax years ineach of the next 4 calendar years, and a part (For this purpose, “car” was defined earlier
which you used the car more than 50% inyear’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- under Actual Car Expenses.)
qualified business use, minusdar year.
Qualified business use 50% or less in yearUnder MACRS, your recovery period is the 2) The amount of the depreciation deductions
placed in service. If you use your car 50% orsame whether you use declining balance or that would have been allowable for those
less for qualified business use (defined earlierstraight line depreciation. You determine your years if you had not used the car more
under Depreciation Deduction.) in the year theunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you than 50% in qualified business use for the
car is placed in service, the following two specialplaced the car in service. year you placed it in service. This means
rules apply. the amount of depreciation figured usingHow to treat unrecovered basis. If you the straight line method.continue to use your car for business after the 1) You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation tion.deduction in each succeeding tax year until you Example. On June 25, 1998, you bought a
2) You must figure depreciation using therecover your full basis in the car. The maximum car for $11,000 and placed it in service. You did
straight line method over a 5-year recoveryamount you can deduct each year is determined not claim the section 179 deduction. You used
period. You must continue to use theby the date you placed the car in service and the car exclusively in qualified business use for
straight line method even if your percent-your business-use percentage. For example, no 1998, 1999, and 2000. For those years, you
age of business use increases to morededuction is allowed for a year you use your car used the appropriate MACRS Depreciation
than 50% in a later year.100% for personal purposes. Chart to figure depreciation deductions totaling
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$7,832 ($2,200 for 1998, $3,520 for 1999, and Fair market value. Fair market value is the the dollar amount for the number of days in the
$2,112 for 2000) under the 200% DB method. price at which the property would change hands lease term that fall within the tax yea r.
between a buyer and a seller, neither having toDuring 2001, you used the car 50% for busi-
Example. On August 16, 2000, Will leasedbuy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-ness and 50% for personal purposes. Since you
an electric car with a fair market value ofedge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similardid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you
$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusivelyproperty around the same date may be helpful inmust include in gross income for 2001 your
in his own data processing business. On No-figuring the fair market value of the property.excess depreciation determined as follows.
vember 5, 2001, Will closed his business andFigure the fair market value on the first day of
Total depreciation claimed: $7,832 went to work for a company where he is notthe lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is(MACRS 200% DB method) required to use a car for business. Using Appen-specified in the lease agreement, use thatMinus total depreciation allowable: dix B– 4, Will computed his inclusion amount foramount as the fair market value.(Straight line method)
2000 and 2001 as shown in the following table1998 — 10% of $11,000 ...... $1,100
and reduced his deductions for lease paymentsFiguring the inclusion amount. Inclusion1999 — 20% of $11,000 ...... 2,200
2000 — 20% of $11,000 ...... 2,200 5,500 by those amounts.amounts are listed in Appendix A and, for elec-
Excess depreciation $2,332 tric cars leased after August 5, 1997, in Appen-
Tax Dollar Business Inclusiondix B . If the fair market value of the car isIn 2001, using Form 4797, you figure and year amount Proration use amount$100,000 or less, use the appropriate appendixreport the $2,332 excess depreciation you must 2000 $ 78 138/366 100% $ 29(depending on the year you first placed the car ininclude in your gross income. Your adjusted 2001 173 309/365 100% 146service) to determine the inclusion amount. Ifbasis in the car is also increased by $2,332.
the fair market value is more than $100,000, seeYour 2001 depreciation deduction is $1,100 Leased car changed from personal to busi-the Revenue Procedure(s) identified in the foot-[$11,000 (unadjusted basis) × 50% (business ness use. If you lease a car for personal usenote of the appendices for the inclusion amount.use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta- and, in a later year, change it to business use,Revenue Procedures are available at most IRSble 3 on the line for Jan. 1—  Sept. 30, 1998)]. you must determine the car ’s fair market valueoffices and many local libraries.
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-For each tax year during which you lease theLeasing a Car sion amount using the rules explained earliercar for business, determine your inclusion under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use theamount by following these three steps.If you lease a car that you use in your business, fair market value on the date of conversion.you can use the standard mileage rate or actual 1) Locate the appendix that applies to you.expenses to figure your deductible car expense. Example. In March 1999, Janice leased aTo find the inclusion amount, do the follow-This section explains how to figure actual ex- car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,ing.penses for a leased car. 2001, she started working as a self-employed
a) Find the line that includes the fair mar- advertising consultant and started using theDeductible payments. You can deduct the ket value of the car on the first day of leased car for business purposes. Her recordspart of each lease payment that is for the use of the lease term. show that her business use for June 1 throughthe car in your business. You cannot deduct any December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusionb) Go across the line to the column for thepart of a lease payment that is for personal use amount for 2001, Janice obtained an appraisaltax year in which the car is used underof the car, such as commuting. from an independent car leasing company thatthe lease to find the dollar amount. ForYou must spread any advance payments showed the fair market value of her 1999 car onthe last tax year of the lease, use theover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct June 1, 2001, was $18,650. Using Appendixdollar amount for the preceding year.any payments you make to buy a car, even if the A– 5, Janice computed her inclusion amount forpayments are called lease payments. 2001 as shown in the following table.2) Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) forIf you lease a car for 30 days or more, you the number of days of the lease term in- Tax Dollar Business Inclusionmay have to reduce your lease payment deduc- cluded in the tax year. year amount Proration use amounttion by an “inclusion amount.”
2001 $ 28 214/365 60% $103) Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by
the percentage of business and invest-
Inclusion Amounts ment use for the tax year. This is your Reporting inclusion amounts. For informa-
inclusion amount. tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employeesIf you lease a car that you use in your business should see Car rentals under Completing Formsfor a lease term of 30 days or more, you may 2106 and 2106 – EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprie-Example. On January 17, 2000, you leasedhave to include an inclusion amount in your tors should see the instructions for Schedule Ca car for 3 years and placed it in service for useincome for each tax year you lease the car. To (Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-in your business. The car had a fair market valuedo this, you do not add an amount to income. tions for Schedule F (Form 1040).of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. YouInstead, you reduce your deduction for your
use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-lease payment. (This reduction has an effect
sonal purposes during each year of the lease.similar to the limit on the depreciation deduction
Assuming you continue to use the car 75% foryou would have on the car if you owned it.) Disposition of a Carbusiness, you use Appendix A– 4 to arrive at theThe inclusion amount is a percentage of part
following inclusion amounts for each year of theof the fair market value of the leased car multi- If you dispose of your car, you may have alease:plied by the percentage of business and invest- taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion ofment use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated Tax Dollar Business Inclusion any gain that is due to depreciation (includingfor the number of days of the lease term in the year amount Proration use amount any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)tax year. 2000 $144 349/366 75% $103 that you claimed on the car will be treated asThe inclusion amount applies to each tax 2001 314 365/365 75% 236 ordinary income. However, you may not have toyear that you lease the car if the fair market 2002 467 365/365 75% 350 recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car2003 558 16/365 75% 18value (defined next) of the car when the lease because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.began was more than the amounts shown in the For each year of the lease that you deduct lease This section gives some general informationfollowing table. payments, you must reduce your deduction by about dispositions of cars. For information on
the inclusion amount computed for that year. how to report the disposition of your car, seeYear Lease Began Fair Market Value*
Publication 544.1999 – 2001 $ 15,500
Leased car changed from business to per-1997 – 1998 15,800
1995 – 1996 15,500 sonal use. If you lease a car for business use Casualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, a
1994 14,600 and, in a later year, change it to personal use, gain results when you receive insurance or other
1993 14,300 follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring reimbursement that is more than your adjusted1992 13,700 the inclusion amount. For the tax year in which basis in your car. If you then spend all of the1991 13,400
you stop using the car for business, use the proceeds to acquire replacement property (a1987 – 1990 12,800
*These amounts are higher for electric cars. dollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fied period of time, you do not recognize any the depreciation amount figured for the full year. ever, if you prepare a record in  a computer
gain. Your basis in the replacement property is Figure your depreciation deduction for the full memory device with the aid of a l ogging pro-
its cost minus any gain that is not recognized. year using the rules explained in this chapter gram, it is considered an adequate  record.
See Publication 547 for more information. and deduct 50% of that amount with your other
actual car expenses. What Are AdequateTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a If you used a Date Placed in Service line for Records?new one, the transaction is considered a Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentagelike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is of the depreciation amount figured for the full You should keep the proof you need in an ac-recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of year. The percentage you use is determined by count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Publication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your the month you disposed of the car. Figure your ilar record. You should also keep documentarybasis in the new property is generally your ad- depreciation deduction for the full year using the evidence that, together with your record, willjusted basis in the old property plus any addi- rules explained in this chapter and multiply the support each element of an expense.tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, result by the percentage from the following tableearlier.) for the month that you disposed of the car. Documentary evidence. You generally must
have documentary evidence, such as receipts,Depreciation adjustment when you used the Month Percentage canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-standard mileage rate. If you used the stan- Jan., Feb., March ............ 12.5% penses.dard mileage rate for the business use of your April, May, June ............. 37.5%
July, Aug., Sept. ............. 62.5%car, depreciation was included in that rate. The Exception. Documentary evidence is notOct., Nov., Dec. .............. 87.5%rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- needed if any of the following conditions apply.
dard mileage rate is shown in the chart that Do not use this table if you are a fiscal 1) You have meals or lodging expenses whilefollows. You must reduce your basis in your car year filer. See Sale or Disposition traveling away from home for which you(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- Before the Recovery Period Ends  inCAUTION
!
account to your employer under an ac-ciation. chapter 3 of Publication 946. countable plan, and you use a per diemThese rates do not apply for any year in allowance method that includes mealswhich the actual expenses method and/or lodging. (Accountable plans andwas used.
TIP
per diem allowances are discussed in
chapter 6.)
2) Your expense, other than lodging, is lessDepreciation
Year(s) Rate per Mile than $75.
2001 $ .15 3) You have a transportation expense for5.2000 .14 which a receipt is not readily available.1994 –  1999 .12
1992 –  1993 .11 1/2
1989 –  1991 .11 Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-
1988 .10 1/2 dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itRecordkeeping1987 .10 shows the amount, date, place, and essential1986 .09 character of the expense.1983 –  1985 .08 If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans- For example, a hotel receipt is enough to1982 .07 1/2 portation expenses, you must be able to prove1980 –  1981 .07 support expenses for business travel if it has all(substantiate) certain elements of expense. This of the following information.For tax years after 1989, the depreciation chapter discusses the records you need to keep
rates apply to all business miles. For tax years to prove these expenses. 1) The name and location of the hotel.before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the If you keep timely and accurate rec- 2) The dates you stayed there.first 15,000 miles. ords, you will have support to show the
3) Separate amounts for charges such asIRS if your tax return is ever examined.RECORDS
Example. In 1996, you bought a car for ex- lodging, meals, and telephone calls.You will also have proof of expenses that yourclusive use in your business. The car cost employer may require if you are reimbursed A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an$14,000. From 1996 through 2001, you used the under an accountable plan. These plans are expense for a business meal if it has all of thestandard mileage rate to figure your car expense discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements. following information.deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in
1996, 16,300 miles in 1997, 15,600 miles in
1) The name and location of the restaurant.1998, 16,700 miles in 1999, 15,100 miles in
2000, and 14,900 miles in 2001. Your deprecia- 2) The number of people served.
tion is figured as follows.
3) The date and amount of the expense.
How To ProveYear Miles x Rate Depreciation If a charge is made for items other than food and1996 14,100 × .12 $ 1,692
beverages, the receipt must show that this is theExpenses1997 16,300 × .12 1,956
1998 15,600 × .12 1,872 case.
1999 16,700 × .12 2,004 Table 4 is a summary of records you need to Canceled check. A canceled check, to-2000 15,100 × .14 2,114 prove each expense discussed in this publica-2001 14,900 × .15 2,235 gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-tion. You must be able to prove the elementsTotal depreciation $11,873 tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checklisted across the top portion of the chart. You by itself does not prove a business expenseAt the end of 2001, your adjusted basis in the car prove them by having the information and re- without other evidence to show that it was for ais $2,127 ($14,000 − $11,873). ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed in business purpose.the first column.Depreciation deduction for the year of
Duplicate information. You do not have todisposition. If you deduct actual car ex- You cannot deduct amounts that you
record information in your account book or otherpenses and you dispose of your car before the approximate or estimate.
record that duplicates information shown on aend of its recovery period, you are allowed a CAUTION
!
receipt as long as your records and receiptsreduced depreciation deduction for the year of
complement each other in an orderly manner.disposition.
You do not have to record amounts yourTo figure the reduced depreciation deduction You should keep adequate records to prove
employer pays directly for any ticket or otherfor a car disposed of in 2001, first determine the your expenses or have sufficient evidence that
travel item. However, if you charge these itemsdepreciation deduction for the full year using will support your own statement. You must gen-
to your employer, through a credit card or other-Table 3. erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-
wise, you must keep a record of the amountsIf you used a Date Placed in Service line for ered adequate. This is because written evidence
you spend.Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half of is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 23

Page 24 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for:
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Timely-kept records. You should record the cording the length of the delivery route once, the supporting evidence must be either direct evi-
elements of an expense or of a business use at date of each trip at or near the time of the trips, dence or documentary evidence.  Direct evi-
or near the time of the expense or use and and the total miles you drove the car during the dence can be written statements, or t he oral
support it with sufficient documentary evidence. tax year. You could also establish the date of testimony of your guests or other  witnesses set-
A timely-kept record has more value than a each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or ting forth detailed information about  the element.
statement prepared later when generally there is other documentary evidence. Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid
a lack of accurate recall. bills, or similar evidence.
Confidential information. You do not need toYou do not need to write down the elements If the element is either the business relation-put confidential information relating to an ele-of every expense on the day of the expense. If ship of your guests or the business purpose ofment of a deductible expense (such as theyou maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- the amount spent, the supporting evidence canplace, business purpose, or business relation-counts for use during the week, the log is consid- be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam-ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-ered a timely-kept record. ple, the nature of your work, such as makingcord. However, you do have to record theIf you give your employer, client, or customer deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence ofinformation elsewhere at or near the time of thean expense account statement, it can also be the use of your car for business purposes. In-expense and have it available to fully prove thatconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if voices of deliveries establish when you used theelement of the expense.you copy it from your account book, diary, state- car for business.
ment of expense, or similar record.
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record
What If I Have Incomplete
Proving business purpose. You must gener- for parts of a tax year and use that record toRecords?
ally provide a written statement of the business prove the amount of business or investment use
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of for the entire year. You must demonstrate byIf you do not have complete records to prove an
proof varies according to the circumstances in other evidence that the periods for which anelement of an expense, then you must prove the
each case. If the business purpose of an ex- adequate record is kept are representative ofelement with: 
pense is clear from the surrounding circum- the use throughout the tax year.
1) Your own written or oral statement con-stances, then you do not need to give a written
Example. You use your car to visit the of-taining specific information about the ele-explanation.
fices of clients, meet with suppliers and otherment, and
Example. If you are a sales representative subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to2) Other supporting evidence that is sufficientwho calls on customers on an established sales clients. There is no other business use of theto establish the element.route, you do not have to give a written explana- car, but you and your family use the car for
tion of the business purpose for traveling that If the element is the description of a gift, or personal purposes. You keep adequ ate records
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re- the cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the during the first week of each mo nth that show
Page 24 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 25 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that 75% of the use of the car is for business. single use, such as a round trip or uninterrupted 3) Your employer does not use ad equate ac-
Invoices and bills show that your business use counting procedures to verify expense ac-business use, with a single record. Minimal per-
continues at the same rate during the later counts. sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the way
weeks of each month. Your weekly records are between two business stops, is not an interrup- 4) You are related to your employer as de-representative of the use of the car each month tion of business use. fined under Standard Meal Allowance inand are sufficient evidence to support the per- chapter 1.Example. You make deliveries at severalcentage of business use for the year.
Reimbursements, adequate accounting, anddifferent locations on a route that begins andExceptional circumstances. You can satisfy nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapterends at your employer’s business premises andthe substantiation requirements with other evi- 6.that includes a stop at the business premisesdence if, because of the nature of the situation in between two deliveries. You can account forwhich an expense is made, you cannot get a these using a single record of miles driven. Examples of Recordsreceipt. This applies if all the following are true.
Gift expenses. You do not always have to Examples of records that show the information1) You were unable to obtain evidence for an record the name of each recipient of a gift. A you need to keep for different types of expenseselement of the expense or use that com- general listing will be enough if it is evident that are included in this publication as Table 6 andpletely satisfies the requirements ex- you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit Table 7. They are part of the illustrated exam-plained earlier under What Are Adequate on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any ples shown at the end of chapter 6.Records. one person. For example, if you buy a large
number of tickets to local high school basketball2) You are unable to obtain evidence for an
games and give one or two tickets to each ofelement that completely satisfies the two
many customers, it is usually enough to record arules listed earlier under What if I Have
general description of the recipients.Incomplete Records.
3) You have presented other evidence for the Allocating total cost. If you can prove the 6.element that is the best proof possible total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-under the circumstances. not prove how much it cost for each person who
participated in the event, you may have to allo-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a cate the total cost among you and your guests How To Reportreceipt because of reasons beyond your control, on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyou can prove a deduction by reconstructing the number of persons who participated in theyour records or expenses. Reasons beyond This chapter explains where and how to reportevent.your control include fire, flood, and other casu- the expenses discussed in this publication. It
An allocation would be needed, for example,alty. discusses reimbursements and how to treat
if you did not have a business relationship with them under accountable and nonaccountable
all of your guests. See Allocating between busi- plans. It also explains rules for independent con-Separating and Combining ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2. tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certainExpenses performing artists, and certain disabled employ-
If your return is examined. If your return is ees. The chapter ends with illustrations of how toThis section explains when expenses must be examined, you may have to provide additional report travel, entertainment, gift, and car ex-kept separate and when expenses can be com- information to the IRS. This information could be penses on Forms 2106 and 2106– EZ.bined. needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- reliability of information contained in your rec-
ment is generally considered a separate ex- ords, statements, testimony, or documentary
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer evidence before a deduction is allowed. Where To Reportor client at dinner and then go to the theater, the
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick- How Long To Keep This section provides general information onets are two separate expenses. You must record where to report the expenses discussed in thisRecords and Receiptsthem separately in your records. publication.
Season or series tickets. If you buy sea- You must keep records as long as they may be
Self-employed. You must report your incomeson or series tickets for business use, you must needed for the administration of any provision of
and expenses on Schedule C or C – EZ (Formtreat each ticket in the series as a separate item. the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide means you must keep records that support your
ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do notthe total cost (but not more than face value) by deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
use Form 2106 or 2106– EZ.the number of games or performances in the the date you file the income tax return on which
series. You must keep records to show whether If you claim car or truck expenses, you mustthe deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. provide certain information on the use of yourconsidered filed on the due date. For a more
Also, you must be able to prove the cost of vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or ule C, Schedule C– EZ, or  Form 4562.ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business
other private luxury box for more than one event. and Keeping Records. If you file Schedule C:
See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. You must keep records of the business use
1) Report your travel expenses, exceptof your car for each year of the recovery period.Combining items. You can make one daily meals, on line 24a,See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underentry in your record for reasonable categories of
Depreciation Deduction.expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone 2) Report your meals (actual cost or standard
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals meal allowance) and entertainment on line
Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoshould be in a separate category. You can in- 24b (The 50% limit is figured on line 24c.),
give their records and documentation to theirclude tips for meal-related services with the 3) Report your gift expenses and transporta-costs of the meals. employers and are reimbursed for their ex- tion expenses, other than car expenses,Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur- penses generally do not have to keep copies of on line 27, anding the course of a single event are considered a this information. However, you may have to
single expense. For example, if during entertain- 4) Report your car expenses on line 10.prove your expenses if any of the following con-
ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for Complete Part IV of the form unless youditions apply.
each serving of refreshments, the total expense have to file Form 4562 for depreciation or
1) You claim deductions for expenses thatfor the refreshments is treated as a single ex- amortization.
are more than reimbursements.pense. If you file Schedule C– EZ, report the total of
2) Your expenses are reimbursed under aCar expenses. You can account for several all business expenses on line 2. You can only
nonaccountable plan.uses of your car that can be considered part of a include 50% of your meals and entertainment in
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 25

Page 26 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that total. If you include car expenses, you must Income-producing property. If you have under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
also complete Part III of the form. travel or transportation expenses related to plan.
If you file Schedule F: income-producing property, report your deducti- This section explains the two types of plans,
ble expenses on the form appropriate for that how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-1) Report your car expenses on line 12. At- activity. ing the amount of your expenses, and the taxtach Form 4562 and provide information For example, if you have rental real estate treatment of your reimbursements and ex-on the use of your car in Part V of Form income and expenses, report your expenses on penses. It also covers rules for independent4562. Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss. contractors.
See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-2) Report all other business expenses dis-
erty, for more information on the rental of real No reimbursement. You are not reimbursedcussed in this publication on line 34. You
estate. If you have deductible investment-re- or given an allowance for your expenses if youcan only include 50% of your meals and
lated transportation expenses, report them on are paid a salary or commission with the under-entertainment on that line.
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). standing that you will pay your own expenses. InSee your forms instructions for more information this situation, you have no reimbursement oron how to complete your tax return. allowance arrangement, and you do not have toVehicle Provided by
read this section on reimbursements. Instead,Both self-employed and an employee. If Your Employer see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106 – EZ,you are both self-employed and an employee,
later, for information on completing your tax re-you must keep separate records for each busi- If your employer provides you with a car, you turn.ness activity. Report your business expenses for may be able to deduct the actual expenses of
self-employment on Schedule C, C – EZ, or F operating that car for business purposes. The Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your amount you can deduct depends on the amount reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-business expenses for your work as an em- that your employer included in your income and rangement is a system or plan that an employerployee on Form 2106 or 2106– EZ, as discussed the business and personal miles you drove dur- uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-next. ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile- penses, advances, reimbursements, andage rate.Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- amounts charged to the employer for employee
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your business expenses. Arrangements include perValue reported on Form W –2. Your em-
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- diem and car allowances.ployer can figure and report either the actual
penses. However, you can use the shorter Form value of your personal use of the car or the value A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of
2106– EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all 3 of the car as if you used it only for personal daily reimbursement your employer gives you
of the following conditions. purposes (100% income inclusion). Your em- for your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses
ployer must separately state the amount if 100% when you are away from home on business.1) You are an employee deducting expenses of the annual lease value was included in your (The term “incidental expenses ” is defined inattributable to your job. income. If you are unsure of the amount in- chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A
2) You were not reimbursed by your em- cluded in your Form W– 2, ask your employer. car allowance is an amount your employer gives
ployer for your expenses (amounts in- you for the business use of your car.
Full value included in your income. You cancluded in box 1 of your Form W – 2 are not Your employer should tell you what methoddeduct the value of the business use of anconsidered reimbursements). of reimbursement is used and what records youemployer-provided car if your employer reported must provide.3) If you claim car expenses, you use the 100% of the value of the car in your income. On
standard mileage rate. your 2001 Form W – 2, the amount of the value Employers. If you are an employer and youwill be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherFor more information on how to report your reimburse employee business expenses, howcompensation, and box 12.expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106 – EZ, see you treat this reimbursement on yourTo claim your expenses, complete Part II,Completing Forms 2106 and 2106– EZ, later. employee’s Form W – 2 depends in part onSections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter your whether you have an accountable plan. Reim-Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse- actual expenses on line 23 of Section C and bursements treated as paid under an accounta-ments (amounts included in box 1 of your Form include the entire value of the employer-pro- ble plan, as explained next, are not reported asW– 2 are not considered reimbursements), the vided car on line 25. Complete the rest of the pay. Reimbursements treated as paid underonly business expense you are claiming is for form. nonaccountable plans, as explained later, aregifts, and the Special Rules discussed later do reported as pay. See Publication 15, Circular E,Less than full value included in your income.not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or Employer’s Tax Guide, for information on em-If less than the full annual lease value of the car2106– EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your ployee pay.was included on your Form W – 2, this meansdeductible gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A
that your Form W – 2 only includes the value of(Form 1040).
Accountable Plansyour personal use of the car. Do not enter thisStatutory employees. If you received a value on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.Form W– 2 and the “Statutory employee” box in To be an accountable plan, your employer ’sIf you paid any actual costs (that your em-box 13 was checked, report your income and reimbursement or allowance arrangement mustployer did not provide or reimburse you for) toexpenses related to that income on Schedule C include all three of the following rules.operate the car, you can deduct the businessor C – EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form portion of those costs. Examples of costs that 1) Your expenses must have a business con-2106 or 2106– EZ. you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com- nection —  that is, you must have paid orStatutory employees include full-time life in- plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106. incurred deductible expenses while per-surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C forming services as an employee of yoursion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the employer.homeworkers. form.
2) You must adequately account to your em-If you are entitled to a reimbursement
ployer for these expenses within a reason-from your employer but you do not
able period of time.claim it,   you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim- Reimbursements 3) You must return any excess reimburse-bursement applies. ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-This section explains what to do when you re- riod of time.ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of
“Adequate accounting ” and “returning ex-Reimbursement for personal expenses. If the employee business expenses discussed in
cess reimbursements” are discussed later.your employer reimburses you for nondeduct- this publication.
ible personal expenses, such as for vacation If you received an advance, allowance, or An excess reimbursement or allowance  is
trips, your employer must report the reimburse- reimbursement for your expenses, how you re- any amount you are paid that is more  than the
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form port this amount and your expenses depends on business-related expenses that you adequa tely
W– 2. You cannot deduct personal expenses. whether the reimbursement was paid to you accounted for to your employer. 
Page 26 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 27 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The definition of reasonable period of time a) The standard mileage rate.Adequate Accounting
depends on the facts and circumstances of your b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).One of the three rules for an accountable plan issituation. However, regardless of the facts and
that you must adequately account to your em-circumstances of your situation, actions that
ployer for your expenses. You adequately ac- For per diem amounts, use the rate intake place within the times specified in the fol-
count by giving your employer a statement of effect for the area where you stop forlowing list will be treated as taking place within a
expense, an account book, a diary, or a similar sleep or rest.reasonable period of time.
TIP
record in which you entered each expense at or
1) You receive an advance within 30 days of near the time you had it, along with documentary
the time you have an expense. evidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile- Regular federal per diem rate. The regularage, and other employee business expenses. federal per diem rate is the highest amount that2) You adequately account for your expenses (See Table 4 in chapter 5 for details you need to the federal government will pay to its employeeswithin 60 days after they were paid or in- enter in your record and documents you need to for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (orcurred. prove certain expenses.) meals and incidental expenses only) while they3) You return any excess reimbursement You must account for all amounts you re- are traveling away from home in a particularwithin 120 days after the expense was ceived from your employer during the year as area. The rates are different for different loca-paid or incurred. advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This tions. Your employer should have these ratesincludes amounts you charged to your employer4) You are given a periodic statement (at available. (Employers can get Publication 1542,by credit card or other method. You must giveleast quarterly) that asks you to either re- which gives the rates in the continental Unitedyour employer the same type of records andturn or adequately account for outstanding States for the current year.)supporting information that you would have toadvances and you comply within 120 days The standard meal allowance. The stan-give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionof the statement. dard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) ison your return. You must pay back the amount of
the federal rate for meals and incidental ex-any reimbursement or other expense allowanceEmployee meets accountable plan rules. If penses (M&IE). The rate for most small localitiesfor which you do not adequately account or thatyou meet the three rules for accountable plans, in the United States is $30. Most major cities andis more than the amount for which you ac-your employer should not include any reim- many other localities qualify for higher rates.counted.bursements in your income in box 1 of your The rates for all localities within the continental
Form W – 2. If your expenses equal your reim- United States are listed in Publication 1542.
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106. Per Diem and Car Allowances You receive an allowance only for meals andYou have no deduction since your expenses incidental expenses when your employer doesand reimbursement are equal. If your employer reimburses you for your ex- one of the following. penses using a per diem or a car allowance, youIf your employer included reimburse- can generally use the allowance as proof for the 1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inments in box 1 of your Form W – 2 and amount of your expenses. A per diem or car kind).you meet all three rules for accounta-
TIP
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-ble plans, ask your employer for a corrected 2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,quirements for the amount of your expensesForm W– 2. for the actual cost of your lodging.only if all four of the following conditions apply. 
3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your1) Your employer reasonably limits payments lodging.Accountable plan rules not met. Even of your expenses to those that are ordinary
though you are reimbursed under an accounta- and necessary in the conduct of the trade 4) Does not have a reasonable belief that you
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet or business. had (or will have) lodging expenses, such
all three rules. Those expenses that fail to meet as when you stay with friends or relatives2) The allowance is similar in form to and notall three rules for accountable plans are treated or sleep in the cab of your truck.more than the federal rate (defined later).as having been reimbursed under a nonac- 5) Computes the allowance on a basis similarcountable plan (discussed later). 3) You prove the time (dates), place, and to that used in computing your compensa-business purpose of your expenses toReimbursement of nondeductible tion, such as number of hours worked oryour employer (as explained in Table 4)expenses. You may be reimbursed under miles traveled.within a reasonable period of time.your employer’s accountable plan for expenses
related to that employer ’s business, some of 4) You are not related to your employer (as High-low rate. This is a simplified method
which are deductible as employee business ex- defined under Standard Meal Allowance in of computing the federal per diem rate for travel
penses and some of which are not deductible. chapter 1). If you are related to your em- within the continental United States. It elimi-
The reimbursements you receive for the nonde- ployer, you must be able to prove your nates the need to keep a current list of the per
ductible expenses do not meet rule (1) for ac- expenses to the IRS even if you have al- diem rate for each city.
countable plans, and they are treated as paid ready adequately accounted to your em- Under the high-low method, the per diemunder a nonaccountable plan. ployer and returned any excess amount for travel during January through Sep-reimbursement. tember of 2001 is $201 (including $42 for M&IE)Example. Your employer’s plan reimburses for certain high-cost locations. All other areasIf the IRS finds that an employer ’s travel allow-you for travel expenses while away from home have a per diem amount of $124 (including $34ance practices are not based on reasonablyon business and also for meals when you work for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-late at the office, even though you are not away (Revised March 2001), which gives the areasognition of cost differences in different areas forfrom home. The part of the arrangement that eligible for the $201 per diem amount under theper diem amounts), you will not be considered toreimburses you for the nondeductible meals high-low method for all or part of this period.)have accounted to your employer. In this case,when you work late at the office is treated as you must be able to prove your expenses to the Effective October 1, 2001, the per diempaid under a nonaccountable plan. IRS. rates under this method increased.The employer makes the decision The increased rate for certainCAUTION
!
whether to reimburse employees The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- high-cost locations is $204 (including $42 forunder an accountable plan or a nonac- ured using any one of the following methods.
TIP
M&IE). The increased rate for all other locationscountable plan. If you are an employee who is $124 (including $34 for M&IE). However, an1) For per diem amounts:receives payments under a nonaccountable employer can continue to use the lower ratesplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay- described in the preceding paragraph for thea) The regular federal per diem rate.ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily remainder of 2001 if those rates and locationsaccounting to your employer for the expenses b) The standard meal allowance. are used consistently during October, Novem-and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- ber, and December for all employees. Employ-c) The high-low rate.ments to the employer. ers who did not use the high-low method during
2) For car expenses: the first 9 months of 2001 cannot begin to use it
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
before 2002. See Revenue Procedure 2001– 47 However, if your actual expenses are more directly for her lodging and reimbursed Laura
than your allowance, you can complete Form $40 a day ($80 total) for meals and incidentalfor more information.
2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- expenses. Laura ’s actual meal expenses were
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- not more than the federal rate for Albuquerque,
Prorating the standard meal allowance on penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the which is $38 per day.
partial days of travel. The standard meal al- total amount of your expenses and reimburse- Her employer included the $4 that was more
lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you ments for the entire year. If you are using the than the federal rate [($40 − $38) × 2] in box 1 of
travel for part of a day, such as on the days you standard meal allowance or the standard mile- Laura’s Form W – 2. Her employer shows $76
depart and return, you must prorate the full-day age rate, you do not have to prove that amount. ($38 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form W– 2. This
M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- amount is not included in Laura’s income. Laura
Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-dayployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or does not have to complete Form 2106; however,
business trip to Denver. The federal rate forthe high-low rate. she must include the $4 in her gross income as
Denver is $128 per day. As required by hisYou can use either of the following methods wages (by reporting the total amount shown in
employer’s accountable plan, he accounts forto figure the federal M&IE for that day. box 1 of her Form W– 2).
the time (dates), place, and business purpose of
the trip. His employer reimburses him $128 a Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and1) Method 1: day ($256 total) for living expenses. Jeremy ’s works for the same employer as Laura. In May
living expenses in Denver are not more thana) For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days
$128 a day.standard meal allowance amount for and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. The
Jeremy’s employer does not include any ofthat day. employer reimbursed Joe $50 a day for his
the reimbursement on his Form W – 2 and Jer- meals and incidental expenses. The federal rateb) For the day you return, add 3/4 of the emy does not deduct the expenses on his return. for San Diego is $46 a day.standard meal allowance amount for Joe can prove that his actual meal expensesthe preceding day. Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day totaled $290. His employer ’s accountable plan
business trip to Boston. Matt ’s employer uses will not pay more than $50 a day for travel to San2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al- the high-low method to reimburse employees. Diego, so Joe does not give his employer thelowance using any method that you con- Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given records that prove that he actually spent $290.sistently apply and that is in accordance an advance of $180 a day ($360 total) for his However, he does account for the time, place,with reasonable business practice. For ex- lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’s and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe ’sample, an employer can treat 2 full days of actual expenses totaled $490. only business trip this year.per diem (that includes M&IE) paid for Since Matt ’s $490 of expenses are more Joe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4 days),travel away from home from 9 a.m. of one than his $360 advance, he includes the excess which is $16 more than the federal rate of $184day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt ($46 × 4 days). The employer includes the $16more than the federal rate. This is true completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex- as income on Joe ’s Form W – 2 in box 1. Theeven though a federal employee would be penses and reimbursements). He must also al- employer also enters $184 in box 12 of Joe ’slimited to a reimbursement of M&IE for locate his reimbursement between his meals Form W– 2.only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate. and other expenses as discussed later under Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-Completing Forms 2106 and 2106– EZ. ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisThe standard mileage rate. This is a set
actual expenses for the year ($290) on Formrate per mile that you can use to compute your Example 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatdeductible car expenses. For 2001, the standard year for business. Under her employer ’s ac- were not included in his income ($184). His totalmileage rate is 341/2 cents a mile for all business countable plan, she accounts for the time deductible expense, before the 50% limit, ismiles. This rate is adjusted periodically. (dates), place, and business purpose of each $106. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowanceFixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willof 20 cents a mile.allowance your employer may use to reimburse include the balance, $53, as an itemized deduc-Since Nicole ’s $3,450 expenses computedyour car expenses. Under this method, your tion.under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×employer pays an allowance that includes a
341/2 cents) are more than her $2,000 reim-combination of payments covering fixed and va- Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forbursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she item-riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to business. Under her employer ’s accountableizes her deductions to claim the excesscover your variable operating costs (such as plan, she gets reimbursed 37 cents a mile, whichexpenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your is 21/2 cents a mile more than the standard mile-ing all of her expenses and reimbursements)fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay- age rate.and enters $1,450 ($3,450 − $2,000) as an item-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer Debbie’s employer must include the reim-ized deduction.chooses to use this method, your employer will bursement amount up to the standard mileage
request the necessary records from you. Allowance MORE than the federal rate. If rate, $3,450 (10,000 miles × 341/2 cents), in box
your allowance is more than the federal rate, 12 of her Form W – 2. That amount is not taxa-Reporting your expenses with a per diem or your employer must include the allowance ble. Her employer must also include $250car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your (10,000 miles × 21/2 cents) in box 1 of her Formform of an allowance received under an ac- Form W – 2. This amount is not taxable. How- W– 2. This is the reimbursement that is morecountable plan, the following two facts affect ever, the excess allowance will be included in than the standard mileage rate.your reporting. box 1 of your Form W – 2. You must report this If Debbie ’s expenses are equal to or less
part of your allowance as if it were wage income. than the standard mileage rate, she would not1) The federal rate. If your actual expenses are less than or complete Form 2106. If her expenses are more
equal to the federal rate, you do not complete2) Whether the allowance or your actual ex- than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onpenses were more than the federal rate. plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses
your return. and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of herThe following discussions explain where to re- However, if your actual expenses are more Form W – 2). She would then claim the excessport your expenses depending upon how the than the federal rate, you can complete Form expenses as an itemized deduction.amount of your allowance compares to the fed- 2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youeral rate. must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements
Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed- up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your Returning Excess
eral rate. If your allowance is less than or Form W – 2) and all your expenses. You should Reimbursements
equal to the federal rate, the allowance will not be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.
be included in box 1 of your Form W– 2. You do Under an accountable plan, you are required to
not need to report the related expenses or the Example 1. Laura lives and works in Austin. return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
allowance on your return if your expenses are Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2 days pense allowances for your business expenses
equal to or less than the allowance. on business. Laura ’s employer paid the hotel to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must return the $90 ($45 × 2 days) advance for
the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to
return the $9 difference between the allowance
you received and the federal rate for Phoenix
[($45 − $42) × 3 days]. However, the $9 will be
reported on your Form W– 2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement that does not
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an
accountable plan, the following payments will be
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
plan:
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return
to your employer, and
2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses related to your employer’s busi-
ness. See Reimbursement of
nondeductible expenses, earlier, under Ac-
countable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business
expenses by reducing the amount reported as
your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated
as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you
are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay
whether or not you have any business ex-
penses.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
expense allowance arrangement is an account-
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-
ployer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan. Your employer will combine
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1
of your Form W– 2.
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106 – EZ
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment
expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-
Table 5.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12 — it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12 — it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenseslowance. Excess reimbursement means any Unproved amounts. If you do not prove will be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-that you actually traveled on each day for whichamount for which you did not adequately ac- come limit that applies to most miscellaneousyou received a per diem or car allowance (prov-count within a reasonable period of time. For itemized deductions.ing the elements described in Table 4), you mustexample, if you received a travel advance and
return this unproved amount of the travel ad-you did not spend all the money on business-re- Example 1. Kim’s employer gives her $500vance within a reasonable period of time. If youlated expenses, or you do not have proof of all a month ($6,000 total for the year) for her busi-do not do this, the unproved amount will beyour expenses, you have an excess reimburse- ness expenses. Kim does not have to provideconsidered paid under a nonaccountable planment. any proof of her expenses to her employer, and(discussed later). Kim can keep any funds that she does not“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-
Per diem allowance MORE than federal spend.riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-
rate. If your employer’s accountable plan pays Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-ter.
you an allowance that is higher than the federal countable plan. Her employer will include the
rate, you do not have to return the difference $6,000 on Kim ’s Form W– 2 as if it were wages.Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
between the two rates for the period you can If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,vance if your employer provides you with an
prove business-related travel expenses. How- she must complete Form 2106 or 2106 – EZ andexpense allowance before you actually have the ever, the difference will be reported as wages on itemize her deductions.expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- your Form W– 2. This excess amount is consid-pected to be no more than your expense. Under Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month byered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-an accountable plan, you are required to ade- his employer. On days that he travels away fromcussed later).quately account to your employer for this ad- home on business, his employer designates $50vance and to return any excess within a Example. Your employer sends you on a a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travelreasonable period of time. 5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-
If you do not adequately account for or do not $225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover your vin his monthly salary whether or not he was
return any excess advance within a reasonable meals and incidental expenses. The federal per traveling away from home, the arrangement is a
period of time, the amount you do not account diem for meals and incidental expenses for nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a day
for or return will be treated as having been paid Phoenix is $42. Your trip lasts only 3 days. designated by his employer is treated as paid
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). Under your employer ’s accountable plan, you under an accountable plan.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
necessary business expenses. However, you Form 2106, you can deduct parking fees andRules for Independent
must file Form 1099 – MISC, Miscellaneous In- tolls that apply to the business use of the car. IfContractors and Clients come, to report amounts paid to the indepen- you file Form 2106 – EZ, complete line 1, Part I,
dent contractor if the total of the reimbursements for the standard mileage rate and line 2 forThis section provides rules for independent con- and any other fees is $600 or more during the parking fees and tolls. See Standard Mileagetractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client calendar year. Rate in chapter 4 for information on using thisor customer. The rules cover the reporting and rate.substantiation of certain expenses discussed in
this publication, and they affect both indepen- Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction
dent contractors and their clients or customers. based on actual expenses, you cannot useCompleting FormsYou are considered an independent contrac- Form 2106– EZ. You must complete Section C,
tor if you are self-employed and you perform Part II, Form 2106. In addition, unless you lease2106 and 2106–EZservices for a customer or client. your car, you must complete Section D to show
your depreciation deduction and any sectionThis section briefly describes how employees 179 deduction you can claim.complete Forms 2106 and 2106 – EZ. Table 5Accounting to Your Client If you are still using a car that is fully depreci-explains what the employer reports on Form ated, continue to complete Section C. Since youW– 2 and what the employee reports on FormIf you received a reimbursement or an allow- have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on2106. The instructions for the forms have moreance for travel, entertainment, or gift expenses line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.information on completing them.that you incurred on behalf of a client, you
Car rentals. If you claim car rental ex-should provide an adequate accounting of these If you are self-employed, do not file penses on line 24a of Form 2106, you may haveexpenses to your client. If you do not account to Form 2106 or 2106 – EZ. Report your to reduce that expense by an inclusion amountyour client for these expenses, you must include expenses on Schedule C, C – EZ, or FCAUTION
!
as described in chapter 4. If so, you can showany reimbursements or allowances in income. (Form 1040). See the instructions for the form your car expenses and any inclusion amount asYou must keep adequate records of these ex- that you must file. follows.penses whether or not you account to your client
for these expenses. 1) Compute the inclusion amount withoutIf you do not separately account for and seek Form 2106 –EZ. You may be able to use the taking into account your business use per-reimbursement for meals and entertainment in shorter Form 2106 – EZ to claim your employee centage for the tax year.connection with providing services for a client, business expenses. You can use this form if youyou are subject to the 50% limit on those ex- 2) Report the inclusion amount from (1) onmeet all 3 of the following conditions.penses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2. line 24b, Part II, Form 2106.
1) You are an employee deducting expensesAdequate accounting. As a self-employed 3) Report on line 24c the net amount of car
attributable to your job.person, you adequately account by reporting rental expenses [total car rental expenses
your actual expenses. You should follow the minus the inclusion amount computed in2) You were not reimbursed by your em-recordkeeping rules in chapter 5. (1)].ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W – 2 are notHow to report. For information on how to The net amount of car rental expenses will be
considered reimbursements).report expenses on your tax return, see Self-em- adjusted on line 27, Part II, of Form 2106, to
ployed at the beginning of this chapter. reflect the percentage of business use for the tax3) If you claim car expenses, you use the
year.standard mileage rate.
Transportation expenses. Show your trans-Required Records for Car expenses. If you used a car to perform portation expenses that did not involve overnightClients or Customers your job as an employee, you may be able to travel on line 2, Column A, of Form 2106 or on
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener- line 2, Part I, of Form 2106– EZ. Also include onIf you are a client or customer, you generally do
ally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and then this line business expenses you have for parkingnot have to keep records to prove the reimburse-
claimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of Form fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-ments or allowances you give, in the course of
2106. Car expenses using the standard mileage ating your car or expenses of commuting be-your business, to an independent contractor for
rate can also be figured on Form 2106 – EZ by tween your home and work.travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.
completing Part II and line 1 of Part I.However, you must keep records if: Employee business expenses other than
meals and entertainment. Show your otherInformation on use of cars. If you claim1) You reimburse the contractor for entertain- employee business expenses on lines 3 and 4,any deduction for the business use of a car, youment expenses incurred on your behalf, Column A, of Form 2106 or on lines 3 and 4 ofmust answer certain questions and provide in-and Form 2106 – EZ. Do not include expenses forformation about the use of the car. The informa-
2) The contractor adequately accounts to you meals and entertainment on those lines. Line 4tion relates to the following items.
for these expenses. is for expenses such as gifts, educational ex-• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and penses (tuition and books), office-in-the-homeother personal mileage).Contractor adequately accounts. If the con- expenses, and trade and professional publica-
tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain- tions.• Percentage of business use.
ment expenses, you (the client or customer) If line 4 expenses are the only ones you• Date placed in service.must keep records documenting each element are claiming, you received no reim-of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Use • Use of other vehicles. bursements (or the reimbursements
TIP
your records as proof for a deduction on your tax • After-work use. were all included in box 1 of your Form W – 2),return. If entertainment expenses are accounted and the Special Rules discussed later do notfor separately, you are subject to the 50% limit • Whether you have evidence to support the apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 oron entertainment. If the contractor adequately deduction. 2106– EZ. Claim these amounts directly on lineaccounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you do • Whether or not the evidence is written. 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type andnot have to report the amounts on an information amount of each expense on the dotted lines andreturn. Employees must complete Section A, Part II, include the total on line 20.Form 2106, or Part II, Form 2106 – EZ, to pro-Contractor does not adequately account. If vide this information.the contractor does not adequately account to
you for allowances or reimbursements of enter- Standard mileage rate. If you claim a de- Meal and entertainment expenses. Show
tainment expenses, you do not have to keep duction based on the standard mileage rate in- the full amount of your expenses for
records of these items. You are not subject to stead of your actual expenses, you must business-related meals and entertainment on
the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. You complete Section B, Part II, Form 2106. The line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Incl ude meals
can deduct the reimbursements or allowances amount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to line 1, while away from your tax home ove rnight and
as payment for services if they are ordinary and Part I, Form 2106. In addition, on line 2, Part I, other business meals and ente rtainment. Enter
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-50% of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertain- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
tions. If you are an employee, deduct yourment expenses on line 9, Column B, of Form tified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the payment
employee business expenses (as figured on2106. goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To
Form 2106 or 2106– EZ) on line 20 of Scheduleallocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses theIf you file Form 2106 – EZ, enter the full
A (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemizedworksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.amount of your meals and entertainment on the
deductions, including employee business ex-His completed worksheet follows.line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by
penses, are subject to a 2%-of-50%. Enter the result on line 5. 1. Enter the total amount of adjusted-gross-income limit. This limit is figuredreimbursements your employerHours of service limits. If you are subject on line 25 of Schedule A (Form 1040).gave you that were not reportedto the Department of Transportation ’s “hours of
to you in box 1 of Form W – 2 . . 3,000 3. Limit on total itemized deductions. Ifservice” limits (as explained earlier under Indi- 2. Enter the total amount of your your adjusted gross income ( line 34 of Formviduals subject to “hours of service ” limits in expenses for the periods covered 1040) is more than $132,950 ($66,475 if you arechapter 2), use 60% instead of 50%. by this reimbursement ....... 4,500
married filing separately), the total of certain3. Of the amount on line 2, enter
your total expense for meals and itemized deductions, including employee busi-Reimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form entertainment ............ 2,000 ness expenses, may be limited. See your form
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter the2106 (You cannot use Form 2106 – EZ.) the instructions for information on how to figure thisresult as a decimal (rounded to atamounts your employer (or third party) reim- limit.least three places) .........  .444 bursed you that were not reported to you in box 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the1 of your Form W– 2. This includes any amount result here and in Column B, line 7 1,332 Special Rulesreported under code L in box 12 of Form W– 2. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter
the result here and in Column A, This section discusses special rules that applyAllocating your reimbursement. If you line 7 ................. 1,668 only to government officials who are paid on awere reimbursed under an accountable plan and
On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668 fee basis, performing artists, and disabled em-want to deduct excess expenses that were not
($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) in ployees with impairment-related work ex-reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-
Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Column penses.bursement. This is necessary when your em-
B.ployer pays your reimbursement in the following
manner:
Officials Paid on a Fee BasisAfter you complete the form. After you have
1) Pays you a single amount that covers completed your Form 2106 or 2106 – EZ, follow Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em-meals and/or entertainment, as well as the directions on that form to deduct your ex- ployee business expenses whether or not theyother business expenses, and penses on the appropriate line of your tax return. itemize their other deductions on Schedule AFor most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule A2) Does not clearly identify how much is for (Form 1040).(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentdeductible meals and/or entertainment.
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, or Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-You must allocate that single payment so that a disabled employee with impairment-related ployed by a state or local government and whoyou know how much to enter in Column A and work expenses, see Special Rules, later. are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. TheyColumn B of line 7 of Form 2106. can deduct their business expenses in perform-
ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossLimits on employee business expenses.Example. Rob’s employer paid him an ex- income rather than as a miscellaneous itemizedYour employee business expenses may be sub-pense allowance of $5,000 this year under an deduction.ject to any of the three limits described next.accountable plan. The $5,000 payment con- They are figured in the following order on thesisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter- If you are a fee-basis official, include yourspecified form.tainment and car expenses. The employer did employee business expenses from line 10 of
not clearly show how much of the $3,000 was for 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer- Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106 – EZ in the
the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu- tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub- total on line 32 of Form 1040. Prin t “FBO” and
ally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 for ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, you the amount of your employee busine ss ex-
airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 for figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of penses in the space to th e left of line 32 of Form
car expenses). Form 2106 – EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.) 1040.
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log
Date
6/7/01
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/8/01
6/9/01
6/10/01
6/11/01
6/12/01
6/13/01
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 18.25
2.00
16.50
17.25
$ 62.00
$993.00
8.00
Expenses
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with your workplace that are necessary for you the 70% business use. He adds this amountExpenses of Certain
to be able to work. ($2,156) to the depreciation deduction ($2,142)Performing Artists
and reports the total ($4,298) on line 1, Part I.You are disabled if you have:If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to His other transportation expenses for park-• A physical or mental disability (for exam-deduct your employee business expenses as an ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He entersple, blindness or deafness) that function-adjustment to gross income rather than as a this amount on line 2, Part I. David ’s employerally limits your being employed, ormiscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify, reimbursed him a total of $2,940 for his car andyou must meet all of the following requirements. • A physical or mental impairment (for ex- transportation expenses. This amount was paid
ample, a sight or hearing impairment) that from an accountable plan and was not shown on1) During the tax year, you perform services
substantially limits one or more of your David’s Form W– 2. However, since he is claim-in the performing arts for at least two em-
major life activities, such as performing ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-ployers.
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- ments, he must show the entire reimbursement2) You receive at least $200 each from any ing, learning, or working. amount on line 7, Column A, Part I. Since Davidtwo of these employers. had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-
You can deduct impairment-related expenses3) Your related performing-arts business ex- ters his excess deductible expenses ($2,548) on
as business expenses if they are:penses are more than 10% of your gross line 10, Part I. He can deduct these expenses
income from the performance of those ser- (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income• Necessary for you to do your work satis-vices. limit) on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040) if hefactorily, itemizes his deductions.4) Your adjusted gross income is not more • For goods and services not required orthan $16,000 before deducting these busi- used, other than incidentally, in your per- Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee ofness expenses. sonal activities, and Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a
typical week, Bill leaves his home on Long Is-Special rules for married persons. If you are • Not specifically covered under other in- land on Monday morning and drives to Albany tomarried, you must file a joint return unless you come tax laws. exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospectivelived apart from your spouse at all times during
customers. Then he drives to Troy to showthe tax year. If you file a joint return, you must Example. You are blind. You must use a Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately reader to do your work. You use the reader both partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,for both you and your spouse. However, require- during your regular working hours at your place he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent forment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com- of work and outside your regular working hours Town Department Store, to discuss the new line.bined adjusted gross income. away from your place of work. The reader ’s He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out toWhere to report. If you meet all of the above services are only for your work. You can deduct dinner to discuss Attire Co. ’s buying Fashion ’srequirements, you should first complete Form your expenses for the reader as business ex- new line of clothing.2106 or 2106 – EZ. Then you include your penses. Bill purchased his car on January 3, 1998.performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106 – EZ in the Illustrated Examples pense purposes. He records his total mileage,total on line 32 of Form 1040. Write “QPA” and business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for thethe amount of your performing-arts-related ex- The following examples illustrate the reporting of year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-penses in the space to the left of line 32 of Form travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex- nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-1040. penses on Forms 2106 and 2106– EZ. Business pense and Entertainment Record, shown inIf you do not meet all of the above require- use of a car is shown using actual car expenses Table 7. He obtains receipts for his expenses forments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orpenses as an adjustment to gross income. Example 2. Sample records that prove some of more.Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or the claimed expenses are also shown.
During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,0002106– EZ and deduct your employee business
expenses as an itemized deduction on line 20 of miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.Example 1. David Pine purchased a car for
Schedule A (Form 1040). Following the instructions for Part II of Form$18,500 (including sales tax) on January 6,
2106, he answers all the questions and figures2001. In 2001, he used the car 70% for business
his car expense to be $6,900 (20,000 businesspurposes. A sample page from David’s logbook
Impairment-Related Work miles × 341/2 cents standard mileage rate.is illustrated in Table 6. He records his business
Expenses of Disabled Employees mileage (but not his personal miles) and ex- His total employee business expenses are
penses daily. shown in the following table.If you are an employee with a physical or mental David uses Form 2106 to claim actual cardisability, your impairment-related work ex- Type of Expense Amountexpenses. He completes Part II, Section A, aspenses are not subject to the Parking fees and tolls .......... $  3 2 5shown later on his illustrated form. He does not Car expenses ............... 6,9002%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies claim the section 179 deduction. He uses the Meals .................... 2,632to most other employee business expenses. Af- Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning ..... 8,975MACRS double declining balance methodter you complete Form 2106 or 2106– EZ, enter Entertainment ............... 1,870(200% DB) to determine his depreciation deduc-your impairment-related work expenses from Gifts, education, etc. ........... 4 3 0tion.line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106– EZ Total $21,132
His depreciation deduction normally wouldon line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040), and Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300be $2,590 [$18,500 (unadjusted basis) × 70%identify the type and amount of this expense on per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill did(business use) × 20% (from Table 3 )]. However,the dotted line next to line 27. Enter your em-
not have to account to his employer for theit is limited in the first year to $2,142 [$3,060ployee business expenses that are unrelated to
reimbursement and the $3,600 was included as(from the Maximum Depreciation Deduction foryour disability from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6
income in box 1 of his Form W – 2.Cars table shown in chapter 4) × 70%]. Heof Form 2106 – EZ on line 20 of Schedule A
enters these amounts in Part II, Section D. Because Bill’s reimbursement was included(Form 1040).
in his income and he is using the standard mile-His other car expenses included $3,080 forImpairment-related work expenses are your
gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this age rate for his car expenses, he files Formallowable expenses for attendant care at your
amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by 2106–EZ with his tax return.workplace and other expenses in connection
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
4,298
1,190
5,488
2,940
2,548
2,548
2,548
OMB No. 1545-0139Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form
2106 to your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses by 60% (.60) instead of 50%. For details, see
instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified
performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on
where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2001)
Part I
(99)
2001
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
16 0 1
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
3,080
3,080
2,156
2,142
4,298
18,500
12,950
200DB 20%
2,590
2,590
3,060
2,142
2,142
Page 2Form 2106 (2001)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2001
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or
Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 34 1⁄2¢ (.345) 22
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28
Depreciation. Enter amount
from line 38 below
28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C
for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter amount of section 179
deduction (see instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you elected the
section 179 deduction)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the limit from the table in
the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35 or
line 37. Also enter this amount
on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2001)
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 7. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 2, 2001 To: August 8, 2001 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 6, 2001 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
6,900
8,975
430
2,251
18,881
139 8
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 341⁄2¢
(.345)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 60%
(.60) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2001)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting expenses attributable to your job.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2001.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2001, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
A Change To Note
The standard mileage rate has been
increased to 34
1⁄2 cents for each mile of
business use in 2001.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2001 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
2001
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Search regulations and the Internal Reve- Walk-in. You can walk in to many post
nue Code. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick
up certain forms, instructions, and pub-• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot7. lications. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerytax issues and news. stores, copy centers, city and county govern-
• Get information on starting and operating ments, credit unions, and office supply stores
a small business. have an extensive collection of products avail-How To Get Tax able to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from
You can also reach us with your computer reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices and
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.Help libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regu-
lations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-
TaxFax Service. Using the phone at- lative Bulletins available for research purposes.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, tached to your fax machine, you canorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- receive forms and instructions by call-tions, and get more information from the IRS in ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions from Mail. You can send your order forseveral ways. By selecting the method that is the prompts. When you order forms, enter the forms, instructions, and publications tobest for you, you will have quick and easy ac- catalog number for the form you need. The items the Distribution Center nearest to youcess to tax help. you request will be faxed to you. and receive a response within 10 workdays after
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you For help with transmission problems, call the your request is received. Find the address that
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608. applies to your part of the country.
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
• Western part of U.S.:payer Advocate.
Western Area Distribution CenterThe Taxpayer Advocate represents your in- Phone. Many services are available by Rancho Cordova, CA 95743– 0001terests and concerns within the IRS by protect- phone.
ing your rights and resolving problems that have • Central part of U.S.:
not been fixed through normal channels. While Central Area Distribution Center
Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law P.O. Box 8903• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-or make a technical tax decision, they can clear Bloomington, IL 61702– 8903tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-up problems that resulted from previous con- rent and prior year forms, instructions, and • Eastern part of U.S. and foreigntacts and ensure that your case is given a com- publications. addresses:plete and impartial review.
Eastern Area Distribution CenterTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate: • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with P.O. Box 85074your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at Richmond, VA 23261– 5074
1–877–777–4778. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–• Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040. CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publica-4059 to ask tax questions or to order tion 1796, Federal Tax Products on• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate forms and publications. CD-ROM, and obtain:office in your area.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a listen to pre-recorded messages covering • Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-TTY/TDD user. various tax topics. cations.
For more information, see Publication 1546, • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.Evaluating the quality of our telephone ser-The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
vices. To ensure that IRS representatives give • Popular tax forms that may be filled in
Free tax services. To find out what services accurate, courteous, and professional answers, electronically, printed out for submission,
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free we evaluate the quality of our telephone ser- and saved for recordkeeping.
Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi- vices in several ways. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-
• A second IRS representative sometimesscribes other free tax information services,
monitors live telephone calls. That person The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-including tax education and assistance pro-
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) bygrams and a list of TeleTax topics.
not keep a record of any taxpayer’s name calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at
Personal computer. With your per- or tax identification number. www.irs.gov. The first release is available in
sonal computer and modem, you can mid-December and the final release is available• We sometimes record telephone calls toaccess the IRS on the Internet at in late January.evaluate IRS assistors objectively. Wewww.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Re-hold these recordings no longer than onecan: source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM thatweek and use them only to measure the contains information important to small busi-• Find answers to questions you may have. quality of assistance. nesses. It is available in mid-February. You can
• Download forms and publications or • We value our customers’ opinions. get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676
search for forms and publications by topic Throughout this year, we will be surveying or visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov.
or keyword. our customers for their opinions on our
service.• View forms that may be filled in electroni-
cally, print the completed form, and then
save the form for recordkeeping.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published
in the last few years.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 37

Page 38 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
report if you leased a car (other than an electric If any of these apply to you, use the appendix
car) for 30 days or more. The tables are num- for the year you first leased the car. (See chapterAppendices
bered. 4.)
Appendices B – 1 through B – 5 show theThere are ten appendices.
lease inclusion amounts that you may need toAppendices A – 1 through A – 5 show the
report if you leased an electric car.lease inclusion amounts that you may need to
Page 38 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 39 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1993 through 1997
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
40
48
55
63
73
87
99
112
125
137
150
163
175
189
207
233
259
285
310
335
362
387
412
438
464
490
515
540
566
591
617
643
669
695
720
746
771
796
822
847
874
899
925
950
975
39
49
58
68
81
97
113
129
145
161
176
193
208
225
248
280
312
344
376
408
440
471
503
535
567
599
631
662
694
726
757
790
822
854
886
918
950
981
1,013
1,045
1,077
1,109
1,141
1,172
1,204
28
43
56
71
89
113
136
159
184
207
230
254
277
301
336
383
429
477
524
570
617
665
711
758
804
851
899
946
992
1,039
1,086
1,133
1,180
1,227
1,274
1,320
1,367
1,415
1,462
1,508
1,556
1,603
1,649
1,696
1,743
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1993
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1994
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1995
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1996
$$ $$$ $
5th and Later
21
32
42
53
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
$
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
1,002
1,027
1,052
1,078
1,104
1,130
1,155
1,194
1,245
1,295
1,347
1,398
1,450
1,500
1,551
1,236
1,268
1,299
1,331
1,363
1,395
1,427
1,475
1,538
1,602
1,666
1,730
1,793
1,857
1,921
1,790
1,837
1,884
1,931
1,977
2,024
2,072
2,142
2,235
2,330
2,423
2,517
2,611
2,704
2,799
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,801, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1994, Revenue Procedure 94-53 (1994-2 CB 712)
For 1993, Revenue Procedure 93-35 (1993-2 CB 472)
For 1995, Revenue Procedure 95-9 (1995-1 CB 498)
For 1996, Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681)
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1987, use Appendix B.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
1
4
6
9
12
5
10
15
20
28
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
55
63
71
79
88
96
104
112
120
128
137
145
153
161
169
178
186
194
202
210
218
227
235
243
251
259
268
276
284
292
300
308
317
325
333
341
349
358
370
386
403
419
435
452
468
484
501
517
546
587
627
668
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
99
108
122
140
158
176
193
211
229
247
265
283
301
319
337
355
373
391
409
427
445
463
481
498
516
534
552
570
588
606
624
642
660
678
695
713
732
750
768
785
812
848
884
920
956
991
1,027
1,063
1,099
1,135
1,198
1,287
1,377
1,467 2,178 3,018 2,613
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
$$ $$$$ $ 8
16
25
33
43
56
70
83
96
110
123
136
150
163
183
210
236
263
290
317
343
370
396
423
449
476
502
529
556
582
608
635
662
688
715
742
769
795
822
849
875
901
928
955
981
1,008
1,035
1,062
1,087
1,114
1,140
1,168
1,207
1,261
1,313
1,367
1,420
1,474
1,527
1,580
1,633
1,686
1,779
1,913
2,046
12
22
31
41
53
70
85
101
117
133
149
165
181
197
221
252
285
316
348
380
412
444
476
508
540
571
604
635
667
699
731
763
794
827
859
891
922
955
986
1,018
1,050
1,082
1,114
1,145
1,178
1,209
1,241
1,273
1,305
1,337
1,369
1,400
1,449
1,512
1,577
1,640
1,704
1,767
1,832
1,896
1,959
2,023
2,134
2,294
2,453
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
2,263
2,337
2,466
2,649
2,834
Page 40 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 41 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
16
19
22
26
29
32
39
47
53
61
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
32
35
39
42
47
53
60
66
73
79
85
92
98
105
111
118
124
131
137
144
150
157
163
170
176
183
189
196
202
208
215
221
228
234
241
247
254
260
267
273
280
286
296
309
322
335
348
361
374
387
399
412
435
467
500
532
68
75
82
89
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
199
214
227
242
256
270
284
299
313
327
341
355
369
384
398
412
426
441
455
469
483
497
512
526
540
554
569
582
597
611
625
646
675
703
732
760
788
817
845
874
902
952
1,023
1,094
1,165 1,729 2,394 2,073
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
$$ $$$$ $
48
59
69
80
90
101
111
122
132
148
169
190
212
233
253
275
296
316
338
359
380
402
423
443
464
486
507
528
549
570
591
612
633
654
675
696
718
739
759
780
802
823
843
865
886
907
928
960
1,002
1,044
1,086
1,128
1,171
1,212
1,255
1,297
1,339
1,413
1,518
1,623
58
71
83
96
108
121
134
146
160
178
204
229
254
279
305
330
355
381
406
431
456
481
506
532
557
582
607
633
658
683
708
734
759
784
810
835
860
885
911
936
961
986
1,012
1,037
1,062
1,087
1,113
1,151
1,201
1,252
1,302
1,353
1,403
1,454
1,504
1,555
1,606
1,694
1,821
1,947
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
964
993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
1,796
1,854
1,956
2,102
2,248
2
4
6
8
10
13
3
7
11
15
20
25
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
4
10
17
23
29
38
4
13
20
28
35
45
6
14
23
32
41
53
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 41

Page 42 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
23
28
9
17
25
33
42
10
20
30
40
49
12
23
34
45
57
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
49,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
25
29
33
37
41
45
50
54
60
68
77
85
93
102
110
119
127
135
144
152
160
169
177
185
194
202
210
219
227
235
244
252
260
269
277
285
294
302
311
319
327
336
344
352
361
369
381
398
415
432
448
465
482
498
515
532
561
603
644
686
36
45
54
63
72
81
91
100
109
118
132
150
168
187
205
223
241
259
278
296
314
333
351
369
388
406
424
443
461
479
497
516
534
552
571
589
607
626
644
662
680
699
717
735
754
772
790
808
836
873
909
945
982
1,019
1,055
1,092
1,129
1,165
1,229
1,320
1,412
1,504
52
66
79
93
107
121
133
147
160
174
194
222
249
276
303
330
358
385
412
439
467
493
521
548
574
602
629
656
683
710
738
765
792
819
846
873
901
927
954
982
1,009
1,036
1,063
1,090
1,117
1,145
1,172
1,199
1,240
1,294
1,348
1,403
1,457
1,511
1,566
1,620
1,673
1,728
1,823
1,959
2,095
2,230
62
78
95
111
127
143
160
176
193
209
234
266
298
331
364
396
429
461
493
527
558
591
623
656
689
721
754
786
819
852
884
916
949
982
1,014
1,047
1,079
1,112
1,145
1,177
1,210
1,242
1,275
1,308
1,340
1,372
1,405
1,438
1,486
1,551
1,617
1,681
1,747
1,811
1,876
1,942
2,007
2,072
2,186
2,349
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
2,317
2,392
2,523
2,711
2,899
3,087
2,511
2,674
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 I.R.B. 274).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 42 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 43 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
22
27
9
16
24
33
41
10
20
30
39
48
11
22
33
44
56
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
53
59
67
75
83
91
100
108
116
124
132
140
149
157
165
173
181
189
198
206
214
222
230
238
247
255
263
271
279
287
296
304
312
320
328
336
345
353
361
373
390
406
422
439
455
471
488
504
520
549
590
631
671
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
97
106
115
129
147
165
183
201
218
236
254
272
290
308
326
343
361
379
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
540
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
702
720
738
755
773
791
818
854
890
926
961
997
1,033
1,068
1,104
1,140
1,203
1,292
1,382
1,472
51
64
78
91
104
117
131
144
158
171
190
217
243
270
296
324
350
377
403
430
456
482
510
536
563
590
616
642
669
695
722
748
775
802
828
855
881
908
935
961
987
1,014
1,040
1,067
1,093
1,120
1,147
1,173
1,213
1,266
1,319
1,372
1,426
1,479
1,532
1,585
1,638
1,692
1,784
1,917
2,049
2,182
61
77
92
109
125
141
156
173
188
204
229
260
292
324
356
387
419
451
483
515
547
579
610
643
674
705
738
770
801
833
865
897
929
961
993
1,024
1,057
1,088
1,119
1,151
1,184
1,215
1,248
1,279
1,311
1,343
1,375
1,407
1,455
1,518
1,582
1,645
1,709
1,772
1,836
1,901
1,964
2,027
2,139
2,298
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
2,267
2,341
2,469
2,653
2,837
3,020
2,458
2,617
$$ $$$$ $
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 43

Page 44 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997
1
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
1
This table only applies to lease terms beginning after August 5, 1997.
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
1
9
17
25
34
42
50
58
66
74
83
91
99
111
128
144
160
177
193
209
226
242
259
287
328
369
410
4
22
40
58
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
201
219
246
282
318
354
389
425
461
497
533
568
632
721
811
900
7
33
60
87
114
140
167
194
220
247
273
300
326
366
419
472
525
579
632
686
738
792
845
938
1,071
1,204
1,337
9
41
73
104
136
169
200
232
264
296
328
359
392
440
503
567
631
695
759
822
887
950
1,014
1,125
1,285
1,444
1,604
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
4
5
13
21
29
38
46
54
62
70
79
87
95
103
115
132
148
164
181
197
214
230
246
263
291
332
373
414
11
29
47
65
83
101
119
137
155
172
190
208
226
253
289
325
361
396
432
468
504
540
576
639
728
818
908
18
45
71
98
124
151
177
204
231
258
284
311
338
378
430
484
537
591
644
697
750
803
856
949
1,083
1,215
1,348
21
52
85
116
148
180
212
244
275
307
340
372
403
451
515
578
643
706
770
834
898
962
1,025
1,137
1,296
1,456
1,615
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
4
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
Page 44 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 45 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
14
28
43
57
71
86
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
206
235
263
291
320
348
377
405
433
462
511
582
654
724
21
42
62
83
105
126
147
168
189
211
232
252
273
305
347
389
432
473
516
558
600
643
684
758
864
968
1,075
26
51
77
102
127
151
177
202
228
253
278
304
329
367
417
468
518
569
619
669
720
771
822
910
1,036
1,163
1,289
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
235
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
833
891
949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
17
31
45
59
74
88
102
116
130
145
159
173
187
208
237
266
294
322
351
379
407
436
464
514
585
656
727
26
47
69
90
110
132
153
174
195
216
237
258
279
311
353
394
437
480
521
564
606
648
690
763
869
975
1,080
32
57
82
107
133
157
183
209
234
259
284
310
335
373
423
474
524
574
625
675
727
777
828
916
1,042
1,168
1,295
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
838
897
955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 726).
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 45

Page 46 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
9
17
25
33
42
50
58
66
74
82
91
99
107
119
136
152
168
185
201
217
234
250
266
295
336
377
417
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
200
218
236
263
298
334
370
406
442
478
513
549
585
648
737
826
916
33
60
86
113
139
165
192
218
245
272
299
325
352
391
445
498
551
604
657
710
764
817
870
962
1,095
1,229
1,361
40
71
104
135
167
199
231
263
295
326
358
390
422
470
533
597
661
724
788
852
915
979
1,043
1,155
1,314
1,472
1,632
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
Page 46 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 47 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Local transportation ....... 1 3 Unclaimed ............ 2 6AE
Luxury skyboxes ......... 1 1 Related to employer ........ 5Accountable plan ......... 2 6 Electric cars .......... 15, 19
Luxury water travel ........ 8 Reporting businessAccounting to employer .... 2 7 Employer-provided vehicles . . . 2
expenses ............ 2 5Actual car expenses ..... 16, 30 Entertainment:
Returning excess50% limit ............. 1 1Actual cost .............. 5 M reimbursement ......... 2 8Deductible expenses . . . 10, 30Adequate accounting ...... 2 7 M&IE .................. 5Facilities .............. 9 Rural mail carriers ........ 1 5Adequate records ........ 2 3 MACRS depreciation ...... 1 8Tickets ............ 10, 25Advances, travel ....... 26, 29 MACRS depreciation chart . . 19Exceptions to the 50% limit . . 12Advertising ........... 12, 14 Main place of business or SExcess depreciation of car . . 21Allocating between work ................. 3 Section 179 deduction . . . 17, 21Excess reimbursements . . 26, 28business and Meal allowance ........... 5 Self-employed person .... 12, 25Expenses for others ......4 ,  1 1nonbusiness expenses . . 7, 10 Meal allowance, standard . . . 27 Skyboxes .............. 1 1Extravagant expenses ....5 ,  1 0Allocation of reimbursement . . . Meal expenses .......... 3 0 Spouse, expenses for .....4 ,  1 1................... 3 1 Meal expenses: Standard meal allowance . . 5, 27Allowances and F Actual cost ............ 5 Standard meal allowance:reimbursements ........ 2 6 Fair market value of car .... 2 2 Standard meal allowance . . . 5 Amount ............... 6Armed Forces ..........3 ,  1 4 FAVR allowance ......... 2 8 Meals and entertainment: Charitable travel ......... 5Artists, performing ........ 3 2 50% limit ............. 1 1Federal crime investigations Educational travel ........ 5Assistance ( See Tax help) or prosecutions ......... 4 Meals and incidental Investment-related travel . . . 5Associated entertainment . . . 11 expenses ............ 2 7Federal rate ............ 2 7 Medical travel .......... 5Away from home .......... 3 Meetings, expenses ofFee-basis officials ........ 3 1 Standard mileage rate:
attending ........... 10-11Forms: Amount .............. 1 5
Membership fees .......... 92106 ............. 30, 32 Depreciation adjustment . . 23B 2106– E Z .......... 30, 32 Military personnel .......3 ,  1 4 How to report ........ 28, 30Basis of car .......... 16-17 4562 ............... 2 5 More information ( See Tax help) Substantiation of expenses . . 23Business and nonbusiness 4797 ............... 2 1 Suggestions ............. 2entertainment .......... 1 0 Free tax services ......... 3 7 NBusiness associate ........ 4
Necessary expense ........ 2Business trip ............6 - 7 TG Nonaccountable plan ...... 2 9Business use of car ..... 16-17, Tax help ............... 3 7Gifts, business .......... 1 3 North American area ....... 921-22 Tax home ............... 3Business use of car: Taxpayer Advocate ....... 3 7HMore-than-50%-use test . . 17 O Temporary assignment ....4 ,  1 3Hauling tools ............ 1 4Qualified business use . . . 17 Office in the home ........ 1 4 Temporary work location .... 1 3Help ( See Tax help) Officials paid on a fee basis . . 31 Tickets:High-low rate ........... 2 7 Ordinary expense ......... 2 Charity event .......... 1 0C Home used as office ...... 1 4 Entertainment ....... 10, 25Car allowance ......... 27-28 Hours of service limits ..... 1 3 Traffic violations ........ 1 6PCar defined ............ 1 6 How to report business Trade-in of car ........ 18, 23Per diem allowances:Car expenses ........... 1 5 expenses ............ 2 5 Traffic tickets ........... 1 6High-low rate .......... 2 7Car pools .............. 1 4 Transient ............... 3Meals and incidentalCar rentals ........... 22, 30 I Transportation ........... 3 0expenses rate ........ 2 7Clean-fuel cars ........ 15, 19 Impairment-related work Regular rate .......... 2 7 Transportation expenses .... 1 3Client, expenses paid for .... 3 0 expenses ............ 3 2 Reporting expenses . . . 27-28 Transportation workers ...... 6Club dues ............... 9 Incidental expenses ........ 5 Performing artists ........ 3 2 Travel:Comments .............. 2 Inclusion amount ......... 2 2 Personal trip ........... 6 ,  8 Advance ............. 2 9Commuting ............. 1 4 Incomplete records ....... 2 4 Allocation rules ......... 7Personal use of car ..... 16-17,
Conventions ...........8 ,  1 1 20-22 Away from home ........ 3Indefinite assignment ....... 4
Cost of car ............. 1 6 Deductible expenses .... 2 ,  4Placed in service, car ...... 1 6Independent contractor ..... 3 0
Cruise ships ............. 9 Expenses for others ...... 4Probationary work period .... 4Itinerant ................ 3
Customer, expenses paid In the United States ...... 6Prorating standard meal
f o r ................. 3 0 Luxury water ........... 8allowance ............ 2 8K Meals expense .......... 4Proving expenses ........ 2 3Keeping records ....... 23, 25 Outside the United States . . 6Publications ( See Tax help)D Purpose of travel ........ 6Purpose of travel .......... 6Depreciation of car: TTY/TDD information ...... 3 7L
Chart, MACRS ......... 1 9 Lavish expenses ........5 ,  1 0
RExcess .............. 2 1 Leasing a car ......... 22, 30 UReasonable period ........ 2 6General rules ........ 16-19 Limits: Unadjusted basis ......... 1 7Recordkeeping .......... 2 350% limit ............. 1 1Limits ............... 1 9 Unclaimed reimbursement . . . 26Recovery period of car . . . 18, 21Depreciation of car ...... 1 9Standard mileage rate .... 2 3 Union hall, trips from ...... 1 4Regular federal per diemEmployee businessYear of disposition ...... 2 3 rate ................ 2 7 Unrecovered basis of car . . . 21expenses ........... 3 1Directly– related Exceptions to 50% limit . . . 12 Reimbursements:entertainment .......... 1 1 Gifts ................ 1 3 Excess .............. 2 6
Disabled employees, VLuxury water travel ....... 8 For personal expenses .....
expenses of ........... 3 2 Vehicle provided byMeals and entertainment . . 11 ............... 26-27
Disposition of car ....... 17, 22 employer ............. 2 6Section 179 deduction . . 17, 21 General rules .......... 2 6
Documentary evidence ..... 2 3 Volunteers .............. 2Skyboxes ............ 1 1 Reporting ............ 3 1
Page 47

Page 48 of 48 of Publication 463 11:17 - 21-DEC-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
W
Water travel ............. 8
I
Page 48