Userid: CPM Schema: instrx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 9  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 19  11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2025
Instructions for Schedule C 
(Form 1040)
Profit or Loss From Business
Section references are to the Internal Revenue Code unless 
otherwise noted.
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Schedule C and its instructions, such as legislation enacted after 
they were published, go to IRS.gov/ScheduleC.
What’s New
Standard mileage rate. For 2025, the standard mileage rate 
for the cost of operating your car for business use is 70 cents per 
mile.
Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction.  The 
expense is now reported on line 27a.
Other expenses (from line 48). The expense is now reported 
on line 27b.
Bonus depreciation. Certain qualified property acquired and 
placed in service after January 19, 2025, can take a 100% bonus 
depreciation. Y ou can also elect to use the previous bonus 
depreciation phase-down rates instead of 100% expensing. See 
the Instructions for Form 4562 for more information.
Section 179 deduction dollar limits increased. Beginning in 
2025, the maximum section 179 expense deduction is $2.5 
million. This limit is reduced by the amount by which the cost of 
section 179 property placed in service during the tax year 
exceeds $4 million. See the Instructions for Form 4562 for more 
information.
Domestic research and experimental expenditures. 
Beginning in 2025, you can deduct your domestic research and 
experimental expenditures as current business expenses or you 
can elect to capitalize and amortize the expenditures ratable 
over a period of 60 months or more. See Revenue Procedure 
2025-28 for more information.
Qualified sound recording productions. Y ou may be eligible 
to deduct up to $150,000 of qualified sound recording production 
costs. This applies to costs starting after July 4, 2025, but before 
January 1, 2026. See section 181 for more information.
No tax on qualified tips. Beginning in 2025, you may be 
eligible to take a deduction for qualified tips you received in 
2025. Y ou can’t deduct more than $25,000 of those tips. The 
deduction is claimed on Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) not on your 
Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) and its instructions 
for more information.
No tax on qualified overtime. Beginning in 2025, if you 
earned qualified overtime pay you may be eligible to deduct up 
to $12,500 ($25,000 if married filing jointly) of your qualified 
overtime compensation. The deduction is claimed on Schedule 
1-A (Form 1040) not on your Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A 
(Form 1040) and its instructions for more information.
No tax on car loan interest. If you are self-employed and use 
your vehicle for personal and business use, you may be eligible 
to take a deduction for the interest for the personal use on 
Schedule 1-A (Form 1040). Y ou can only deduct the part of the 
interest expense that represents the business use of your vehicle 
on Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) and its 
instructions for more information.
Reminders
Form 1040-SS filers and business use of home. T axpayers 
who file Form 1040-SS and claim a deduction for business use 
of home will report the expense on Schedule C (Form 1040). 
Filers will use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Y our 
Home, if applicable, to figure the deduction and report the 
amount on Schedule C, line 30.
Redesigned Form 1040-SS. Schedule C (Form 1040) is 
available to be filed with Form 1040-SS, if applicable. It replaces 
Form 1040-SS, Part IV . For additional information, see the 
Instructions for Form 1040-SS.
Business meals deduction. The business meals deduction is 
50%.
Reporting nontaxable Medicaid waiver payments. Certain 
Medicaid waiver payments that are reported to you on Form 
1099-MISC or Form 1099-NEC may be nontaxable. For 
information on how to report these payments on Schedule C, see 
Medicaid waiver payments, later.
Gig economy tax center. The gig (or on-demand, sharing, or 
access) economy refers to an activity where people earn income 
providing on-demand work, services, or goods. Go to 
IRS.gov/Gig to get more information about the tax consequences 
of participating in the gig economy.
Excess business loss limitation. If you report a loss on 
line 31 of your Schedule C (Form 1040), you may be subject to a 
business loss limitation. The disallowed loss resulting from the 
limitation will not be reflected on line 31 of your Schedule C. 
Instead, use Form 461 to determine the amount of your excess 
business loss, which will be included as income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8p. Any disallowed loss resulting from this 
limitation will be treated as a net operating loss that must be 
carried forward and deducted in a subsequent year.
See Form 461 and its instructions for details on the excess 
business loss limitation.
Small Business and Self-Employed (SB/SE) Tax Center. Do 
you need help with a tax issue or preparing your return, or do you 
need a free publication or form? SB/SE serves taxpayers who 
file Form 1040 or 1040-SR, Schedules C, E, and F , or Form 
2106, as well as small business taxpayers with assets under $10 
million. For additional information, go to the Small Business and 
Self-Employed T ax Center at IRS.gov/SmallBiz.
Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040) (2025)  Catalog Number 24329W
Jan 2, 2026 Department of the T reasury  Internal Revenue Service  www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
General Instructions
Use Schedule C (Form 1040) to report income or (loss) from a 
business you operated or a profession you practiced as a sole 
proprietor. An activity qualifies as a business if your primary 
purpose for engaging in the activity is for income or profit and 
you are involved in the activity with continuity and regularity. For 
example, a sporadic activity, a not-for-profit activity, or a hobby 
does not qualify as a business. T o report income from a 
nonbusiness activity, see the Instructions for Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8j.
Also, use Schedule C to report (a) wages and expenses you had 
as a statutory employee; (b) income and deductions of certain 
qualified joint ventures; and (c) certain amounts shown on a 
Form 1099, such as Form 1099-MISC, Form 1099-NEC, and 
Form 1099-K. See the instructions on your Form 1099 for more 
information about what to report on Schedule C.
Y ou may be subject to state and local taxes and other 
requirements such as business licenses and fees. Check with 
your state and local governments for more information.
Other Schedules and Forms You May 
Have To File
• Schedule A (Form 1040) to deduct interest, taxes, and 
casualty losses not related to your business.
• Schedule E (Form 1040) to report rental real estate and 
royalty income or (loss) that is not subject to self-employment 
tax.
• Schedule F (Form 1040) to report profit or (loss) from farming.
• Schedule J (Form 1040) to figure your tax by averaging your 
farming or fishing income over the previous 3 years. Doing so 
may reduce your tax.
• Schedule SE (Form 1040) to pay self-employment tax on 
income from any trade or business.
• Form 461 to report an excess business loss.
• Form 3800 to claim any of the general business credits.
• Form 4562 to claim depreciation and amortization on assets 
placed in service in 2025, to claim amortization that began in 
2025, to make an election under section 179 to expense certain 
property, or to report information on listed property.
• Form 4684 to report a casualty or theft gain or (loss) involving 
property used in your trade or business or income-producing 
property.
• Form 4797 to report sales, exchanges, and involuntary 
conversions (not from a casualty or theft) of trade or business 
property.
• Form 6198 to apply a limitation to your loss if you have a 
business loss and you have amounts invested in the business for 
which you are not at risk.
• Form 6252 to report income from an installment agreement.
• Form 7205 to claim the IRC 179D deduction for qualifying 
energy efficient commercial building expenses.
• Form 8582 to apply a limitation to your loss from passive 
activities.
• Form 8594 to report certain purchases or sales of groups of 
assets that constitute a trade or business.
• Form 8824 to report like-kind exchanges.
• Form 8829 to claim actual expenses for business use of your 
home.
• Form 8936 to claim the commercial clean vehicle credit.
• Form 8960 to pay Net Investment Income T ax on certain 
income generally from your passive activities.
• Form 8990 to determine whether your business interest 
deduction is limited.
• Form 8995 or 8995-A to claim a deduction for qualified 
business income.
Single-member limited liability company (LLC). Generally, a 
single-member domestic LLC is not treated as a separate entity 
for federal income tax purposes. If you are the sole member of a 
domestic LLC, file Schedule C (or Schedule E or F , if applicable) 
unless you have elected to treat the domestic LLC as a 
corporation. See Form 8832 for details on making this election 
and for information about the tax treatment of a foreign LLC.
Single-member LLCs with employees. A single-member LLC 
must file employment tax returns using the LLC’s name and 
employer identification number (EIN) rather than the owner’s 
name and EIN, even if the LLC is not treated as a separate entity 
for federal income tax purposes.
Heavy highway vehicle use tax. If you use certain highway 
trucks, truck-trailers, tractor-trailers, or buses in your trade or 
business, you may have to pay a federal highway motor vehicle 
use tax. See the Instructions for Form 2290 to find out if you 
must pay this tax and go to IRS.gov/T rucker for the most recent 
developments.
Information returns. Y ou may have to file information returns 
for wages paid to employees, and certain payments of fees and 
other nonemployee compensation, interest, rents, royalties, real 
estate transactions, annuities, and pensions. See Line I, later, 
and IRS.gov/Form1099 for details and other payments that may 
require you to file a Form 1099.
If you received cash of more than $10,000 in one or more 
related transactions in your trade or business, you may have to 
file Form 8300. For details, see the Instructions for Form 8300 
and IRS.gov/Pub1544. See also the IRS Form 8300 Reference 
Guide, available at IRS.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-
employed/irs-form-8300-reference-guide.
E-filing Forms 1099. The T axpayer First Act of 2019 authorized 
the Department of the T reasury and the IRS to issue regulations 
that reduce the 250-return e-file threshold. T reasury Decision 
9972, published February 23, 2023, lowered the e-file threshold 
to 10 (calculated by aggregating all information returns) effective 
for information returns required to be filed after 2023. Go to 
IRS.gov/filing/e-file-information-returns for e-file options.
Business Owned and Operated by 
Spouses
Generally, if you and your spouse jointly own and operate an 
unincorporated business and share in the profits and losses, you 
are partners in a partnership, whether or not you have a formal 
partnership agreement. Y ou generally have to file Form 1065 
instead of Schedule C for your joint business activity; however, 
you may not have to file Form 1065 if either of the following 
applies.
• Y ou and your spouse elect to be treated as a qualified joint 
venture. See Qualified Joint Venture next.
• Y ou and your spouse wholly own the unincorporated business 
as community property and you treat the business as a sole 
proprietorship. See Community Income, later.
Otherwise, use Form 1065. See Pub. 541 for information about 
partnerships.
Qualified Joint Venture Y ou and your spouse can elect to treat 
an unincorporated business as a qualified joint venture instead 
of a partnership if you:
• Each materially participate in the business (see Material 
participation, later, in the instructions for line G);
• Are the only owners of the business; and
• File a joint return for the tax year.
Making the election will allow you to avoid the complexity of 
Form 1065 but still give each of you credit for social security 
earnings on which retirement benefits, disability benefits, 
survivor benefits, and insurance (Medicare) benefits are based. 
2

Page 3 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In most cases, this election will not increase the total tax owed 
on the joint return.
Jointly owned property. Y ou and your spouse must operate 
a business to make this election. Do not make the election for 
jointly owned property that is not a trade or business.
Only businesses that are owned and operated by 
spouses as co-owners (and not in the name of a state 
law entity) qualify for the election. Thus, a business 
owned and operated by spouses through an LLC does not 
qualify for the election of a qualified joint venture.
Making the election. T o make this election, divide all items of 
income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit attributable to the 
business between you and your spouse based on your 
respective interests in the business. Each of you must file a 
separate Schedule C or F (Form 1040). Enter your share of the 
applicable income, deduction, or (loss) on the appropriate lines 
of your separate Schedule C or F (Form 1040). Each of you may 
also need to file a separate Schedule SE (Form 1040) to pay 
self-employment tax. If the business was taxed as a partnership 
before you made the election, the partnership will be treated as 
terminating at the end of the preceding tax year. For information 
on how to report the termination of the partnership, see Pub. 
541.
Revoking the election. The election can be revoked only with 
the permission of the IRS. However, the election remains in 
effect only for as long as you and your spouse continue to meet 
the requirements to make the election. If you and your spouse 
fail to meet the requirements for any year, you will need to make 
a new election to be treated as a qualified joint venture in any 
future year.
Employer identification number (EIN). Y ou and your spouse 
do not need to obtain an EIN to make the election. But you may 
need an EIN to file other returns, such as employment or excise 
tax returns. T o apply for an EIN, see the Instructions for Form 
SS-4 or go to IRS.gov/EIN.
Rental real estate business. If you and your spouse make the 
election for your rental real estate business, you must each 
report your share of income and deductions on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). Rental real estate income is not generally included 
in net earnings from self-employment subject to self-employment 
tax and is generally subject to the passive loss limitation rules. 
Electing qualified joint venture status does not alter the 
application of the self-employment tax or the passive loss 
limitation rules.
More information. For more information on qualified joint 
ventures, go to IRS.gov/QJV.
Community Income
If you and your spouse wholly own an unincorporated business 
as community property under the community property laws of a 
state, foreign country, or U.S. territory, you can treat your wholly 
owned, unincorporated business as a sole proprietorship instead 
of a partnership. Any change in your reporting position will be 
treated as a conversion of the entity.
Report your income and deductions as follows.
• If you choose to treat the business as a sole proprietorship, 
report all the income and other items from the business on the 
Schedule C of one spouse.
• If you choose to treat the business as a partnership, see Pub. 
541.
• If both spouses elected to treat the business as a qualifying 
joint venture, see Qualified Joint Venture, earlier.
States with community property laws include Arizona, 
California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, T exas, 
CAUTION
!
Washington, and Wisconsin. See Pub. 555 for more information 
about community property laws.
Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each reportable 
transaction in which you participated. Form 8886 must be filed 
for each tax year that your federal income tax liability is affected 
by your participation in the transaction. Y ou may have to pay a 
penalty if you are required to file Form 8886 but don’t do so. Y ou 
may also have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable 
transaction understatements. The following are reportable 
transactions.
• Any listed transaction that is the same as or substantially 
similar to tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS in 
published guidance.
• Any transaction offered to you or a related party under 
conditions of confidentiality for which you paid an advisor a fee 
of at least $50,000.
• Certain transactions for which you or a related party have 
contractual protection against disallowance of the tax benefits.
• Certain transactions resulting in a loss of at least $2 million in 
any single tax year or $4 million in any combination of tax years. 
(At least $50,000 for a single tax year if the loss arose from a 
foreign currency transaction defined in section 988(c)(1), 
whether or not the loss flows through from an S corporation or 
partnership.)
• Certain transactions of interest entered into that are the same 
or substantially similar to one of the types of transactions that the 
IRS has identified by published guidance as a transaction of 
interest.
See the Instructions for Form 8886 for more details. See also 
chapter 2 of Pub. 550.
Capital Construction Fund
Do not claim on Schedule C the deduction for amounts 
contributed to a capital construction fund set up under 
chapter 535 of title 46 of the United States Code. Instead, 
reduce the amount you would otherwise enter on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 15, by the amount of the deduction. Next to 
line 15, enter “CCF” and the amount of the deduction. For 
details, see Pub. 595.
Additional Information
See Pub. 334 for more information for small businesses.
Specific Instructions
Filers of Form 1041. Do not complete the block labeled “Social 
security number (SSN).” Instead, enter the EIN issued to the 
estate or trust on line D.
Line A
Describe the business or professional activity that provided your 
principal source of income reported on line 1. If you owned more 
than one business, complete a separate Schedule C for each 
business. Give the general field or activity and the type of 
product or service. If your general field or activity is wholesale 
trade, retail trade, or services connected with production 
services (mining, construction, or manufacturing), also give the 
type of customer or client; for example, “wholesale sale of 
hardware to retailers” or “appraisal of real estate for lending 
institutions.”
Line B
Enter on line B the six-digit code from the Principal Business or 
Professional Activity Codes chart at the end of these 
3

Page 4 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
instructions. For nonstore retailers, select the PBA code by the 
primary product that your establishment sells. For example, 
establishments primarily selling prescription and nonprescription 
drugs select PBA code 456110 Pharmacies & drug retailers.
Line D
Enter on line D the EIN that was issued to you on Form SS-4. Do 
not enter your SSN on this line. Do not enter another taxpayer’s 
EIN (for example, from any Forms 1099-MISC that you received). 
If you do not have an EIN, leave line D blank. 
Y ou need an EIN only if you have a qualified retirement plan 
or are required to file employment, excise, alcohol, tobacco, or 
firearms returns or are a payer of gambling winnings. If you need 
an EIN, see the Instructions for Form SS-4.
Single-member LLCs. If you are the sole owner of an LLC that 
is not treated as a separate entity for federal income tax 
purposes, enter on line D the EIN that was issued to the LLC (in 
the LLC’s legal name) for a qualified retirement plan; to file 
employment, excise, alcohol, tobacco, or firearms returns; or as 
a payer of gambling winnings. If you do not have such an EIN, 
leave line D blank.
Line E
Enter your business address. Show a street address instead of a 
box number. Include the suite or room number, if any. If you 
conducted the business from your home located at the address 
shown on page 1 of your tax return, you don’t have to complete 
this line.
Line F
Generally, you can use the cash method, an accrual method, or 
any other method permitted by the Internal Revenue Code. In all 
cases, the method used must clearly reflect income. Unless you 
are a small business taxpayer (defined later under Part III), you 
must use an accrual method for sales and purchases of 
inventory items. Special rules apply to long-term contracts (see 
section 460 for details).
If you use the cash method, show all items of taxable income 
actually or constructively received during the year (in cash, 
property, or services). Income is constructively received when it 
is credited to your account or made available to you without 
restriction. Also, show amounts actually paid during the year for 
deductible expenses. However, if the payment of an expenditure 
creates an asset having a useful life that extends beyond 12 
months or the end of the next tax year, it may not be deductible 
or may be deductible only in part for the year of the payment. 
See chapter 2 of Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small Business.
For amounts includible in income and deductible as expense 
under an accrual method, see Pub. 538.
T o change your accounting method, you must generally file 
Form 3115. Y ou may also have to make an adjustment to prevent 
amounts of income or expense from being duplicated or omitted. 
This is called a section 481(a) adjustment.
Example. Y ou change to the cash method of accounting and 
choose to account for inventoriable items in the same manner as 
nonincidental materials and supplies for the 2025 tax year. Y ou 
accrued sales in 2024 for which you received payment in 2025. 
Y ou must report those sales in both years as a result of changing 
your accounting method and must make a section 481(a) 
adjustment to prevent duplication of income.
A net negative section 481 adjustment is generally taken into 
account in the year of change. A net positive section 481(a) 
adjustment is generally taken into account over a period of 4 
years. Include any net positive section 481(a) adjustments on 
line 6. If the net section 481(a) adjustment is negative, report it in 
Part V .
More information. For more information about changing your 
accounting method and the section 481(a) adjustment, see the 
Instructions for Form 3115. Additional information is also 
available in various revenue procedures. See Revenue 
Procedure 2025-23 (and any subsequent revenue procedures 
modifying Revenue Procedure 2025-23) for a list of automatic 
changes, including a description of its effect on prior lists of 
automatic changes. Revenue Procedure 2025-23 is available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2025-24_IRB#REV-PROC-2025-23.
Line G
If your business activity is not a rental activity and you meet any 
of the material participation tests, explained next, or the 
exception for oil and gas applies, check the “Y es” box. 
Otherwise, check “No.” If you check “No,” this activity is passive. 
If you have a loss from a passive activity, see Limit on losses, 
later. If you have a profit from the rental of property to a 
nonpassive activity, see Recharacterization of Passive Income in 
Pub. 925 to find out how to report the net income.
Material participation. For purposes of the seven material 
participation tests listed later, participation generally includes 
any work you did in connection with an activity if you owned an 
interest in the activity at the time you did the work. The capacity 
in which you did the work does not matter. However, work is not 
treated as participation if it is work that an owner would not 
customarily do in the same type of activity and one of your main 
reasons for doing the work was to avoid the disallowance of 
losses or credits from the activity under the passive activity rules.
Work you did as an investor in an activity is not treated as 
participation unless you were directly involved in the day-to-day 
management or operations of the activity. Work performed as an 
investor includes:
• Studying and reviewing financial statements or reports on the 
activity,
• Preparing or compiling summaries or analyses of the finances 
or operations of the activity for your own use, and
• Monitoring the finances or operations of the activity in a 
nonmanagerial capacity.
Participation by your spouse during the tax year in an activity 
in which you own an interest can be counted as your 
participation in the activity. This rule applies even if your spouse 
did not own an interest in the activity and whether or not you and 
your spouse file a joint return. However, this rule does not apply 
for purposes of determining whether you and your spouse can 
elect to have your business treated as a qualified joint venture 
instead of a partnership (see Qualified Joint Venture, earlier).
For purposes of the passive activity rules, you materially 
participated in the operation of a trade or business activity during 
2025 if you met any of the following seven tests.
1. Y ou participated in the activity for more than 500 hours 
during the tax year.
2. Y our participation in the activity for the tax year was 
substantially all of the participation in the activity of all individuals 
(including individuals who did not own any interest in the activity) 
for the tax year.
3. Y ou participated in the activity for more than 100 hours 
during the tax year, and you participated at least as much as any 
other person for the tax year. This includes individuals who did 
not own any interest in the activity.
4. The activity is a significant participation activity for the tax 
year, and you participated in all significant participation activities 
for more than 500 hours during the year. An activity is a 
“significant participation activity” if it involves the conduct of a 
trade or business, you participated in the activity for more than 
4

Page 5 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
100 hours during the tax year, and you did not materially 
participate under any of the material participation tests (other 
than this test 4).
5. Y ou materially participated in the activity for any 5 of the 
prior 10 tax years.
6. The activity is a personal service activity in which you 
materially participated for any 3 prior tax years. A personal 
service activity is an activity that involves performing personal 
services in the field of health, law, engineering, architecture, 
accounting, actuarial science, performing arts, or consulting, or 
any other trade or business in which capital is not a material 
income-producing factor.
7. Based on all the facts and circumstances, you 
participated in the activity on a regular, continuous, and 
substantial basis for more than 100 hours during the tax year. 
Y our participation in managing the activity does not count in 
determining if you meet this test if any person (except you) (a) 
received compensation for performing management services in 
connection with the activity, or (b) spent more hours during the 
tax year than you spent performing management services in 
connection with the activity (regardless of whether the person 
was compensated for the services).
Rental of personal property. Generally, a rental activity (such 
as long-term equipment leasing) is a passive activity even if you 
materially participated in the activity. However, if you met any of 
the five exceptions listed under Rental Activities in the 
Instructions for Form 8582, the rental of the property is not 
treated as a rental activity and the material participation rules 
explained earlier apply.
Exception for oil and gas. If you are filing Schedule C to report 
income and deductions from an oil or gas well in which you own 
a working interest directly or through an entity that does not limit 
your liability, check the “Y es” box. The activity of owning a 
working interest is not a passive activity, regardless of your 
participation.
Limit on losses. Y our business activity loss may be limited if 
you checked the “No” box on line G. In addition, your rental 
activity loss may be limited even if you materially participated. In 
general, a business activity in which you do not materially 
participate or a rental activity is a passive activity and you have 
to use Form 8582 to apply a limitation that may reduce the loss, if 
any, that you may enter on Schedule C, line 31. For details, see 
Pub. 925.
Note: Line G doesn’t apply to filers of Form 1040-SS.
Line H
If you started or acquired this business in 2025, check the box on 
line H. Also, check the box if you are reopening or restarting this 
business after temporarily closing it, and you didn’t file a 2024 
Schedule C for this business.
Line I
If you made any payment in 2025 that would require you to file 
any Forms 1099, check the “Y es” box. Otherwise, check the “No” 
box.
Y ou may have to file information returns for wages paid to 
employees, certain payments of fees and other nonemployee 
compensation, interest, rents, royalties, real estate transactions, 
annuities, and pensions. Y ou may also have to file an information 
return if you sold $5,000 or more of consumer products to a 
person on a buy-sell, a deposit-commission, or other similar 
basis for resale.
Note:  Line I doesn’t apply to filers of Form 1040-SS.
The Guide to Information Returns in the 2025 General 
Instructions for Certain Information Returns identifies 
which Forms 1099 must be filed, the amounts to report, 
and the due dates for the required Forms 1099. For information, 
see IRS.gov/instructions/Form1099.
Part I. Income
Except as otherwise provided in the Internal Revenue Code, 
gross income includes income from whatever source derived. In 
certain circumstances, however, gross income does not include 
extraterritorial income that is qualifying foreign trade income. Use 
Form 8873 to figure the extraterritorial income exclusion. Report 
it on Schedule C as explained in the Instructions for Form 8873.
If you were a debtor in a chapter 11 bankruptcy case during 
2025, see Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Cases in the Instructions for 
Form 1040 (under Income) and the Instructions for Schedule SE.
Be sure to report all income attributable to your trade or 
business from all sources. Y ou may receive one or more Forms 
1099 from people who are required to provide information to the 
IRS listing amounts that may be income you received as a result 
of your trade or business activities. The following is a list of some 
of the common Forms 1099.
• 1099-MISC. For more information about what is reported on 
Form 1099-MISC, see the Instructions for Recipient included on 
that form.
• 1099-NEC. For more information about what is reported on 
Form 1099-NEC, see the Instructions for Recipient included on 
that form.
• 1099-K. For more information about what is reported on Form 
1099-K, see the Instructions for Payee included on that form and 
go to IRS.gov/Gig.
Income you report on Schedule C may be qualified 
business income and entitle you to a deduction on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 13a. See Forms 8995 and 8995-A 
for more information.
Line 1
Enter gross receipts from your trade or business. Be sure to 
check any Forms 1099 you received for business income that 
must be reported on this line.
If you received one or more Forms 1099-NEC, be sure line 1 
includes amounts properly shown on your Forms 1099-NEC. If 
the total amounts that were reported in box 1 of Forms 
1099-NEC are more than the total you are reporting on line 1, 
attach a statement explaining the difference.
Statutory employees. If you received a Form W-2, and the 
"Statutory employee" box in box 13 of that form was checked, 
report your income and expenses related to that income on 
Schedule C. Enter your statutory employee income from box 1 of 
Form W-2 on line 1 of Schedule C and check the box on that 
line. Social security and Medicare tax should have been withheld 
from your earnings; as a result, you do not owe self-employment 
tax on these earnings. Statutory employees include full-time life 
insurance agents, certain agent or commission drivers and 
traveling salespersons, and certain homeworkers.
If you had both self-employment income and statutory 
employee income, you must file two Schedules C. Y ou cannot 
combine these amounts on a single Schedule C.
Note: Statutory employees information doesn’t apply to Form 
1040-SS filers.
TIP
TIP
5

Page 6 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified joint ventures should report rental real estate 
income not subject to self-employment tax on 
Schedule E (Form 1040). See Qualified Joint Venture, 
earlier, and the Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040).
Name, image, likeness (NIL) income. If you are a 
student-athlete, any monetary or financial gain, including 
non-cash compensation like merchandise or gift cards, you 
receive from a transaction in which you benefit from the use of 
your name, image, or likeness is NIL income. Generally, 
student-athletes are considered independent contractors for tax 
purposes and report NIL income and related expenses as 
self-employment income on Schedule C. However, report 
royalties and other NIL income that is not self-employment 
income on Schedule E instead.
Medicaid waiver payments.  If you are a sole proprietor in a 
business of providing home care services, certain Medicaid 
waiver payments you receive may be nontaxable. If you receive 
Medicaid waiver payments on a Form 1099-MISC or Form 
1099-NEC that are excludable from gross income under Notice 
2014-7, report the full amount of the payments as income on 
Schedule C, line 1. Then report the nontaxable and excludable 
amount as an expense in Part V , Other Expenses, and write 
“Notice 2014-7” next to the amount. These payments are 
nontaxable and excludable from income. Notice 2014-7 is 
available at IRS.gov/irb/2014-04_IRB#NOT -2014-7. For more 
information about these payments see the related questions and 
answers at Certain Medicaid Waiver Payments May Be 
Excludable From Income, available at IRS.gov/individuals/
certain-medicaid-waiver-payments-may-be-excludable-from-
income
Installment sales. Generally, the installment method can’t be 
used to report income from the sale of (a) personal property 
regularly sold under the installment method, or (b) real property 
held for resale to customers. But the installment method can be 
used to report income from sales of certain residential lots and 
timeshares if you elect to pay interest on the tax due on that 
income after the year of sale. See section 453(l)(2)(B) for details. 
If you make this election, include the interest in the total on 
Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 14, and enter the amount of 
interest and “453(l)(3)” on the line next to the entry space.
If you use the installment method, attach a statement to your 
return. Show separately for 2025 and the 3 preceding years: 
gross sales, cost of goods sold, gross profit, percentage of gross 
profit to gross sales, amounts collected, and gross profit on 
amounts collected.
Line 2
Report your sales returns and allowances as a positive number 
on line 2. A sales return is a cash or credit refund you gave to 
customers who returned defective, damaged, or unwanted 
products. A sales allowance is a reduction in the selling price of 
products, instead of a cash or credit refund.
Line 6
Report on line 6 business income not reported elsewhere in Part 
I. Be sure to include amounts from the following.
• Finance reserve income.
• Scrap sales.
• Bad debts you recovered.
• Interest (such as on notes and accounts receivable).
• State gasoline or fuel tax refunds you received in 2025.
• Any amount of credit for biofuel claimed on line 3 of Form 
6478.
• Any amount of credit for biodiesel, renewable diesel, and 
sustainable aviation fuel claimed on line 11 of Form 8864.
CAUTION
!
• Credit for federal tax paid on fuels claimed on your 2024 Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
• Prizes and awards related to your trade or business.
• Amounts you received in your trade or business as shown on 
Form 1099-PATR.
• Other kinds of miscellaneous business income.
If the business use percentage of any listed property (defined 
under Line 13, later) dropped to 50% or less in 2025, report on 
this line any recapture of excess depreciation, including any 
section 179 expense deduction. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to 
figure the recapture. Also, if the business use percentage drops 
to 50% or less on leased listed property (other than a vehicle), 
include on this line any inclusion amount. See chapter 5 of Pub. 
946 to figure the amount.
Part II. Expenses
Capitalizing costs of producing property and acquiring 
property for resale. If you produced real or tangible personal 
property or acquired real or personal property for resale, you 
must generally capitalize certain expenses in inventory or other 
property. These expenses include the direct costs of the property 
and any indirect costs properly allocable to that property. 
Reduce the amounts on lines 8 through 27a and Part V by 
amounts capitalized. See Pub. 538 for a discussion of the 
uniform capitalization rules.
Exception for a small business taxpayer. A small business 
taxpayer (defined later under Part III) is not required to capitalize 
certain expenses to inventory or other property. See Pub. 538 for 
more details.
Exception for creative property. If you are a freelance 
artist, author, or photographer, you may be exempt from the 
capitalization rules. However, your personal efforts must have 
created (or reasonably be expected to create) the property. This 
exception does not apply to any expense related to printing, 
photographic plates, motion picture films, videotapes, or similar 
items. These expenses are subject to the capitalization rules. For 
details, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in Pub. 538.
Line 9
Y ou can deduct the actual expenses of operating your car or 
truck or take the standard mileage rate. This is true even if you 
used your vehicle for hire (such as a taxicab). Y ou must use 
actual expenses if you used five or more vehicles simultaneously 
in your business (such as in fleet operations). Y ou can’t use 
actual expenses for a leased vehicle if you previously used the 
standard mileage rate for that vehicle.
Y ou can take the standard mileage rate for 2025 only if you:
• Owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the 
first year you placed the vehicle in service, or
• Leased the vehicle and are using the standard mileage rate 
for the entire lease period.
If you take the standard mileage rate:
• Multiply the number of business miles driven by 0.70. For 
example, 1,250 business miles driven × 0.70 = $875.00;
• Add to this amount your parking fees and tolls; and
• Enter the total on line 9. Do not deduct depreciation, rent or 
lease payments, or your actual operating expenses.
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal 
purposes and you claimed a deduction in 2025 on 
Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) for the vehicle loan interest 
allocable to your personal use, then you can’t claim a deduction 
for that same interest on Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A (Form 
1040) and its instructions for more information.
If you deduct actual expenses:
CAUTION
!
6

Page 7 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Include on line 9 the business portion of expenses for 
gasoline, oil, repairs, insurance, license plates, etc.; and
• Show depreciation on line 13 and rent or lease payments on 
line 20a.
For details, see chapter 4 of Pub. 463.
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal 
purposes and you claimed a deduction in 2025 on 
Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) for the vehicle loan interest 
allocable to your personal use, then you can’t claim a deduction 
for that same interest on Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A (Form 
1040) and its instructions for more information.
Information on your vehicle. If you claim any car and truck 
expenses, you must provide certain information on the use of 
your vehicle by completing one of the following.
1. Complete Schedule C, Part IV , if (a) you are claiming the 
standard mileage rate, you lease your vehicle, or your vehicle is 
fully depreciated; and (b) you are not required to file Form 4562 
for any other reason. If you used more than one vehicle during 
the year, attach a statement with the information requested in 
Schedule C, Part IV , for each additional vehicle.
2. Complete Form 4562, Part V , if you are claiming 
depreciation on your vehicle or you are required to file Form 
4562 for any other reason (see Line 13, later).
Line 10
Enter the total commissions and fees for the tax year. Do not 
include commissions or fees that are capitalized or deducted 
elsewhere on your return.
Y ou must file Form 1099-NEC to report certain commissions 
and fees of $600 or more during the year. See the Instructions 
for Forms 1099-MISC and 1099-NEC for details.
Sales of property. Generally, commissions and other fees paid 
to facilitate the sale of property must be capitalized. However, if 
you are a dealer in property, enter on line 10 the commissions 
and fees you paid to facilitate the sale of that property.
Note: A dealer in property is a person who regularly sells 
property in the ordinary course of their trade or business.
For more information on the capitalization of commissions 
and fees, see the examples under Regulations section 
1.263(a)-1(e)(3).
Line 11
Enter the total cost of contract labor for the tax year. Contract 
labor includes payments to persons you do not treat as 
employees (for example, independent contractors) for services 
performed for your trade or business. Do not include contract 
labor deducted elsewhere on your return, such as contract labor 
includible on line 17, 21, 26, or 37. Also, do not include salaries 
and wages paid to your employees; instead, see Line 26, later.
Y ou must file Form 1099-NEC to report contract labor 
payments of $600 or more during the year. See the Instructions 
for Forms 1099-MISC and 1099-NEC for details.
Line 12
Enter your deduction for depletion on this line. If you have timber 
depletion, attach Form T (Timber). See chapter 7 of Pub. 225 for 
additional details.
Depletion is generally an item of tax preference under 
the Alternative Minimum T ax (AMT). See section 57.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Line 13
Depreciation and section 179 expense deduction. 
Depreciation is the annual deduction allowed to recover the cost 
or other basis of business or investment property having a useful 
life substantially beyond the tax year. Y ou can also depreciate 
improvements made to leased business property. However, 
stock in trade, inventories, and land are not depreciable. 
Depreciation starts when you first use the property in your 
business or for the production of income. It ends when you take 
the property out of service, deduct all your depreciable cost or 
other basis, or no longer use the property in your business or for 
the production of income. Y ou can also elect under section 179 
to expense part or all of the cost of certain property you bought 
in 2025 for use in your business. See the Instructions for Form 
4562 and Pub. 946 to figure the amount to enter on line 13.
When to attach Form 4562. Y ou must complete and attach 
Form 4562 only if you are claiming:
• Depreciation on property placed in service during 2025;
• Depreciation on listed property (defined later), regardless of 
the date it was placed in service; or
• A section 179 expense deduction.
If you acquired depreciable property for the first time in 2025, 
see Pub. 946.
Listed property. Listed property generally includes, but is not 
limited to:
• Passenger automobiles weighing 6,000 pounds or less;
• Any other property used for transportation if the nature of the 
property lends itself to personal use, such as motorcycles, 
pickup trucks, etc.; and
• Any property used for entertainment or recreational purposes 
(such as photographic, phonographic, communication, and 
video recording equipment).
Exception. Listed property does not include photographic, 
phonographic, communication, or video equipment used 
exclusively in your trade or business or at your regular business 
establishment. For purposes of this exception, a portion of your 
home is treated as a regular business establishment only if that 
portion meets the requirements under section 280A(c)(1) for 
deducting expenses for the business use of your home.
Recapture. See Line 6, earlier, if the business use 
percentage of any listed property dropped to 50% or less in 
2025.
Line 14
Deduct contributions to employee benefit programs that are not 
an incidental part of a pension or profit-sharing plan included on 
line 19. Examples are accident and health plans, group-term life 
insurance, and dependent care assistance programs. If you 
made contributions on your behalf as a self-employed person to 
a dependent care assistance program, complete Form 2441, 
Parts I and III, to figure your deductible contributions to that 
program.
Y ou cannot deduct contributions you made on your behalf as 
a self-employed person for group-term life insurance.
Do not include on line 14 any contributions you made on your 
behalf as a self-employed person to an accident and health plan. 
However, you may be able to deduct on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 17, the amount you paid for health insurance on 
behalf of yourself, your spouse, and dependents, even if you do 
not itemize your deductions. See the instructions for line 17, 
Schedule 1, contained within the Instructions for Form 1040.
Y ou must reduce your line 14 deduction by the amount of any 
credit for small employer health insurance premiums determined 
on Form 8941. See Form 8941 and its instructions to determine 
which expenses are eligible for the credit.
7

Page 8 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 15
Deduct premiums paid for business insurance on line 15. Deduct 
on line 14 amounts paid for employee accident and health 
insurance. Do not deduct amounts credited to a reserve for 
self-insurance or premiums paid for a policy that pays for your 
lost earnings due to sickness or disability. For details, see Pub. 
334, chapter 8.
Lines 16a and 16b
Interest allocation rules. The tax treatment of interest 
expense differs depending on its type. For example, home 
mortgage interest and investment interest are treated differently. 
“Interest allocation” rules require you to allocate (classify) your 
interest expense so it is deducted (or capitalized) on the correct 
line of your return and receives the right tax treatment. These 
rules could affect how much interest you are allowed to deduct 
on Schedule C.
Generally, you allocate interest expense by tracing how the 
proceeds of the loan were used. See chapter 4 of Pub. 225, 
generally, for details.
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal 
purposes and you claimed a deduction in 2025 on 
Schedule 1-A (Form 1040) for the vehicle loan interest 
allocable to your personal use, then you can’t claim a deduction 
for that same interest on Schedule C. See Schedule 1-A (Form 
1040) and its instructions for more information.
Limitation on business interest.  Y ou must file Form 8990 to 
deduct any interest expenses of this trade or business unless 
you are a small business taxpayer (defined under Part III) or 
meet one of the other filing exceptions listed in the Instructions 
for Form 8990.
If you must file Form 8990, figure the limit on your business 
interest expenses on Form 8990 before completing lines 16a 
and 16b. Follow the instructions under How to report, later, but 
report the reduced interest on lines 16a and 16b. The interest 
you can’t deduct this year will carry forward to next year on Form 
8990.
If you are a small business taxpayer or meet one of the other 
filing exceptions for Form 8990, follow the instructions under 
How to report, later, and report all of your deductible interest on 
lines 16a and 16b.
How to report. If you have a mortgage on real property used in 
your business, enter on line 16a the interest you paid for 2025 to 
banks or other financial institutions for which you received a 
Form 1098 (or similar statement). If you did not receive a Form 
1098, enter the interest on line 16b.
If you paid more mortgage interest than is shown on Form 
1098, include the amount on line 16a. Attach a statement to your 
return explaining the difference and enter “See attached” in the 
margin next to line 16a. Don’t include mortgage interest that 
must be capitalized, for example, added to basis. See Pub. 551, 
under Uniform Capitalization Rules, for details.
The T ax Cuts and Jobs Act, section 11043, limited the 
deduction for mortgage interest paid on home equity 
loans and lines of credit. See section 163(h)(3)(F).
If you and at least one other person (other than your spouse if 
you file a joint return) were liable for and paid interest on the 
mortgage and the other person received the Form 1098, include 
your share of the interest on line 16b. Attach a statement to your 
return showing the name and address of the person who 
received the Form 1098. In the margin next to line 16b, enter 
“See attached.”
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
If you paid interest in 2025 that also applies to future years, 
deduct only the part that applies to 2025.
Line 17
Include on this line fees charged by accountants and attorneys 
that are ordinary and necessary expenses directly related to 
operating your business.
Include fees for tax advice related to your business and for 
preparation of the tax forms related to your business. Also, 
include expenses incurred in resolving asserted tax deficiencies 
related to your business.
For more information, see Pub. 334.
Line 18
Include on this line your expenses for
office supplies and postage.
Line 19
Enter your deduction for the contributions you made for the 
benefit of your employees to a pension, profit-sharing, or annuity 
plan (including SEP , SIMPLE, and SARSEP plans described in 
Pub. 560). If the plan included you as a self-employed person, 
enter the contributions made as an employer on your behalf on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 16, not on Schedule C.
This deduction may be subject to limitations. For more 
information on potential limitations, see Pub. 560.
In most cases, you must file the applicable form listed below if 
you maintain a pension, profit-sharing, or other funded-deferred 
compensation plan. The filing requirement is not affected by 
whether or not the plan qualified under the Internal Revenue 
Code, or whether or not you claim a deduction for the current tax 
year. There is a penalty for failure to timely file these forms.
Form 5500-EZ. File this form if you have a one-participant 
retirement plan that meets certain requirements. A 
one-participant plan is a plan that covers only you (or you and 
your spouse).
Form 5500-SF . File this form electronically with the Department 
of Labor (at efast.dol.gov) if you have a small plan (fewer than 
100 participants in most cases) that meets certain requirements.
Form 5500. File this form electronically with the Department of 
Labor (at efast.dol.gov) for a plan that does not meet the 
requirements for filing Form 5500-EZ or Form 5500-SF . For 
details, see Pub. 560.
Lines 20a and 20b
If you rented or leased vehicles, machinery, or equipment, enter 
on line 20a the business portion of your rental cost. But if you 
leased a vehicle for a term of 30 days or more, you may have to 
reduce your deduction by the inclusion amount. See Leasing a 
Car in chapter 4 of Pub. 463 to figure this amount.
Enter on line 20b amounts paid to rent or lease other 
property, such as office space in a building.
Line 21
Deduct the cost of incidental repairs and maintenance that do 
not add to the property’s value or appreciably prolong its life. Do 
not deduct the value of your own labor. Do not deduct amounts 
spent to restore or replace property; they must be capitalized.
Line 22
In most cases, you can deduct the cost of materials and supplies 
only to the extent you actually consumed and used them in your 
8

Page 9 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business during the tax year (unless you deducted them in a 
prior tax year). However, if you had incidental materials and 
supplies on hand for which you kept no inventories or records of 
use, you can deduct the cost of those you actually purchased 
during the tax year, provided that method clearly reflects income.
Y ou can also deduct the cost of books, professional 
instruments, equipment, etc., if you normally use them within a 
year. However, if their usefulness extends substantially beyond a 
year, you must generally recover their costs through 
depreciation.
Line 23
Y ou can deduct the following taxes and licenses on this line.
• State and local sales taxes imposed on you as the seller of 
goods or services. If you collected this tax from the buyer, you 
must also include the amount collected in gross receipts or sales 
on line 1.
• Real estate and personal property taxes on business assets.
• Licenses and regulatory fees for your trade or business paid 
each year to state or local governments. But some licenses, 
such as liquor licenses, may have to be amortized. See the 
Instructions for Form 4562 for more information on amortization.
• Social security and Medicare taxes paid to match required 
withholding from your employees’ wages. Reduce your 
deduction by the amount shown on Form 8846, line 4.
• Federal unemployment tax paid.
• Federal highway use tax.
• Contributions to a state unemployment insurance fund, or 
paid family and medical leave program disability benefit fund if 
they are considered taxes under state law.
Do not deduct the following.
• Federal income taxes, including your self-employment tax. 
However, you can deduct one-half of your self-employment tax 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 15 (but if filing Form 1040-NR, 
then only when covered under the U.S. social security system 
due to an international social security agreement).
• Estate and gift taxes.
• T axes assessed to pay for improvements, such as paving and 
sewers.
• T axes on your home or personal use property.
• State and local sales taxes on property purchased for use in 
your business. Instead, treat these taxes as part of the cost of 
the property.
• State and local sales taxes imposed on the buyer that you 
were required to collect and pay over to state or local 
governments. These taxes are not included in gross receipts or 
sales nor are they a deductible expense. However, if the state or 
local government allowed you to retain any part of the sales tax 
you collected, you must include that amount as income on line 6.
• Other taxes and license fees not related to your business.
Line 24a
Enter your expenses for lodging and transportation connected 
with overnight travel for business while away from your tax home. 
In most cases, your tax home is your main place of business, 
regardless of where you maintain your family home. Y ou can’t 
deduct expenses paid or incurred in connection with 
employment away from home if that period of employment 
exceeds 1 year. Also, you cannot deduct travel expenses for your 
spouse, your dependent, or any other individual unless that 
person is your employee, the travel is for a bona fide business 
purpose, and the expenses would otherwise be deductible by 
that person.
Do not include expenses for meals on this line. Instead, see 
Line 24b, later. Do not include entertainment expenses on this 
line.
Instead of keeping records of your actual incidental expenses, 
you can use an optional method for deducting incidental 
expenses only if you did not pay or incur meal expenses on a 
day you were traveling away from your tax home. The amount of 
the deduction is $5 a day. Incidental expenses include fees and 
tips given to porters, baggage carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, 
stewards or stewardesses and others on ships, and hotel 
servants in foreign countries. They do not include expenses for 
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodging taxes, or the 
costs of telegrams or telephone calls. Y ou cannot use this 
method on any day that you use the standard meal allowance 
(as explained under Line 24b, later).
Y ou can’t deduct expenses for attending a convention, 
seminar, or similar meeting held outside the North American 
area unless the meeting is directly related to your trade or 
business and it is as reasonable for the meeting to be held 
outside the North American area as within it. These rules apply 
to both employers and employees. Other rules apply to luxury 
water travel.
For details on travel expenses, see chapter 1 of Pub. 463.
Line 24b
Enter your deductible business meal expenses. This includes 
expenses for meals while traveling away from home for business. 
Y our deductible business meal expenses are a percentage of 
your actual business meal expenses or standard meal 
allowance. See Amount of deduction, later, for the percentage 
that applies to your actual meal expenses or standard meal 
allowance. In most cases, the percentage is 50%.
Do not include entertainment expenses on this line.
Business meal expenses.  Y ou can deduct a percentage of 
the actual cost of a meal if the following conditions are met.
• The meal expense was an ordinary and necessary expense in 
carrying on your trade or business.
• The expense was not lavish or extravagant under the 
circumstances.
• Y ou or your employee was present at the meal.
• The meal was provided to a current or potential business 
customer, client, consultant, or similar business contact.
• In the case of food or beverages provided during or at an 
entertainment event, the food and beverages were purchased 
separately from the entertainment, or the cost of the food and 
beverages was stated separately from the cost of the 
entertainment on one or more bills, invoices, or receipts.
Y ou cannot avoid the entertainment disallowance rule by 
inflating the amount charged for food and beverages.
See Regulations sections 1.274-11 and 1.274-12 for 
examples and more information.
Standard meal allowance. Instead of deducting the actual 
cost of your meals while traveling away from home, you can use 
the standard meal allowance for your daily meals and incidental 
expenses. Under this method, you deduct a specified amount, 
depending on where you travel, instead of keeping records of 
your actual meal expenses. However, you must still keep records 
to prove the time, place, and business purpose of your travel.
The standard meal allowance is the federal meals and 
incidental expenses (M&IE) rate. Y ou can find these rates for 
locations inside and outside the continental United States by 
going to the General Services Administration’s website at 
GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates/mie-breakdown.
See chapter 2 of Pub. 463 for details on how to figure your 
deduction using the standard meal allowance, including special 
rules for partial days of travel. For special per diem rates and 
rules of high cost locales, see Notice 2024-68, available at 
CAUTION
!
9

Page 10 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRS.gov/irb/2024-41_IRB#NOT -2024-68. Notice 2024-68 
provides the rates and list of high-cost localities for the period 
October 1, 2024, to September 30, 2025. For subsequent 
periods, see Notice 2025-54, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2025-41_IRB#NOT -2025-54.
Amount of deduction. In most cases, you can deduct only 
50% of your business meal expenses, including meals incurred 
while away from home on business. However, for individuals 
subject to the Department of T ransportation (DOT) hours of 
service limits, the percentage is increased to 80% for business 
meals consumed during or incident to any period of duty for 
which those limits are in effect. Individuals subject to the DOT 
hours of service limits include the following.
• Certain air transportation workers (such as pilots, crew, 
dispatchers, mechanics, and control tower operators) who are 
under Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
• Interstate truck operators who are under DOT regulations.
• Certain merchant mariners who are under Coast Guard 
regulations.
However, you can fully deduct meals and incidentals 
furnished or reimbursed to an employee if you properly treat the 
expense as wages subject to withholding. Y ou can also fully 
deduct meals and incidentals provided to a nonemployee to the 
extent the expenses are includible in the gross income of that 
person and reported on Form 1099-NEC. See chapter 5 of Pub. 
15, Employer’s T ax Guide, for details and other exceptions. See 
also chapter 8 of Pub. 334.
Daycare providers. If you qualify as a family daycare provider, 
you can use the standard meal and snack rates, instead of 
actual costs, to figure the deductible cost of meals and snacks 
provided to eligible children. If you receive reimbursement under 
a food program of the Department of Agriculture, only deduct the 
cost of food that exceeds reimbursement, if any. See Pub. 587 
for details, including recordkeeping requirements.
Line 25
Deduct utility expenses only for your trade or business.
Local telephone service. If you used your home phone for 
business, do not deduct the base rate (including taxes) of the 
first phone line into your residence. But you can deduct any 
additional costs you incurred for business that are more than the 
base rate of the first phone line. For example, if you had a 
second line, you can deduct the business percentage of the 
charges for that line, including the base rate charges.
Line 26
Enter the total salaries and wages for the tax year reduced by the 
amount of the following credit(s), if applicable.
• Work Opportunity Credit (Form 5884).
• Empowerment Zone Employment Credit (Form 8844).
• Credit for Employer Differential Wage Payments (Form 8932).
• Employer Credit for Paid Family and Medical Leave (Form 
8994).
Do not reduce your deduction for any portion of a credit that 
was passed through to you from a pass-through entity. See the 
instructions for the credit form for more information.
Do not include salaries and wages deducted elsewhere on 
your return or amounts paid to yourself.
If you provided taxable fringe benefits to your 
employees, such as personal use of a car, do not deduct 
as wages the amount applicable to depreciation and 
other expenses claimed elsewhere.
In most cases, you are required to file Form W-2 for each 
employee. See the General Instructions for Forms W-2 and W-3.
CAUTION
!
Line 27a
Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction.  Y ou may 
be able to deduct part or all of the expenses of modifying an 
existing commercial building to make it energy efficient. For 
details, see Form 7205 and its instructions. Attach Form 7205 to 
your tax return.
Line 30
Business use of your home. Y ou may be able to deduct 
certain expenses for business use of your home, subject to 
limitations. T o claim a deduction for business use of your home, 
use Form 8829, or you can elect to determine the amount of the 
deduction using a simplified method.
If you have a business use of another home, you can’t use the 
simplified method for that home. Y ou can use the Form 8829 to 
claim expenses for business use of the other home.
For additional information about claiming this deduction, see 
Pub. 587.
If you are not using the simplified method to determine 
the amount of expenses you may deduct for business 
use of a home, do not complete the additional entry 
spaces on line 30 for total square footage of your home and of 
the part of the home used for business. Instead, include the 
amount from line 36 of your Form 8829 on line 30.
Simplified method. The simplified method is an alternative to 
the calculation, allocation, and substantiation of actual 
expenses. In most cases, you’ll figure your deduction by 
multiplying the area (measured in square feet) used regularly 
and exclusively for business, regularly for daycare, or regularly 
for storage of inventory or product samples, by $5. The area you 
use to figure your deduction cannot exceed 300 square feet. Y ou 
can’t use the simplified method to figure a deduction for rental 
use of your home.
Electing to use the simplified method. Y ou choose 
whether or not to use the simplified method each tax year. Make 
the election by using the simplified method to figure the 
deduction for the qualified business use of a home on a timely 
filed, original federal income tax return for that year. An election 
for a year, once made, is irrevocable. A change from using the 
simplified method in one year to actual expenses in a 
succeeding year, or vice versa, is not a change in method of 
accounting and does not require the consent of the 
Commissioner.
If you share your home with someone else who uses the 
home for a separate business that qualifies for this deduction, 
each of you may make your own election but not for the same 
portion of the home.
If you conduct more than one business that qualifies for this 
deduction in your home, your election to use the simplified 
method applies to all your qualified business uses of your home. 
Y ou are limited to a maximum of 300 square feet for all of the 
businesses you conduct in your home that qualify for this 
deduction. Allocate the actual square footage used (up to the 
maximum 300 square feet) among your qualified business uses 
in any reasonable manner you choose, but you may not allocate 
more square feet to a qualified business use than you actually 
use in that business.
TIP
10

Page 11 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions for the Simplified Method Worksheet
 
Use this worksheet to figure the amount of expenses you may deduct for a qualified business use of a home if you are electing to use the simplified 
method for that home. If you are not electing to use the simplified method, use Form 8829.
Line 1. If all gross income from your trade or business is from this qualified business use of your home, figure your gross income limitation as follows.
A. Enter the amount from Schedule C, line 29 ............................................................  
B. Enter any gain derived from the business use of your home and shown on Form 8949 (and included on Schedule D) or Form 
4797 ........................................................................................  
C. Add lines A and B ..............................................................................  
D. Enter the total amount of any losses (as a positive number) shown on Form 8949 (and included on Schedule D) or Form 4797 
that are allocable to the business, but not allocable to the business use of the home ..............................  
E. Gross income limitation. Subtract line D from line C. Enter the result here and on line 1 of the simplified method 
worksheet ....................................................................................
 
If some of the income is from a place of business other than your home, you must first determine the part of your gross income (Schedule C, line 7, 
and gains from Form 8949, Schedule D and Form 4797) from the business use of your home. In making this determination, consider the amount of 
time you spent at each location as well as other facts. After determining the part of your gross income from the business use of your home, subtract 
from that amount the total expenses shown on Schedule C, line 28, plus any losses shown on Form 8949 (and included on Schedule D) or Form 
4797 that are allocable to the business in which you use your home but that are not allocable to the business use of the home. Enter the result on 
line 1 of the simplified method worksheet.
Note: If you had more than one home in which you conducted this business during the year, include only the income earned and the deductions 
attributable to that income during the period you owned the home for which you elected to use the simplified method.
Line 2. If you used the same area for the entire year, enter the smaller of the square feet you actually used or 300. If you and your spouse conducted 
the business as a qualified joint venture, split the square feet between you and your spouse in the same manner you split your other tax attributes. If 
you shared space with someone else, used the home for business for only part of the year, or the area you used changed during the year, see 
Figuring your allowable expenses for business use of the home, before entering an amount on this line. Do not enter more than 300 square feet or, if 
applicable, the average monthly allowable square footage on this line. See Part-year use or area changes (for simplified method only), later, for more 
information on how to figure your average monthly allowable square footage. 
Line 3b. If your qualified business use is providing daycare, you may need to account for the time that you used the same part of your home for other 
purposes. If you used the part of your home exclusively and regularly for providing daycare, enter 1.0 on line 3b. If you did not use the part of your 
home exclusively for providing daycare, complete the Daycare Facility Worksheet to figure what number to enter on line 3b. 
Line 6. Because you are using the simplified method this year, you cannot deduct the amounts you entered on lines 6a and 6b this year. If you file 
Form 8829 in a later year for your qualified business use of this home, you will be able to include these expenses when you figure your deduction. 
6a. If you didn’t file a 2024 Form 8829, your carryover of prior-year operating expenses is the amount of operating expenses 
shown in Part IV of the last Form 8829, if any, that you filed to claim a deduction for business use of the home. If you filed 
Form 1040-SS in a prior year and used a worksheet in Pub. 587 to figure your carryover of unallowed expenses, your 
carryover of prior-year operating expenses is the amount of operating expenses shown on your last worksheet from Pub. 587, 
if any, that you used to claim a deduction for business use of the home. This will be the amount from line 6a of the Simplified 
Method Worksheet or line 41 of the Worksheet T o Figure the Deduction for Business Use of Y our Home in Pub. 587.
6b. If you didn’t file a 2024 Form 8829, your carryover of prior-year excess casualty losses and depreciation is the amount of 
excess casualty losses and depreciation shown in Part IV of the last Form 8829, if any, that you filed to claim a deduction for 
business use of the home. If you filed Form 1040-SS in a prior year and used a worksheet in Pub. 587 to figure your carryover 
of unallowed expenses, your carryover of prior-year excess casualty losses and depreciation is the amount of excess 
casualty losses and depreciation shown on your last worksheet from Pub. 587, if any, that you used to claim a deduction for 
business use of the home. This will be the amount from line 6b of the Simplified Method Worksheet or line 42 of the 
Worksheet T o Figure the Deduction for Business Use of Y our Home in Pub. 587.
11

Page 12 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Simplified Method Worksheet Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the amount of the gross income limitation. See the Instructions for the Simplified Method Worksheet above .......... 1.  
2. Allowable square footage for the qualified business use. Don’t enter more than 300 square feet. See the Instructions for the 
Simplified Method Worksheet above ............................................................. 2.  
3. Simplified method amount
a. Maximum allowable amount ................................................................ 3a. $5
b. For daycare facilities not used exclusively for business, see the instructions for line 3b of this worksheet above, and enter the 
decimal amount from the Daycare Facility Worksheet; otherwise, enter 1.0 ................................. 3b.  
c. Multiply line 3a by line 3b and enter the result to two decimal places ...................................... 3c.  
4. Multiply line 2 by line 3c ...................................................................... 4.  
5. Allowable expenses using the simplified method. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 4 here and include that amount on 
Schedule C, line 30. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................................................ 5.  
6. Carryover of unallowed expenses from a prior year that are not allowed in 2025. Form 1040-SS filers, see the instructions 
above before completing.
a. Operating expenses. Enter the amount from your last Form 8829, line 43 (line 42 if before 2018). See the instructions for 
line 6a above .......................................................................... 6a.  
b. Excess casualty losses and depreciation. Enter the amount from your last Form 8829, line 44 (line 43 if before 2018). See the 
instructions for line 6b above ............................................................... 6b.  
Instructions for the Daycare Facility Worksheet
  
Use this worksheet to figure the percentage to use on line 3b of the Simplified Method Worksheet. If you don’t use the area of your home exclusively 
for daycare, you must reduce the prescribed rate before figuring your deduction using the simplified method.
TIP
If you used at least 300 square feet for daycare regularly and exclusively during the year, then you don’t need to complete this worksheet. 
This worksheet is only needed if you did not use the allowable area exclusively for daycare.
Line 1. Enter the total number of hours the facility was used for daycare during the year.
Example. Y our home is used Monday through Friday for 12 hours per day for 250 days during the year. It’s also used on 50 Saturdays for 8 hours a 
day. Enter 3,400 hours on line 4 (3,000 hours for weekdays plus 400 hours for Saturdays).
Line 2. If you used your home for daycare during the entire year, multiply 365 days (366 for a leap year) by 24 hours, and enter the result. 
If you started or stopped using your home for daycare during the year, you must prorate the number of hours based on the number of days the home 
was available for daycare. Multiply 24 hours by the number of days available and enter the result.
Daycare Facility Worksheet (for simplified method)
1. Multiply days used for daycare during the year by hours used per day ................................ 1.  
2. T otal hours available for use during the year. See the Instructions for the Daycare Facility Worksheet........... 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2. Enter the result as a decimal amount here and on line 3b of the Simplified Method 
Worksheet ........................................................................ 3.  
12

Page 13 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you used your home for more than one business, you 
will need to file a separate Schedule C for each 
business. Don’t combine your deductions for each 
business use on a single Schedule C.
Business use of more than one home. Y ou may have used 
more than one home in your business. If you used more than one 
home for the same business during 2025, you may elect to use 
the simplified method for only one home; you must file a Form 
8829 to claim a business use of the home deduction for any 
additional home. If one or more of the homes were not used for 
the entire year (for example, you moved during the year), see 
Part-year use or area changes (for simplified method only), later, 
and Columns (a) and (b) in the Instructions for Form 8829.
Other requirements must still be met. Y ou must still meet all 
the use requirements to claim a deduction for business use of 
the home. The simplified method is only an alternative to the 
calculation, allocation, and substantiation of actual expenses. 
The simplified method is not an alternative to the exclusivity and 
other tests that must be met in order to qualify for this deduction. 
For more information about qualifying business uses, see 
Qualifying for a Deduction in Pub. 587.
Gross income limitation. The amount of your deduction is still 
limited to the gross income derived from qualified business use 
of the home reduced by the business deductions that are not 
related to your use of the home. If this limitation reduces the 
amount of your deduction, you can’t carry over the difference to 
another tax year.
Carryover of actual expenses from Form 8829. If you used 
Form 8829 in a prior year and you had actual expenses that you 
could carry over to the next year, you can’t claim those expenses 
if you are using the simplified method. Instead, the actual 
expenses from Form 8829 that were not allowed will be carried 
over to the next year that you use actual expenses to figure your 
deduction.
Carryover of actual expenses for Form 1040-SS filers. If 
you filed Form 1040-SS in a prior year and used a worksheet in 
Pub. 587 to figure your actual expenses that you could carry over 
to the next year, you can’t claim those expenses if you are using 
the simplified method. Instead, the amount of your Operating 
expenses and Excess casualty losses and depreciation from 
your worksheet in Pub. 587 that were not allowed will be carried 
over to the next year that you use actual expenses to figure your 
deduction. The next time you claim actual expenses, you need to 
file Form 8829.
Depreciation of home. Y ou can’t deduct any depreciation 
(including any additional first-year depreciation) or section 179 
expense for the portion of your home that is used in a qualified 
business use if you figure the deduction for the business use of 
your home using the simplified method. The depreciation 
deduction allowable for that portion of the home for that year is 
deemed to be zero.
Although you can’t deduct any depreciation or section 
179 expense for the portion of your home that is a 
qualified business use because you elect to use the 
simplified method, you may still claim depreciation or the section 
179 expense deduction on other assets (for example, furniture 
and equipment) used in the qualified business use of your home.
Figuring your allowable expenses for business use of the 
home. Y ou will figure the deduction using Form 8829 or the 
Simplified Method Worksheet or both.
Y ou may not use the simplified method and also file 
Form 8829 for the same qualified business use of the 
same home.
CAUTION
!
TIP
CAUTION
!
Using Form 8829. Use Form 8829 to figure and claim this 
deduction for a home if you are not using or cannot use the 
simplified method for that home. For information about claiming 
this deduction using Form 8829, see the Instructions for Form 
8829 and Pub. 587.
Using the simplified method. Use the Simplified Method 
Worksheet in these instructions to figure your deduction for a 
qualified business use of your home if you are electing to use the 
simplified method for that home.
Shared use (for simplified method only). If you share your 
home with someone else who uses the home for a separate 
business that also qualifies for this deduction, you may not 
include the same square feet to figure your deduction as the 
other person. Y ou must allocate the shared space between you 
and the other person in a reasonable manner.
Example. T aylor and Logan are roommates. T aylor uses 300 
square feet of their home for a qualified business use. Logan 
uses 200 square feet of their home for a separate qualified 
business use. The qualified business uses share 100 square 
feet. In addition to the portion that they don’t share, T aylor and 
Logan can both claim 50 of the 100 square feet or divide the 100 
square feet between them in any reasonable manner. If divided 
evenly, T aylor could claim 250 square feet using the simplified 
method and Logan could claim 150 square feet.
Part-year use or area changes (for simplified method only). 
If your qualified business use was for a portion of the tax year (for 
example, a seasonal business, a business that begins during the 
year, or you moved during the year) or you changed the square 
footage of your qualified business use, your deduction is limited 
to the average monthly allowable square footage. Y ou figure the 
average monthly allowable square footage by adding the amount 
of allowable square feet you used in each month and dividing the 
sum by 12.
When determining the average monthly allowable square 
footage, you can’t take more than 300 square feet into account 
for any 1 month. Additionally, if your qualified business use was 
less than 15 days in a month, use -0- for that month.
Example 1. Finley files a federal income tax return on a 
calendar year basis. On July 20, Finley began using 400 square 
feet of the home for a qualified business use. Finley continued to 
use the 400 square feet until the end of the year. Finley’s average 
monthly allowable square footage is 125 square feet (300 square 
feet for August through December divided by the number of 
months in the year ((300 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300)/12)).
Example 2. Riley files a federal income tax return on a 
calendar year basis. On April 20, Riley began using 100 square 
feet of the home for a qualified business use. On August 5, Riley 
expanded the area of qualified business use to 350 square feet. 
Riley continued to use the 350 square feet until the end of the 
year. Riley’s average monthly allowable square footage is 150 
square feet (100 square feet for May through July and 300 
square feet for August through December divided by the number 
of months in the year ((100 + 100 +100 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300 
+ 300)/12)).
Example 3. Carter files a federal income tax return on a 
calendar year basis. From January 1 through July 16, Carter 
used 300 square feet of the home for a qualified business use. 
On July 17, Carter moved to a new home and immediately 
began using 200 square feet of the new home for the same 
qualified business use. Using the simplified method to deduct 
expenses for the qualified business use for the previous home, 
Carter’s average monthly allowable square footage is 175 square 
feet (300 square feet for January through July divided by the 
number of months in the year ((300 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 300 + 
300 + 300)/12)). Carter also prepared Form 8829 to deduct the 
actual expenses associated with the qualified business use of 
the new home.
13

Page 14 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Once you have determined your allowable square footage, 
enter the result on line 2 of the Simplified Method Worksheet.
If you moved during the year, your average allowable 
square footage will generally be less than 300.
Y ou can use the Area Adjustment Worksheet in Pub. 587 
to help you determine the allowable square footage to 
enter on line 2 of the Simplified Method Worksheet.
Reporting your expenses for business use of the home. If 
you didn’t use the simplified method, include the amount from 
line 36 of Form 8829 on line 30 of the Schedule C you are filing 
for that business.
If you used the simplified method. If you elect to use the 
simplified method for the business use of a home, complete the 
additional entry spaces on line 30 for that home only. Include the 
amount from line 5 of the Simplified Method Worksheet on 
line 30.
If you itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
you may deduct your mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and 
casualty losses on Schedule A (Form 1040) as if you didn’t use 
your home for business. Y ou can’t deduct any excess mortgage 
interest, excess real estate taxes, or excess casualty losses on 
Schedule C for this home.
Use Part II of Schedule C to deduct business expenses that 
are unrelated to the qualified business use of the home (for 
example, expenses for advertising, wages, or supplies, or 
depreciation of equipment or furniture).
Deduction figured on multiple forms. If you used more 
than one home for a business during the year, use a Form 8829 
for each home or use the simplified method for one home and 
Form 8829 for any other home. Combine the amount you figured 
using the simplified method and the amounts you figured on your 
Forms 8829, and then enter the total on line 30 of the 
Schedule C for that business.
Line 31
Figuring your net profit or loss. If your expenses (including 
the expenses you report on line 30) are more than your gross 
income, don’t enter your loss on line 31 until you have applied 
the at-risk rules and the passive activity loss rules. T o apply 
these rules, follow the instructions under Line 32, later, and the 
Instructions for Form 8582. After applying those rules, the 
amount on line 31 will be your loss, and it may be smaller than 
the amount you figured by subtracting line 30 from line 29.
If your gross income is more than your expenses (including 
the expenses you report on line 30) and you don’t have prior year 
unallowed passive activity losses, subtract line 30 from line 29. 
The result is your net profit.
If your gross income is more than your expenses (including 
the expenses you report on line 30) and you have prior year 
unallowed passive activity losses, don’t enter your net profit on 
line 31 until you have figured the amount of prior year unallowed 
passive activity losses you may claim this year for this activity. 
Use Form 8582 to figure the amount of prior year unallowed 
passive activity losses you may include on line 31. Be sure to 
indicate that you are including prior year passive activity losses 
by entering “PAL ” to the left of the entry space.
If you checked the “No” box on line G, see the Instructions for 
Form 8582. Y ou may need to include information from this 
schedule on Form 8582 even if you have a net profit.
Rental real estate activity.  Unless you are a qualifying real 
estate professional, a rental real estate activity is a passive 
activity even if you materially participated in the activity. If you 
have a loss, you may need to file Form 8582 to apply a limitation 
that may reduce your loss. See the Instructions for Form 8582.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Reporting your net profit or loss. Once you have figured your 
net profit or loss, report it as follows.
If you enter a loss on line 31, you may have an excess 
business loss. Use Form 461 to figure your excess 
business loss.
Individuals. Enter your net profit or loss on line 31 and 
include it on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 3. Also, include your 
net profit or loss on Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 2. However, if 
you are a statutory employee or notary public, see Statutory 
employees or Notary public, later.
Nonresident aliens. Enter your net profit or loss on line 31 
and include it on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 3. Y ou should 
also include this amount on Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 2, if 
you are covered under the U.S. social security system due to an 
international social security agreement currently in effect. See 
the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for information on 
international social security agreements. However, if you are a 
statutory employee or notary public, see Statutory employees or 
Notary public, later.
Trusts and estates. Enter the net profit or loss on line 31 and 
include it on Form 1041, line 3.
Statutory employees. Enter your net profit or loss on line 31 
and include it on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 3. However, do 
not report this amount on Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 2. If 
you were a statutory employee and you are required to file 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) because of other self-employment 
income, see the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Notary public. Do not enter your net profit from line 31 on 
Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 2, unless you are required to file 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) because you have other 
self-employment income. See the Instructions for Schedule SE 
(Form 1040).
Y ou can deduct one-half of your self-employment tax on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 15. See the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.
Community income. If you and your spouse had community 
income and are filing separate returns, see the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040) before figuring self-employment tax.
Earned income credit (EIC). If you have a net profit on line 31, 
this amount is earned income and may qualify you for the EIC.
T o figure your EIC, use the Instructions for Form 1040, 
line 27a. Complete all applicable steps plus Worksheet 
B. If you are required to file Schedule SE (Form 1040), 
remember to enter one-half of your self-employment tax on Part 
1, line 1d, of Worksheet B.
Line 32
Y ou don’t need to complete line 32 if line 7 is more than 
the total of lines 28 and 30.
At-risk rules. In most cases, if you have a business loss and 
amounts invested in the business for which you are not at risk, 
complete Form 6198 to apply a limitation that may reduce your 
loss. The at-risk rules generally limit the amount of loss 
(including loss on the disposition of assets) you can claim to the 
amount you could actually lose in the business.
Check box 32b if you have amounts invested in this business 
for which you are not at risk, such as the following.
• Nonrecourse loans used to finance the business, to acquire 
property used in the business, or to acquire the business that are 
not secured by your own property (other than property used in 
the business) and which you are not personally responsible to 
repay. However, there is an exception for certain nonrecourse 
CAUTION
!
TIP
CAUTION
!
TIP
14

Page 15 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
financing borrowed by you in connection with holding real 
property. See the Instructions for Form 6198 and Pub. 925.
• Cash, property, or borrowed amounts used in the business (or 
contributed to the business or used to acquire the business) that 
are protected against loss by a guarantee, stop-loss agreement, 
or other similar arrangement (excluding casualty insurance and 
insurance against tort liability).
• Amounts borrowed for use in the business from a person who 
has an interest in the business other than as a creditor or who is 
related under section 465(b)(3)(C) to a person (other than you) 
having such an interest.
Figuring your loss. Before determining your loss, check 
box 32a or 32b to indicate whether the loss from your business 
activity is limited by the at-risk rules. Follow the instructions next 
that apply to your box 32 activity.
Note: Line 32 doesn’t apply to filers of Form 1040-SS.
All investment is at risk. If all amounts are at risk in this 
business, check box 32a. If you answered “Y es” on line G, your 
loss will not be reduced by the at-risk rules or the passive activity 
loss rules. See Line 31, earlier, for how to report your loss.
If you answered “No” on line G, you may need to complete 
Form 8582 to figure your loss to enter on line 31. See the 
Instructions for Form 8582 for details.
Some investment is not at risk. If some investment is not at 
risk, check box 32b; the at-risk rules apply to your loss. Be sure 
to attach Form 6198 to your return.
If you answered "Y es" on line G, complete Form 6198 to figure 
the loss to enter on line 31. The passive activity loss rules do not 
apply. See Line 31, earlier, for how to report your loss.
If you answered "No" on line G, the passive activity loss rules 
may apply. First, complete Form 6198 to figure the amount of 
your profit or (loss) for the at-risk activity, which may include 
amounts reported on other forms and schedules, and the at-risk 
amount for the activity. Follow the Instructions for Form 6198 to 
determine how much of your Schedule C loss will be allowed. 
After you figure the amount of your loss that is allowed under the 
at-risk rules, you may need to complete Form 8582 to figure the 
passive activity loss to enter on line 31. See the Instructions for 
Form 8582 for details.
If you checked box 32b because some investment is not 
at risk and you do not attach Form 6198, the processing 
of your return may be delayed.
At-risk loss deduction. Any loss from this business not 
allowed for 2025 only because of the at-risk rules is treated as a 
deduction allocable to the business in 2026.
More information. For details, see the Instructions for Form 
6198 and Pub. 925.
Part III. Cost of Goods Sold
In most cases, if you engaged in a trade or business in which the 
production, purchase, or sale of merchandise was an 
income-producing factor, you must take inventories into account 
at the beginning and end of your tax year.
Exception for small business taxpayers. If you are a small 
business taxpayer, you can choose not to keep an inventory, but 
you must still use a method of accounting for inventory that 
clearly reflects income. If you choose not to keep an inventory, 
you won’t be treated as failing to clearly reflect income if your 
method of accounting for inventory treats inventory as 
nonincidental material or supplies or conforms to your financial 
accounting treatment of inventories. If, however, you choose to 
keep an inventory, you must generally value the inventory each 
CAUTION
!
year to determine your cost of goods sold in Part III of 
Schedule C.
Small business taxpayer. Y ou qualify as a small business 
taxpayer if you (a) have average annual gross receipts of $31 
million or less for the 3 prior tax years (indexed for inflation), and 
(b) are not a tax shelter (as defined in section 448(d)(3)).
If your business has not been in existence for all of the 
3-tax-year period used in figuring average gross receipts, base 
your average on the period it has existed, and if your business 
has a predecessor entity, include the gross receipts of the 
predecessor entity from the 3-tax-year period when figuring 
average gross receipts. If your business (or predecessor entity) 
had short tax years for any of the 3-tax-year period, annualize 
your business’s gross receipts for the short tax years that are 
part of the 3-tax-year period.
See Pub. 538 for more information.
Treating inventory as nonincidental material or supplies. 
If you account for inventories as materials and supplies that are 
not incidental, you deduct the amounts paid to acquire or 
produce the inventoriable items (treated as materials and 
supplies) in the year in which they are first used or consumed in 
your operations.
Financial accounting treatment of inventories. Y our 
financial accounting treatment of inventories is determined with 
regard to the method of accounting you use in your applicable 
financial statement (as defined in section 451(b)(3)) or, if you 
don’t have an applicable financial statement, with regard to the 
method of accounting you use in your books and records that 
have been prepared in accordance with your accounting 
procedures.
More information. For more information about this exception 
for small businesses using this method of accounting for 
inventoriable items, see Pub. 538.
Changing your method of accounting for inventory.  If 
you want to change your method of accounting for inventory, file 
Form 3115. For details, see Line F, earlier.
Certain direct and indirect expenses may have to be 
capitalized or included in inventory. See Part II, earlier. 
See Pub. 538 for additional information.
Line 33
Y our inventories can be valued at cost, the lower of cost or 
market, or any other method approved by the IRS.
Line 33 doesn’t apply to filers of Form 1040-SS.
Line 35
If you are changing your method of accounting beginning with 
2025, refigure last year’s closing inventory using your new 
method of accounting and enter the result on line 35. If there is a 
difference between last year’s closing inventory and the refigured 
amount, attach an explanation and take it into account when 
figuring your section 481(a) adjustment. For details, see the 
example under Line F, earlier.
Part IV. Information on Your Vehicle
Line 44b
In most cases, commuting is travel between your home and a 
work location. If you converted your vehicle during the year from 
personal to business use (or vice versa), enter your commuting 
miles only for the period you drove your vehicle for business.
T ravel that meets any of the following conditions isn’t 
commuting; it is considered deductible business travel.
CAUTION
!
15

Page 16 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Y ou have at least one regular work location away from your 
home and the travel is to a temporary work location in the same 
trade or business, regardless of the distance. Generally, a 
temporary work location is one where your employment is 
expected to last 1 year or less. See Pub. 463 for more details.
• The travel is to a temporary work location outside the 
metropolitan area where you live and normally work.
• Y our home is your principal place of business under section 
280A(c)(1)(A) (for purposes of deducting expenses for business 
use of your home) and the travel is to another work location in 
the same trade or business, regardless of whether that location 
is regular or temporary and regardless of distance.
Line 47
Specific recordkeeping rules apply to car or truck expenses. For 
more information about what records you must keep, see Pub. 
463.
Y ou may maintain written evidence by using an electronic 
storage system that meets certain requirements. For more 
information about electronic storage systems, see Pub. 583.
Part V. Other Expenses. Line 48
Include all ordinary and necessary business expenses not 
deducted elsewhere on Schedule C. List the type and amount of 
each expense separately in the space provided. Enter the total 
on lines 48 and 27b. Do not include the cost of business 
equipment or furniture; replacements or permanent 
improvements to property; or personal, living, and family 
expenses. Do not include charitable contributions. Also, you 
can’t deduct fines or penalties paid to a government for violating 
any law. For details on business expenses, see Pub. 334, 
chapter 8.
Amortization. Include amortization in this part. For amortization 
that begins in 2025, complete and attach Form 4562.
Y ou can amortize such costs as:
• The cost of pollution-control facilities;
• Amounts paid for research and experimentation (see sections 
174 and 174A for new provisions that impact research and 
experimentation expenditures);
• Amounts paid to acquire, protect, expand, register, or defend 
trademarks or trade names; or
• Goodwill and certain other intangibles.
In most cases, you cannot amortize real property construction 
period interest and taxes. Special rules apply for allocating 
interest to real or personal property produced in your trade or 
business.
For a complete list, see the Instructions for Form 4562, Part 
VI.
At-risk loss deduction. Any loss from this business that was 
not allowed last year because of the at-risk rules is treated as a 
deduction allocable to this business in 2025.
Bad debts. Include debts and partial debts from sales or 
services that were included in income and are definitely known 
to be worthless. If you later collect a debt that you deducted as a 
bad debt, include it as income in the year collected. For details, 
see Pub. 334, chapter 8.
Business startup costs. If your business began in 2025, you 
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of certain business startup 
costs. The $5,000 limit is reduced (but not below zero) by the 
amount by which your total startup costs exceed $50,000. Y our 
remaining startup costs can be amortized over a 180-month 
period beginning with the month the business began.
For details, see IRS.gov/Newsroom/Heres-how-businesses-
can-deduct-startup-costs-from-their-federal-taxes. For 
amortization that begins in 2025, complete and attach Form 
4562.
Deduction for removing barriers to individuals with disabil-
ities and the elderly. Y ou may be able to deduct up to $15,000 
of costs paid or incurred in 2025 to remove architectural or 
transportation barriers to individuals with disabilities and the 
elderly. However, you can’t take both a credit (on Form 8826) 
and a deduction for the same expenditures.
Nontaxable Medicaid waiver payments. Include the 
nontaxable amount of your Medicaid waiver payments. See 
Medicaid waiver payments, earlier.
De minimis safe harbor for tangible property. Generally, you 
must capitalize costs to acquire or produce real or tangible 
personal property used in your trade or business, such as 
buildings, equipment, or furniture. However, if you elect to use 
the de minimis safe harbor for tangible property, you may deduct 
de minimis amounts paid to acquire or produce certain tangible 
property if these amounts are deducted by you for financial 
accounting purposes or in keeping your books and records.
If you have an applicable financial statement, you may use 
this safe harbor to deduct amounts paid for tangible property up 
to $5,000 per item or invoice. If you don’t have an applicable 
financial statement, you may use the de minimis safe harbor to 
deduct amounts paid for tangible property up to $2,500 per item 
or invoice.
Only deduct these amounts as other expenses. Don’t include 
these amounts on any other line.
For details on making this election and requirements for using 
the de minimis safe harbor for tangible property, see chapter 8 of 
Pub. 334.
Film, television, live theatrical, and sound recording pro-
duction expenses. Y ou can elect to deduct costs of certain 
qualified film or television productions, certain qualified live 
theatrical productions, and certain qualified sound recording 
productions. See section 181 for details.
Forestation and reforestation costs. Reforestation costs are 
generally capital expenditures. However, for each qualified 
timber property, you can elect to expense up to $10,000 ($5,000 
if married filing separately) of qualifying reforestation costs paid 
or incurred in 2025.
Y ou can elect to amortize the remaining costs over 84 
months. For amortization that begins in 2025, complete and 
attach Form 4562.
The amortization election and the expense election don’t 
apply to trusts. For details on reforestation expenses, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 225.
Technology and software tools.  Y ou can deduct technology 
and software tools that are ordinary and necessary expenses 
directly related to operating your business. Generally, this will 
include tax preparation software and subscription services paid 
to manage your business. However, you can’t deduct technology 
or software tools that must be depreciated or amortized. Most 
computer software expenses must be capitalized and 
depreciated or expensed under section 179. See Pub. 946 for 
more information.
Paperwork Reduction Act Notice. We ask for the information 
on Schedule C (Form 1040) to carry out the Internal Revenue 
laws of the United States. Y ou are required to give us the 
information. We need it to ensure that you are complying with 
these laws and to allow us to figure and collect the right amount 
of tax.
Y ou are not required to provide the information requested on 
a form that is subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act unless the 
form displays a valid OMB control number. Books or records 
16

Page 17 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
relating to a form or its instructions must be retained as long as 
their contents may become material in the administration of any 
Internal Revenue law. Generally, tax returns and return 
information are confidential, as required by section 6103.
The time needed to complete and file Schedule C (Form 
1040) will vary depending on individual circumstances. The 
estimated burden for individual taxpayers filing this form is 
included in the estimates shown in the instructions for their 
individual income tax return. The estimated burden for all other 
taxpayers who file this form is approved under OMB control 
number 1545-0074 and is shown next.
Recordkeeping .................... 3 hr., 36 min.
Learning about the law or the form ....... 1 hr., 19 min.
Preparing the form .................. 1 hr., 39 min.
Copying, assembling, and sending the form to 
the IRS ......................... 34 min.
If you have comments concerning the accuracy of these time 
estimates or suggestions for making this form simpler, we would 
be happy to hear from you. See the instructions for the tax return 
with which this form is filed.
17

Page 18 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Principal Business or Professional 
Activity Codes
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
These codes for the Principal Business or 
Professional Activity classify sole proprietorships by the 
type of activity they are engaged in to facilitate the 
administration of the Internal Revenue Code. These 
six-digit codes are based on the NAICS.
Select the category that best describes your primary 
business activity (for example, Real Estate). Then select 
the activity that best identifies the principal source of 
your sales or receipts (for example, real estate agent). 
Now find the six-digit code assigned to this activity (for 
example, 531210, the code for offices of real estate 
agents and brokers) and enter it on Schedule C, line B.
Note: If your principal source of income is from 
farming activities, you should file Schedule F .
Accommodation, Food 
Services, & Drinking Places
Accommodation
721310 Rooming & boarding houses, 
dormitories, & workers’ camps
721210 RV (recreational vehicle) parks & 
recreational camps
721100 T raveler accommodation 
(including hotels, motels, & bed 
& breakfast inns)
Food Services & Drinking Places
722514 Cafeterias, grill buffets, & buffets
722410 Drinking places (alcoholic 
beverages)
722511 Full-service restaurants
722513 Limited-service restaurants
722515 Snack & nonalcoholic beverage 
bars
722300 Special food services (including 
food service contractors & 
caterers)
Administrative & Support and 
Waste Management & 
Remediation Services
Administrative & Support Services
561430 Business service centers 
(including private mail centers & 
copy shops)
561740 Carpet & upholstery cleaning 
services
561440 Collection agencies
561450 Credit bureaus
561410 Document preparation services
561300 Employment services
561710 Exterminating & pest control 
services
561210 Facilities support (management) 
services
561600 Investigation & security services
561720 Janitorial services
561730 Landscaping services
561110 Office administrative services
561420 T elephone call centers (including 
telephone answering services & 
telemarketing bureaus)
561500 T ravel arrangement & reservation 
services
561490 Other business support services 
(including repossession services, 
court reporting, & stenotype 
services)
561790 Other services to buildings & 
dwellings
561900 Other support services (including 
packaging & labeling services, & 
convention & trade show 
organizers)
Waste Management & Remediation 
Services
562000 Waste management & 
remediation services
Agriculture, Forestry, Hunting, & 
Fishing
112900 Animal production (including 
breeding of cats and dogs)
114110 Fishing
113000 Forestry & logging (including 
forest nurseries & timber tracts)
114210 Hunting & trapping
Support Activities for Agriculture & 
Forestry
115210 Support activities for animal 
production (including farriers)
115110 Support activities for crop 
production (including cotton 
ginning, soil preparation, 
planting, & cultivating)
115310 Support activities for forestry
Arts, Entertainment, & 
Recreation
Amusement, Gambling, & Recreation 
Industries
713100 Amusement parks & arcades
713200 Gambling industries
713900 Other amusement & recreation 
services (including golf courses, 
skiing facilities, marinas, fitness 
centers, bowling centers, skating 
rinks, miniature golf courses)
Museums, Historical Sites, & Similar 
Institutions
712100 Museums, historical sites, & 
similar institutions
Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, & 
Related Industries
711410 Agents & managers for artists, 
athletes, entertainers, & other 
public figures
711510 Independent artists, writers, & 
performers
711100 Performing arts companies
711300 Promoters of performing arts, 
sports, & similar events
711210 Spectator sports (including 
professional sports clubs & 
racetrack operations)
Construction of Buildings
236200 Nonresidential building 
construction
236100 Residential building construction
Heavy and Civil Engineering 
Construction
237310 Highway, street, & bridge 
construction
237210 Land subdivision
237100 Utility system construction
237990 Other heavy & civil engineering 
construction
Specialty Trade Contractors
238310 Drywall & insulation contractors
238210 Electrical contractors
238350 Finish carpentry contractors
238330 Flooring contractors
238130 Framing carpentry contractors
238150 Glass & glazing contractors
238140 Masonry contractors
238320 Painting & wall covering 
contractors
238220 Plumbing, heating, & 
air-conditioning contractors
238110 Poured concrete foundation & 
structure contractors
238160 Roofing contractors
238170 Siding contractors
238910 Site preparation contractors
238120 Structural steel & precast 
concrete construction 
contractors
238340 Tile & terrazzo contractors
238290 Other building equipment 
contractors
238390 Other building finishing 
contractors
238190 Other foundation, structure, & 
building exterior contractors
238990 All other specialty trade 
contractors
Educational Services
611000 Educational services (including 
schools, colleges, & universities)
Finance & Insurance
Credit Intermediation & Related 
Activities
522100 Depository credit intermediation 
(including commercial banking, 
savings institutions, & credit 
unions)
522200 Nondepository credit 
intermediation (including sales 
financing & consumer lending)
522300 Activities related to credit 
intermediation (including loan 
brokers)
Insurance Agents, Brokers, & Related 
Activities
524210 Insurance agencies & 
brokerages
524290 Other insurance related activities
Securities, Commodity Contracts, & 
Other Financial Investments & Related 
Activities
523160 Commodity contracts 
intermediation
523150 Investment banking & securities 
intermediation
523210 Securities & commodity 
exchanges
523900 Other financial investment 
activities (including investment 
advice)
Health Care & Social Assistance
Ambulatory Health Care Services
621610 Home health care services
621510 Medical & diagnostic laboratories
621310 Offices of chiropractors
621210 Offices of dentists
621330 Offices of mental health 
practitioners (except physicians)
621320 Offices of optometrists
621340 Offices of physical therapists, 
occupational & speech 
therapists, & audiologists
621111 Offices of physicians (except 
mental health specialists)
621112 Offices of physicians, mental 
health specialists
621391 Offices of podiatrists
621399 Offices of all other miscellaneous 
health practitioners
621400 Outpatient care centers
621900 Other ambulatory health care 
services (including ambulance 
services, blood banks, & organ 
banks)
Hospitals
622000 Hospitals
Nursing & Residential Care Facilities
623000 Nursing & residential care 
facilities
Social Assistance
624410 Childcare services
624200 Community food & housing & 
emergency & other relief 
services
624100 Individual & family services
624310 Vocational rehabilitation services
Information
Publishing Industries
513000 Publishing industries
Broadcasting & Content Providers & 
Telecommunications
516000 Broadcasting & content providers
517000 T elecommunications (including 
wired, wireless, satellite, cable, & 
other program distribution, 
resellers, agents, other 
telecommunications, & internet 
service providers)
Data Processing, Web Search Portals, & 
Other Information Services
518210 Computing infrastructure 
providers, data processing, web 
hosting, & related services
519200 Web search portals, libraries, 
archives, & other info. services
Motion Picture & Sound Recording
512100 Motion picture & video industries 
(except video rental)
512200 Sound recording industries
Manufacturing
315000 Apparel mfg.
312000 Beverage & tobacco product 
mfg.
334000 Computer & electronic product 
mfg.
335000 Electrical equipment, appliance, 
& component mfg.
332000 Fabricated metal product mfg.
337000 Furniture & related product mfg.
333000 Machinery mfg.
339110 Medical equipment & supplies 
mfg.
322000 Paper mfg.
324100 Petroleum & coal products mfg.
326000 Plastics & rubber products mfg.
331000 Primary metal mfg.
323100 Printing & related support 
activities
313000 T extile mills
314000 T extile product mills
336000 T ransportation equipment mfg.
321000 Wood product mfg.
339900 Other miscellaneous mfg.
Chemical Manufacturing
325100 Basic chemical mfg.
325500 Paint, coating, & adhesive mfg.
325300 Pesticide, fertilizer, & other 
agricultural chemical mfg.
325410 Pharmaceutical & medicine mfg.
325200 Resin, synthetic rubber, & 
artificial & synthetic fibers & 
filaments mfg.
325600 Soap, cleaning compound, & 
toilet preparation mfg.
325900 Other chemical product & 
preparation mfg.
Food Manufacturing
311110 Animal food mfg.
311800 Bakeries & tortilla & dry pasta 
mfg.
311500 Dairy product mfg.
311400 Fruit & vegetable preserving & 
speciality food mfg.
311200 Grain & oilseed milling
311610 Animal slaughtering & 
processing
311710 Seafood product preparation & 
packaging
311300 Sugar & confectionery product 
mfg.
311900 Other food mfg. (including coffee, 
tea, flavorings, & seasonings)
Leather & Allied Product Manufacturing
316210 Footwear mfg. (including leather, 
rubber, & plastics)
316110 Leather & hide tanning & 
finishing
316990 Other leather & allied product 
mfg.
Nonmetallic Mineral Product 
Manufacturing
327300 Cement & concrete product mfg.
327100 Clay product & refractory mfg.
327210 Glass & glass product mfg.
327400 Lime & gypsum product mfg.
327900 Other nonmetallic mineral 
product mfg.
Mining
212110 Coal mining
211120 Crude petroleum extraction
212200 Metal ore mining
211130 Natural gas extraction
212300 Nonmetallic mineral mining & 
quarrying
213110 Support activities for mining
Other Services
Personal & Laundry Services
812111 Barber shops
812112 Beauty salons
812220 Cemeteries & crematories
812310 Coin-operated laundries & 
drycleaners
812320 Drycleaning & laundry services 
(except coin-operated) (including 
laundry & drycleaning drop-off & 
pickup sites)
812210 Funeral homes & funeral 
services
18

Page 19 of 19  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:56 - 2-Jan-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Principal Business or Professional Activity Codes (Continued)
812330 Linen & uniform supply
812113 Nail salons
812930 Parking lots & garages
812910 Pet care (except veterinary) 
services
812920 Photofinishing
812190 Other personal care services 
(including diet & weight reducing 
centers)
812990 All other personal services
Repair & Maintenance
811120 Automotive body, paint, interior, 
& glass repair
811110 Automotive mechanical & 
electrical repair & maintenance
811190 Other automotive repair & 
maintenance (including oil 
change & lubrication shops & car 
washes)
811310 Commercial & industrial 
machinery & equipment (except 
automotive & electronic) repair & 
maintenance
811210 Electronic & precision equipment 
repair & maintenance
811430 Footwear & leather goods repair
811410 Home & garden equipment & 
appliance repair & maintenance
811420 Reupholstery & furniture repair
811490 Other personal & household 
goods repair & maintenance
Professional, Scientific, & 
Technical Services
541100 Legal services
541211 Offices of certified public 
accountants
541214 Payroll services
541213 T ax preparation services
541219 Other accounting services
Architectural, Engineering, & Related 
Services
541310 Architectural services
541350 Building inspection services
541340 Drafting services
541330 Engineering services
541360 Geophysical surveying & 
mapping services
541320 Landscape architecture services
541370 Surveying & mapping (except 
geophysical) services
541380 T esting laboratories & services
Computer Systems Design & Related 
Services
541510 Computer systems design & 
related services
Specialized Design Services
541400 Specialized design services 
(including interior, industrial, 
graphic, & fashion design)
Other Professional, Scientific, & 
Technical Services
541800 Advertising, public relations, & 
related services
541600 Management, scientific, & 
technical consulting services
541910 Market research & public opinion 
polling
541920 Photographic services
541700 Scientific research & 
development services
541930 T ranslation & interpretation 
services
541940 Veterinary services
541990 All other professional, scientific, 
& technical services
Real Estate & Rental & Leasing
Real Estate
531100 Lessors of real estate (including 
miniwarehouses & self-storage 
units)
531210 Offices of real estate agents & 
brokers
531320 Offices of real estate appraisers
531310 Real estate property managers
531390 Other activities related to real 
estate
Rental & Leasing Services
532100 Automotive equipment rental & 
leasing
532400 Commercial & industrial 
machinery & equipment rental & 
leasing
532210 Consumer electronics & 
appliances rental
532281 Formal wear & costume rental
532310 General rental centers
532283 Home health equipment rental
532284 Recreational goods rental
532282 Video tape & disc rental
532289 Other consumer goods rental
Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, 
Professional, & Similar 
Organizations
813000 Religious, grantmaking, civic, 
professional, & similar 
organizations
Retail Trade
Building Material & Garden Equipment 
& Supplies Dealers
444140 Hardware retailers
444110 Home centers
444200 Lawn & garden equipment & 
supplies retailers
444120 Paint & wallpaper retailers
444180 Other building materials dealers
Clothing & Accessories Retailers
458110 Clothing & clothing accessories 
retailers
458310 Jewelry retailers
458320 Luggage & leather goods 
retailers
458210 Shoe retailers
Electronic & Appliance Retailers
449210 Electronics & appliance retailers 
(including computers)
Food & Beverage Retailers
445320 Beer, wine, & liquor retailers
445250 Fish & seafood retailers
445230 Fruit & vegetable retailers
445100 Grocery & convenience retailers
445240 Meat retailers
445290 Other specialty food retailers
445132 Vending machine operators
Furniture & Home Furnishings Retailers
449110 Furniture retailers
449120 Home furnishings retailers
Gasoline Stations & Fuel Dealers
457100 Gasoline stations (including 
convenience stores with gas)
457210 Fuel dealers (including heating 
oil & liquefied petroleum)
General Merchandise Retailers
455000 General merchandise retailers
Health & Personal Care Retailers
456120 Cosmetics, beauty supplies, & 
perfume retailers
456130 Optical goods retailers
456110 Pharmacies & drug retailers
456190 Other health & personal care 
retailers
Motor Vehicle & Parts Dealers
441300 Automotive parts, accessories, & 
tire retailers
441222 Boat dealers
441227 Motorcycle, ATV , & all other 
motor vehicle dealers
441110 New car dealers
441210 Recreational vehicle dealers 
(including motor home & travel 
trailer dealers)
441120 Used car dealers
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, Musical 
Instrument, & Miscellaneous Retailers
459210 Book retailers & news dealers 
(including newsstands)
459120 Hobby, toy, & game retailers
459140 Musical instrument, & supplies 
retailers
459130 Sewing, needlework, & piece 
goods retailers
459110 Sporting goods retailers
459920 Art dealers
459310 Florists
459420 Gift, novelty, & souvenir retailers
459930 Manufactured (mobile) home 
dealers
459410 Office supplies & stationery 
retailers
459910 Pet & pet supplies retailers
459510 Used merchandise retailers
459990 All other miscellaneous retailers 
(including tobacco, candle, & 
trophy retailers)
Nonstore Retailers
xx Nonstore retailers sell all types of 
merchandise using such 
methods as Internet, mail-order 
catalogs, interactive television, or 
direct sales. These types of 
Retailers should select the PBA 
associated with their primary line 
of products sold.
xx For example, establishments 
primarily selling prescription and 
nonprescription drugs select 
PBA code 456110 Pharmacies & 
Drug Retailers.
Transportation & Warehousing
481000 Air transportation
485510 Charter bus industry
484110 General freight trucking, local
484120 General freight trucking, long 
distance
485210 Interurban & rural bus 
transportation
486000 Pipeline transportation
482110 Rail transportation
487000 Scenic & sightseeing 
transportation
485410 School & employee bus 
transportation
484200 Specialized freight trucking 
(including household moving 
vans)
485300 T axi, limousine, & ridesharing 
service
485110 Urban transit systems
483000 Water transportation
485990 Other transit & ground passenger 
transportation
488000 Support activities for 
transportation (including motor 
vehicle towing)
Couriers & Messengers
492000 Couriers & messengers
Warehousing & Storage Facilities
493100 Warehousing & storage (except 
leases of miniwarehouses & 
self-storage units)
Utilities
221000 Utilities
Wholesale Trade
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods
423200 Furniture & home furnishing
423700 Hardware & plumbing & heating 
equipment & supplies
423600 Household appliances & 
electrical & electronic goods
423940 Jewelry, watches, precious 
stones, & precious metals
423300 Lumber & other construction 
materials
423800 Machinery, equipment, & 
supplies
423500 Metal & mineral (except 
petroleum)
423100 Motor vehicle & motor vehicle 
parts & supplies
423400 Professional & commercial 
equipment & supplies
423930 Recyclable materials
423910 Sporting & recreational goods & 
supplies
423920 T oy & hobby goods & supplies
423990 Other miscellaneous durable 
goods
Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable 
Goods
424300 Apparel, piece goods, & notions
424800 Beer, wine, & distilled alcoholic 
beverages
424920 Books, periodicals, & 
newspapers
424600 Chemical & allied products
424210 Drugs & druggists’ sundries
424500 Farm product raw materials
424910 Farm supplies
424930 Flower, nursery stock, & florists’ 
supplies
424400 Grocery & related products
424950 Paint, varnish, & supplies
424100 Paper & paper products
424700 Petroleum & petroleum products
424940 T obacco products & electronic 
cigarettes
424990 Other miscellaneous nondurable 
goods
Wholesale Trade Agents & 
Brokers
425120 Wholesale trade agents & 
brokers
999000 Unclassified establishments 
(unable to classify)
19