Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.sgm ( 9-Nov-2001) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
Important Changes ................ 2Department
of the Important Reminders .............. 2InvestmentTreasury
Internal Introduction ..................... 2
Revenue Income and
Chapter 1. Investment Income ........ 3Service
General Information ............. 3
Interest Income ................ 4Expenses
Discount on Debt Instruments ...... 12
When To Report Interest Income .... 15
(Including Capital How To Report Interest Income ..... 16
Dividends and Other CorporateGains and Losses)
Distributions ............... 19
How To Report Dividend
Income ................... 21
Stripped Preferred Stock .......... 22For use in preparing
REMICs, FASITs, and Other
CDOs .................... 23
2001 Returns S Corporations ................ 24
Investment Clubs ............... 24
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters ............ 26
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ...... 29
Limits on Deductions ............ 29
Interest Expenses .............. 29
Bond Premium Amortization ........ 31
Expenses of Producing Income ..... 32
Nondeductible Expenses .......... 33
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 34
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 34
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ............ 36
What is a Sale or Trade? .......... 36
Basis of Investment Property ....... 39
How To Figure Gain or Loss ....... 42
Nontaxable Trades .............. 43
Transfers Between Spouses ....... 44
Related Party Transactions ........ 44
Capital Gains and Losses ......... 45
Holding Period ............... 50
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ......... 50
Short Sales ................. 51
Wash Sales ................. 52
Options .................... 53
Straddles ................... 54
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ......... 58
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities ...... 58
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ............. 59
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 60
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities ................. 63
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ...... 69
Glossary ....................... 70
Index .......................... 72

Page 2 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
U.S. property acquired from a foreign per- pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
help bring these children home by looking at theson. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter-Important Changes
photographs and calling 1–800–THE-LOSTest from a foreign person or firm, you may have
(1–800– 843–5678) if you recognize a child.to withhold income tax on the amount you pay8% capital gain rate. Beginning in 2001, the
for the property (including cash, the fair market10% capital gain rate is lowered to 8% for quali-
value of other property, and any assumed liabil-fied 5-year gain. For more information, see Cap-
ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner-ital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Introductionships, trusts, and estates may also have to
18% capital gain rate. Beginning in 2006, the withhold on certain distributions and other trans- This publication provides information on the tax20% capital gain rate will be lowered to 18% for actions involving U.S. real property interests. If treatment of investment income and expenses.qualified 5-year gain from property with a hold- you fail to withhold, you may be held liable for It explains what investment income is taxableing period that begins after 2000. and what investment expenses are deductible. Itthe tax, penalties that apply, and interest. ForYou can give a new holding period to certain explains when and how to show these items onmore information, see Publication 515, With-assets you already held on January 1, 2001, by your tax return. It also explains how to determineholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-treating them as sold and then reacquired on the and report gains and losses on the disposition ofeign Entities.same date. You must pay tax for 2001 on any investment property and provides informationresulting gain. For more information, see Capital Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with on property trades and tax shelters.Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. investment income from sources outside the There is a glossary at the end of this publica-
United States (foreign income), you must report tion that defines many of the terms used.Securities futures contracts. A securities fu-
tures contract is a new financial product that is a that income on your tax return unless it is ex-
contract of sale for future delivery of a single Investment income. This generally includesempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
security or of a narrow-based security index. interest, dividends, capital gains, and otherside inside or outside the United States and
Gain or loss from the sale or exchange of the types of distributions.whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
contract will generally have the same character foreign payer.as gain or loss from transactions in the property Investment expenses. These include interest
to which the contract relates. Any capital gain or Alien’s individual taxpayer identification paid or incurred to acquire investment property
loss on a sale or exchange of the contract will be number (ITIN). The IRS will issue an ITIN to a and expenses to manage or collect income from
considered short-term, regardless of how long investment property.nonresident or resident alien who does not have
you hold the contract. For more information, see and is not eligible to get a social security number
chapter 4. Comments and suggestions. We welcome(SSN). To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7,
your comments about this publication and yourApplication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifi-
suggestions for future editions.cation Number, with the IRS. Enter your ITIN
You can e-mail us while visiting our web sitewherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. IfImportant Reminders at www.irs.gov.you must include another person’s SSN on your
You can write to us at the following address:return and that person does not have and cannotSale of DC Zone assets. Beginning in 2003, get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN.investments in District of Columbia Enterprise Internal Revenue ServiceAn ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitleZone (DC Zone) assets held more than 5 years Technical Publications Branchyou to social security benefits or change yourwill qualify for a special tax benefit. If you sell or W:CAR:MP:FP:Pemployment or immigration status under U.S.trade a DC Zone asset at a gain, you will not 1111 Constitution Ave. NWlaw.have to include any qualified capital gain in your Washington, DC 20224gross income. This exclusion applies to an inter-
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-est in, or property of, certain businesses operat-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theing in the District of Columbia. For more We respond to many letters by telephone.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-information, see Publication 954, Tax Incentives Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedfor Empowerment Zones and Other Distressed clude your daytime phone number, including the
by the Center may appear in this publication onCommunities. area code, in your correspondence.
Page 2

Page 3 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about getting recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
these publications and forms. give the child ’s SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child ’s SSN to the payer of
1. dividends on stock owned by your child, even
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-
dian.General Information
Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You willInvestment A few items of general interest are covered here. be subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
to:Recordkeeping. You should keep a
Income list showing sources and amounts of 1) Include your SSN on any return, state-investment income that you receiveRECORDS
ment, or other document,during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
ceive that show your investment income (Forms 2) Give your SSN to another person who hasTopics
1099– INT, Interest Income, and 1099 – DIV, to include it on any return, statement, orThis chapter discusses: Dividends and Distributions, for example) as an other document, or
important part of your records.• Interest income, 3) Include the SSN of another person on any
return, statement, or other document.• Dividends and other corporate distribu- Tax on investment income of a child under
tions, age 14. Part of a child ’s 2001 investment in- The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-
come may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.• Real estate mortgage investment conduits
may happen if all of the following are true. You will not be subject to this penalty if you(REMICs), financial asset securitization in-
can show that your failure to provide the SSNvestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- 1) The child was under age 14 on January 1, was due to a reasonable cause and not to willfuleralized debt obligations (CDOs), 2002. neglect.
• S corporations, and If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-
subject to backup withholding.ment income (such as taxable interest and• Investment clubs.
dividends) and has to file a tax return.
Backup withholding. Your investment in-
3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2001.Useful Items come is generally not subject to regular with-
holding. However, it may be subject to backupYou may want to see: If all of these statements are true, Form 8615
withholding to ensure that income tax is col-must be completed and attached to the child ’s
lected on the income. Under backup withhold-Publication tax return. If any of these statements is not true,
ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashis taxed at his or her own tax rate.
patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,❏ 537 Installment Sales However, the parent can choose to include
as income tax, a percentage of the amount youthe child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions are paid. For 2002, the percentage is 30%.return if certain requirements are met. Use
Backup withholding applies if:❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements Form 8814 for this purpose.
(IRAs) For more information about the tax on invest- 1) You do not give the payer your identifica-ment income of children and the parents ’ elec-❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules tion number (either a social security num-tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children ber or an employer identification number)❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount and Dependents. in the required manner,Instruments Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest, 2) The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-dividends, and other investment income you re-Form (and Instructions) fies the payer that you gave an incorrectceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is identification number,generally taxable income. You should receive a❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and
3) The IRS notifies the payer that you areSchedule K – 1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sOrdinary Dividends
subject to backup withholding on interestShare of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and or dividends because you have underre-the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K– 1 and itsOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A ported interest or dividends on your in-instructions will tell you where to report the in-Filers come tax return, orcome on your Form 1040.
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms 4) You are required, but fail, to certify thatSocial security number (SSN). You must1099, 1098, 5498, and W– 2G you are not subject to backup withholdinggive your name and SSN to any person required
for the reason described in (3).by federal tax law to make a return, statement,❏ 3115 Application for Change in
or other document that relates to you. This in-Accounting Method
Certification. For new accounts paying in-cludes payers of interest and dividends.❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— terest or dividends, you must certify under pen-
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a jointIndividuals alties of perjury that your social security number
account belong to one person, list that person’s (SSN) is correct and that you are not subject to❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations name first on the account and give that person’s backup withholding. Your payer will give you a
SSN to the payer. (For information on who owns❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Who Form W–9, Request for Taxpayer Identification
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,Have Investment Income of More Number and Certification, or similar form, to
later.) If the joint account contains combinedThan $1,500 make this certification. If you fail to make this
funds, give the SSN of the person whose name certification, backup withholding may begin im-❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s is listed first on the account. mediately on your new account or investment.Interest and Dividends These rules apply both to joint ownership by
Underreported interest and dividends.❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series a married couple and to joint ownership by other
You will be considered to have underreportedEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds individuals. For example, if you open a joint
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-Issued After 1989 savings account with your child using funds be-
mined for a tax year that:longing to the child, list the child’s name first on❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record the account and give the child’s SSN. 1) You failed to include any part of a reporta-Redemption of Series EE and I
ble interest or dividend payment requiredU.S. Savings Bonds Issued After Custodian account for your child. If your
to be shown on your return, or1989 child is the actual owner of an account that is
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income
Income
If you file
Form 1040
If you can file
Form 1040A
If you can file
Form 1040EZ
Taxable interest that totals
$400 or less
Ordinary dividends that total
$400 or less
Taxable interest that totals
more than $400
Ordinary dividends that total
more than $400
Savings bond interest you will
exclude because of higher
education expenses
Gain or loss from sale of
stocks and bonds
Gain or loss from exchanges
of like investment property
Line 2
Line 8a (You may need to file
Schedule B as well.)
Line 9 (You may need to file
Schedule B as well.)
Line 8a; also use Schedule B
Line 9; also use Schedule B
Schedule B; also use Form
8815
Line 13; also use Schedule D
Line 13; also use Schedule D
and Form 8824
Line 8a (You may need to file
Schedule 1 as well.)
Line 9 (You may need to file
Schedule 1 as well.)
Line 8a; also use Schedule 1
Line 9; also use Schedule 1
Schedule 1; also use Form
8815
You cannot use Form 1040A.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this publication, especially
How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.)
Capital gain distributions
(if you have to file Schedule D)
Schedule D, line 13
Capital gain distributions (if you
do not have to file Schedule D)
Line 13 Line 10
Income from property given to a child.2) You were required to file a return and to information return for the year (for example, a
Property you give as a parent to your child underinclude a reportable interest or dividend Form 1099– INT) that indicates the amount with-
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, thepayment on that return, but you failed to held. The information return will show any
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,file the return. backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-
becomes the child’s property.held.”
Income from the property is taxable to theHow to stop backup withholding due to Nonresident aliens. Generally, payments child, except that any part used to satisfy a legalunderreporting. If you have been notified that made to nonresident aliens are not subject to obligation to support the child is taxable to theyou underreported interest or dividends, you can
backup withholding. You can use Form parent or guardian having that legal obligation.request a determination from the IRS to prevent
W–8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Bene-backup withholding from starting or to stop Savings account with parent as trustee.ficial Owner for United States Tax Withholding,backup withholding once it has begun. You must Interest income from a savings account openedto certify exempt status. However, this does notshow that at least one of the following situations for a child who is a minor, but placed in the nameexempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-applies. and subject to the order of the parents as trust-holding rate that may apply to your investment ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of theincome. For information on the 30% rate, see1) No underreporting occurred. state in which the child resides, both of thePublication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.2) You have a bona fide dispute with the IRS following are true.
about whether underreporting occurred. Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen-
1) The savings account legally belongs to thealties for giving false information to avoid3) Backup withholding will cause or is caus- child.backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikely The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of 2) The parents are not legally permitted tothat you will underreport interest and divi- up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or use any of the funds to support the child.dends in the future. both.
4) You have corrected the underreporting by Accuracy-related penalty. An accuracy-re-filing a return if you did not previously file Where to report investment income. Table lated penalty of 20% can be charged for under-one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and 1– 1 gives an overview of the forms and sched- payments of tax due to negligence or disregardinterest due for any underreported interest ules to use to report some common types of of rules or regulations or substantial understate-or dividend payments. investment income. But, see the rest of this ment of tax. For information on the penalty and
publication for detailed information about report-If the IRS determines that backup withhold- any interest that applies, see Penalties in chap-
ing investment income.ing should stop, it will provide you with a certifi- ter 2.
cation and will notify the payers who were sent
Joint accounts. If two or more persons holdnotices earlier.
property (such as a savings account, bond, orHow to stop backup withholding due to an stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or Interest Incomeincorrect identification number. If you have tenants in common, each person’s share of anybeen notified by a payer that you are subject to interest or dividends from the property is deter- Terms you may need to knowbackup withholding because you have provided mined by local law. (see Glossary):an incorrect SSN or employer identification
number, you can stop it by following the instruc- Example. You and your husband have ations the payer gives you. Accrual methodjoint money market account. Under state law,
half the income from the account belongs to you,Reporting backup withholding. If backup Below-market loan
and half belongs to your husband. If you filewithholding is deducted from your interest or Cash methodseparate returns, you each report half of thedividend income or other reportable payment,
income.the bank or other business must give you an Demand loan
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Forgone interest this tax. (Private activity bonds are discussed earn on the certificate in your income. If you
later under State or Local Government Obliga- itemize deductions, you can deduct the interestGift loan tions.) you pay as investment interest, up to the amount
Interest of your net investment income. See Interest Ex-
Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur- penses in chapter 3.Nominee ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not Example. You deposited $5,000 with aOriginal issue discount
taxable. This includes interest paid on dividends bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toPrivate activity bond on converted United States Government Life make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required
Insurance policies and on National Service Life to buy a 6-month money market certificate. TheTerm loan
Insurance policies. certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2001, but
you received only $265, which represented theIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).This section discusses the tax treatment of dif- $575 you earned minus $310 interest chargedInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.ferent types of interest income. on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. YouIn general, any interest that you receive or 1099– INT for 2001 showing the $575 interestgenerally do not include it in your income untilthat is credited to your account and can be you earned. The bank also gives you a state-you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to ment showing that you paid $310 interest forcation 590 for more information.be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this 2001. You must include the $575 in your in-
rule are discussed later. come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
Taxable Interest —  General ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectForm 1099 –INT. Interest income is generally to the net investment income limit.reported to you on Form 1099– INT, or a similar Taxable interest includes interest you receive
statement, by banks, savings and loans, and from bank accounts, loans you make to others, Gift for opening account. If you receive non-
other payers of interest. This form shows you the and other sources. The following are some cash gifts or services for making deposits or for
interest you received during the year. Keep this sources of taxable interest. opening an account in a savings institution, you
form for your records. You do not have to attach may have to report the value as interest.Dividends that are actually interest. Certainit to your tax return. For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts ordistributions commonly called dividends are ac-Report on your tax return the total amount of services valued at more than $10 must be re-tually interest. You must report as interestinterest income that you receive for the tax year. ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 orso-called “dividends” on deposits or on shareThis includes amounts reported to you on Form more, gifts or services valued at more than $20accounts in:1099– INT and amounts for which you did not must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
receive a Form 1099– INT. mined by the cost to the financial institution.• Cooperative banks,
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives • Credit unions, Example. You open a savings account atinterest as a nominee for you, that person will your local bank and deposit $800. The account• Domestic building and loan associations,give you a Form 1099– INT showing the interest earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-received on your behalf. • Domestic savings and loan associations, culator. If no other interest is credited to yourIf you receive a Form 1099 – INT that in- account during the year, the Form 1099 – INT• Federal savings and loan associations,cludes amounts belonging to another person, you receive will show $35 interest for the year.andsee the discussion on nominee distributions, You must report $35 interest income on your taxlater, under How To Report Interest Income. • Mutual savings banks. return.
Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form
Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on1099– INT that shows an incorrect amount (or Money market funds. Generally, amounts insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-other incorrect information), you should ask the you receive from money market funds should be surance company that can be withdrawn annu-issuer for a corrected form. The new Form reported as dividends, not as interest. ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to1099– INT you receive will be marked “Cor-
your account. However, if you can withdraw itMoney market certificates, savings certifi-rected.”
only on the anniversary date of the policy (orcates, and other deferred interest accounts.
Form 1099 –OID. Reportable interest income other specified date), the interest is taxable inIf you open any of these accounts, interest may
may also be shown on Form 1099 – OID, Origi- the year that date occurs.be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less during
nal Issue Discount. For more information about the term of the account. You generally must Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increaseamounts shown on this form, see Original Issue include this interest in your income when you in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,Discount (OID), later in this chapter. actually receive it or are entitled to receive it advance premiums, or premium deposit funds iswithout paying a substantial penalty. The sameExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-is true for accounts that mature in 1 year or lessdividends you receive from a regulated invest- ums due on insurance policies or made avail-and pay interest in a single payment at maturity.ment company (mutual fund) are not included in able for you to withdraw.If interest is deferred for more than 1 year, seeyour taxable income. (However, see Original Issue Discount (OID), later. U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,Information-reporting requirement, next.) You
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes and bonds,will receive a notice from the mutual fund telling Interest subject to penalty for early
issued by any agency or instrumentality of theyou the amount of the exempt-interest dividends withdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a de-
United States is taxable for federal income taxthat you received. Exempt-interest dividends ferred interest account before maturity, you may
purposes.are not shown on Form 1099 – DIV or Form have to pay a penalty. You must report the total
1099– INT. amount of interest paid or credited to your ac- Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive
count during the year, without subtracting the on tax refunds is taxable income.Information-reporting requirement. Al- penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa- Interest on condemnation award. If the con-ings under How To Report Interest Income,ble, you must show them on your tax return if demning authority pays you interest to compen-later, for more information on how to report theyou have to file. This is an information-reporting sate you for a delay in payment of an award, theinterest and deduct the penalty.requirement and does not change the interest is taxable.Money borrowed to invest in money mar-exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.
ket certificate. The interest you pay on money Installment sale payments. If a contract forSee How To Report Interest Income, later.
borrowed from a bank or savings institution to the sale or exchange of property provides for
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from meet the minimum deposit required for a money deferred payments, it also usually provides for
specified private activity bonds may be subject market certificate from the institution and the interest payable with the deferre d payments.
to the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 interest you earn on the certificate are two sepa- That interest is taxable when yo u receive it. If
and its instructions for more information about rate items. You must report the total interest you little or no interest is provi ded for in a deferred
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payment contract, part of each payment may be any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is These transfers are considere d to occur an-
treated as interest. See Unstated Interest in personal interest. nually, generally on December 31.
Publication 537. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that isLoans subject to the rules. The rules for not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated below-market loans apply to: ket loan if the amount of the loan is more thaninterest on an annuity contract you sell before its
• Gift loans, the present value of all payments due under thematurity date is taxable.
loan.• Pay-related loans,Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- A lender who makes a below-market termest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as • Corporation-shareholder loans, loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-interest unless state law automatically changes ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to• Tax avoidance loans, andit to a payment on the principal. the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-
• Loans to qualified continuing care facilities tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. TheInterest income on frozen deposits. Ex- (made after October 11, 1985) under a amount of this payment is the amount of the loanclude from your gross income interest on frozen continuing care contract. minus the present value, at the applicable fed-deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. Anyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- A pay-related loan is any below-market loan equal amount is treated as original issue dis-posit because: between an employer and an employee or be- count (OID). The lender must report the annual
tween an independent contractor and a person part of the OID as interest income. The borrower1) The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
for whom the contractor provides services. may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-solvent, or
A tax avoidance loan is any below-market pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.2) The state in which the institution is located loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofhas placed limits on withdrawals because Exceptions to the below-market loan rules.the main purposes of the interest arrangement.other financial institutions in the state are Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
bankrupt or insolvent. Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in- discussed here.
terest is:The amount of interest you must exclude is Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.
the interest that was credited on the frozen de- The rules for below-market loans do not apply to1) The amount of interest that would be pay-posits minus the sum of: any day on which the total outstanding amountable for that period if interest accrued on
of loans between the borrower and lender isthe loan at the applicable federal rate and1) The net amount you withdrew from these $10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:was payable annually on December 31,deposits during the year, and
minus 1) Gift loans between individuals if the gift2) The amount you could have withdrawn as
2) Any interest actually payable on the loan loan is not directly used to buy or carryof the end of the year (not reduced by any
for the period. income-producing assets, andpenalty for premature withdrawals of a
time deposit). 2) Pay-related loans or corporation-share-Applicable federal rate. Applicable federal holder loans if the avoidance of federal taxIf you receive a Form 1099 – INT for interest rates are published by the IRS each month in the is not a principal purpose of the interestincome on deposits that were frozen at the end Internal Revenue Bulletin. You can also contact arrangement.of 2001, see Frozen deposits under How To the IRS to get these rates. See chapter 5 for the
Report Interest Income for information about telephone number to call. This exception does not apply to a term loanreporting this interest income exclusion on your described in (2) above that previously has beentax return. Rules for below-market loans. The rules that subject to the below-market loan rules. ThoseThe interest you exclude is treated as apply to a below-market loan depend on rules will continue to apply even if the outstand-credited to your account in the following year. whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, or ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.You must include it in income in the year you can term loan. Exception for loans to continuing care fa-withdraw it.
Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is any cilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa-
below-market loan where the forgone interest is cilities under continuing care contracts are notExample. $100 of interest was credited on
in the nature of a gift. subject to the rules for below-market loans foryour frozen deposit during the year. You with-
A demand loan is a loan payable in full at any the calendar year if the lender or the lender ’sdrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of
time upon demand by the lender. A demand loan spouse is 65 or older at the end of the year. Forthe end of the year. You must include $80 in
is a below-market loan if no interest is charged 2001, this exception applies only to the part ofyour income for the year. You must exclude $20.
or if interest is charged at a rate below the the total outstanding loan balance that is
Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond when applicable federal rate. $144,100 or less.
interest has been defaulted or when the interest A demand loan or gift loan that is a Exception for loans without significant taxhas accrued but has not been paid, that interest below-market loan is generally treated as an effect. Loans are excluded from theis not income and is not taxable as interest if arm’s-length transaction in which the lender is below-market loan rules if their interest arrange-paid later. When you receive a payment of that treated as having made: ments do not have a significant effect on theinterest, it is a return of capital that reduces the
federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.remaining cost basis. Interest that accrues after 1) A loan to the borrower in exchange for a
These loans include:the date of purchase, however, is taxable inter- note that requires the payment of interest
est income for the year received or accrued. See at the applicable federal rate, and 1) Loans made available by the lender to theBonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in this 2) An additional payment to the borrower in general public on the same terms and con-chapter. an amount equal to the forgone interest. ditions that are consistent with the lender’s
customary business practice,The borrower is generally treated as transferringBelow-Market Loans
the additional payment back to the lender as 2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
interest. The lender must report that amount asIf you make a below-market gift or demand loan, municipal government that are made avail-
interest income.you must report as interest income any forgone able under a program of general applica-
interest (defined later) from that loan. The The lender’s additional payment to the bor- tion to the public,
below-market loan rules and exceptions are de- rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution 3) Certain employee-relocation loans,scribed in this section. For more information, to capital, pay for services, or other payment,
see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Code depending on the substance of the transaction. 4) Certain loans from a foreign perso n, un-
and its regulations. The borrower may have to report this payment less the interest income would be effec-
If you receive a below-market loan, you may as taxable income, depending on its classifica- tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
be able to deduct the forgone interest, as well as tion. trade or business and would not be ex-
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
empt from U.S. tax under an income tax accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest change you must report all interest accrue d to
until you receive it or until the bonds mature. date and not previously reported for all yourtreaty,
bonds.5) Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash Once you choose to report the interest eachtributions to which are deductible, if the method of accounting, as most individual tax- year, you must continue to do so for all seriestotal outstanding amount of loans between payers do, you generally report the interest on EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forthe organization and lender is $250,000 or U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But see any you get later, unless you request permissionless at all times during the tax year, and the discussion of Series EE and series I bonds, to change, as explained next.below.6) Other loans on which the interest arrange- Change from method 2. To change fromment can be shown to have no significant Series HH bonds. These bonds are issued at method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-effect on the federal tax liability of the face value. Interest is paid twice a year by direct sion from the IRS. Permission for the change islender or the borrower. deposit to your bank account. If you are a cash automatically granted if you send the IRS a
method taxpayer, you must report interest on statement that meets all the following require-For a loan described in (6) above, all the these bonds as income in the year you receive it. ments.facts and circumstances are used to determine if Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980.the interest arrangement has a significant effect Before 1980, series H bonds were issued. Se- 1) You have typed or printed at the top,on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor- ries H bonds are treated the same as series HH “Change in Method of Accounting Underrower. Some factors to be considered are: bonds. If you are a cash method taxpayer, you Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.
must report the interest when you receive it. 99– 49” (or later update).• Whether items of income and deduction
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30generated by the loan offset each other, 2) It includes your name and social securityyears. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. number under the label in (1).• The amount of these items,
Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on 3) It identifies the savings bonds for which• The cost to you of complying with the these bonds is payable when you redeem the you are requesting this change.below-market loan rules, if they were to bonds. The difference between the purchaseapply, and 4) It includes your agreement to:price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
• Any reasons other than taxes for structur- est. a) Report all interest on any bonds ac-ing the transaction as a below-market Series EE bonds were first offered in July quired during or after the year ofloan. 1980. They have a maturity period of 30 years. change when the interest is realizedBefore July 1980, series E bonds were issued. upon disposition, redemption, or finalIf you structure a transaction to meet this The original 10-year maturity period of series E maturity, whichever is earliest, andexception, and one of the principal purposes of bonds has been extended to 40 years for bonds
structuring the transaction in that way is the issued before December 1965 and 30 years for b) Report all interest on the bonds ac-
bonds issued after November 1965. Series EEavoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid- quired before the year of change when
and series E bonds are issued at a discount. Theered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will the interest is realized upon disposition,
face value is payable to you at maturity.not apply. redemption, or final maturity, whichever
Series I bonds were first offered in 1998. is earliest, with the exception of the in-Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of These are inflation-indexed bonds issued at terest reported in prior tax years.$100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- their face amount with a maturity period of 30viduals, if the outstanding loans between the years. The face value plus accrued interest is 5) It includes your signature.lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the payable to you at maturity.forgone interest to be included in income by the You must attach this statement to your tax re-If you use the cash method of reporting in-lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to turn for the year of change, which you must filecome, you can report the interest on series EE,the amount of the borrower ’s net investment by the due date (including extensions).series E, and series I bonds in either of theincome for the year. If the borrower’s net invest- You can have an automatic extension of 6following ways.ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as months from the due date of your return (includ-
zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the ing extensions) to file the statement with an1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest
avoidance of federal tax is one of the main amended return. To get this extension, you mustuntil the earlier of the year you cash or
purposes of the interest arrangement. have filed your original return by the due datedispose of the bonds or the year in which
(including extensions). At the top of the state-they mature. (However, see Savings
ment, print “Filed pursuant to sectionEffective dates. These rules apply to term bonds traded, later.) Note. Series E bonds
301.9100– 2.”loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand issued in 1961 and 1971 matured in 2001.
loans outstanding after that date. If you have used method 1, you generally By the date you file the original state-must report the interest on these bonds on ment, you must also send a copy to theyour 2001 return.U.S. Savings Bonds address below.
Internal Revenue Service2) Method 2. Choose to report the increaseThis section provides tax information on U.S. Attention: CC:PA:Tin redemption value as interest each year.savings bonds. It explains how to report the P.O. Box 7604You must use the same method for all series EE,interest income on these bonds and how to treat Benjamin Franklin Stationseries E, and series I bonds you own. If you dotransfers of these bonds. Washington, DC 20044.not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseFor other information on U.S. savings If you use a private delivery service, send thein redemption value as interest each year, youbonds, write to: copy to Internal Revenue, Attention: CC:PA:T,must use method 1.
Room 6561, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW,If you plan to cash your bonds in theBureau of the Public Debt Washington, DC 20224.same year that you will pay for higherSavings Bond Operations Office Instead of filing this statement, you can re-educational expenses, you may wantParkersburg, WV 26106– 1328.
TIP
quest permission to change from method 2 toto use method 1 because you may be able to method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,exclude the interest from your income. To learnOr, on the Internet, visit: follow the form instructions for an automatichow, see Education Savings Bond Program,www. savingsbonds.gov change. No user fee is required.later.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in
Change from method 1. If you want to the names of co-owners, such as you and your
Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac- change your method of reporting the interest child or you and your spouse, interest on the
crual method of accounting, you must report from method 1 to method 2, you can do so bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it without permission from the IRS. In the year of bought the bond.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
has to report at that time the interest earned
before the bonds were reissued.
Example 1. You and your spouse each
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You later
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one
in your name and one in your spouse’s name. At
that time neither you nor your spouse has to
report the interest earned to the date of reissue.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The
bond was issued to you and your spouse as
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter-
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-
Table 1–2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF . . . THEN the tax on the bond interest must
be paid by . . .
You buy a bond in your name and the name
of another person as co-owners, using only
your own funds
You buy a bond in the name of another
person, who is the sole owner of the bond
You and another person buy a bond as
co-owners, each contributing part of the
purchase price
You and your spouse, who live in a
community property state, buy a bond that
is community property
You.
The person for whom you bought the bond.
Both you and the other co-owner, in
proportion to the amount each paid for the
bond.
You and your spouse. If you file separate
returns, both you and your spouse generally
pay tax on one-half of the interest.
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name andOne co-owner’s funds used. If you used interest under this choice. However, see Tax on
one in your spouse’s name. You must report halfyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax investment income of a child under age 14,
the interest earned to the date of reissue.on the interest. This is true even if you let the earlier, under General Information. Neither you
other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all nor your child can change the way you report the
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, seriesthe proceeds. Under these circumstances, since interest unless you request permission from the
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to athe other co-owner will receive a Form IRS, as discussed earlier under Change from
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must1099– INT at the time of redemption, the other method 2.
include in your income for that year the interestco-owner must provide you with another Form
earned to the date of transfer if you have notOwnership transferred. If you bought series1099– INT showing the amount of interest from
already reported it. However, if you are consid-E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely withthe bond that is taxable to you. The co-owner
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase inyour own funds and had them reissued in yourwho redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See
value both before and after the transfer contin-co-owner’s name or beneficiary ’s name alone,Nominee distributions under How To Report In-
ues to be taxable to you, you can continue toyou must include in your gross income for theterest Income, later, for more information about
defer reporting the interest earned each year.year of reissue all interest that you earned onhow a person who is a nominee reports interest
You must include the total interest in your in-these bonds and have not previously reported.income belonging to another person.
come in the year you cash or dispose of theBut, if the bonds were reissued in your nameBoth co-owners’ funds used. If you and bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,alone, you do not have to report the interestthe other co-owner each contribute part of the whichever is earlier.accrued at that time.bond’s purchase price, the interest is generally The same rules apply to previously unre-This same rule applies when bonds (othertaxable to each of you, in proportion to the ported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifthan bonds held as community property) areamount each of you paid. the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH ortransferred between spouses or incident to di-
Community property. If you and your series H bonds you acquired in a trade for thevorce.
spouse live in a community property state and series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds
hold bonds as community property, one-half of Example. You bought series EE bonds en- traded, later.
the interest is considered received by each of tirely with your own funds. You did not choose to
Decedents. The manner of reporting interestyou. If you file separate returns, each of you report the accrued interest each year. Later, you
income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,generally must report one-half of the bond inter- transfer the bonds to your former spouse under
after the death of the owner, depends on theest. For more information about community a divorce agreement. You must include the de-
accounting and income-reporting method previ-property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- ferred accrued interest, from the date of the
ously used by the decedent.erty. original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,
in your income in the year of transfer. Your Decedent who reported interest each year.Table 1–2. These rules are also shown in former spouse includes in income the interest on If the bonds transferred because of death wereTable 1– 2. the bonds from the date of transfer to the date of owned by a person who used an accrualredemption.Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savings method, or who used the cash method and had
bonds bought for and registered only in the chosen to report the interest each year, thePurchased jointly. If you and a co-owner
name of your child is income to your child, even interest earned in the year of death up to theeach contributed funds to buy series E, series
if you paid for the bonds and are named as date of death must be reported on that person’sEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E, final return. The person who acquires the bondsbonds reissued in the co-owner ’s name alone,
or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is you must include in your gross income for the includes in income only interest earned after the
income to your child in the earlier of the year the year of reissue your share of all the interest date of death.
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the earned on the bonds that you have not previ- Decedent who postponed reporting inter-bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re- ously reported. At the time of reissue, the former est. If the transferred bonds were owned by aport the interest income each year. co-owner does not have to include in gross in- decedent who had used the cash method andcome his or her share of the interest earned thatChoice to report interest each year. The had not chosen to report the interest each year,was not reported before the transfer. This inter-choice to report the accrued interest each year and who had bought the bonds entirely with hisest, however, as well as all interest earned aftercan be made either by your child or by you for or her own funds, all interest earned beforethe reissue, is income to the former co-owner.your child. This choice is made by filing an in- death must be reported in one of the following
This income-reporting rule also applies whencome tax return that shows all the interest ways.
the bonds are reissued in the name of yourearned to date, and by stating on the return that
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the 1) The surviving spouse or personal repre-your child chooses to report the interest each
new co-owner will report only his or her share of sentative (executor, administrator, etc.)year. Either you or your child should keep a copy
the interest earned after the transfer. who files the final income tax return of theof this return.
decedent can choose to include on thatUnless your child is otherwise required to file If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
return all of the interest earned on thea tax return for any year after making this choice, jointly are reissued to each of you separately in
bonds before the decedent’s death. Theyour child does not have to file a return only to the same proportion as your contribution to the
person who acquires the bonds then in-report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cludes in income only interest earned after series H bonds but not received as of the date of Form 1099 – INT should show the interest as the
the date of death. your aunt ’s death. You must report any interest difference between the amount you received
received during the year as income on your and the amount paid for the bond. However,2) If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest return. The part of the interest that was payable your Form 1099 – INT may show more interestearned up to the date of death is income in but not received before your aunt ’s death is than you have to include on your income taxrespect of the decedent. It should not be income in respect of the decedent and may return. For example, this may happen if any ofincluded in the decedent’s final return. All qualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa- the following are true.of the interest earned both before and after tion on when to report the interest on the seriesthe decedent’s death (except any part re- E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded, 1) You chose to report the increase in theported by the estate on its income tax re- later. redemption value of the bond each year.turn) is income to the person who acquires The interest shown on your Formthe bonds. If that person uses the cash Savings bonds distributed from a retirement 1099– INT will not be reduced by amountsmethod and does not choose to report the or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S. previously included in income.interest each year, he or she can postpone savings bond in a taxable distribution from a
reporting it until the year the bonds are retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income for 2) You received the bond from a decedent.
cashed or disposed of or the year they the year of distribution includes the bond ’s re- The interest shown on your Form
mature, whichever is earlier. In the year demption value (its cost plus the interest ac- 1099– INT will not be reduced by any inter-
that person reports the interest, he or she crued before the distribution). When you redeem est reported by the decedent before death,
can claim a deduction for any federal es- the bond (whether in the year of distribution or or on the decedent’s final return, or by the
tate tax that was paid on the part of the later), your interest income includes only the estate on the estate’s income tax return.
interest included in the decedent’s estate. interest accrued after the bond was distributed. 3) Ownership of the bond was transferred.To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-For more information on income in respect of a The interest shown on your Formbution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec- 1099– INT will not be reduced by interestdeem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators. that accrued before the transfer.bonds distributed from a retirement or
profit-sharing plan under How To Report Interest 4) You were named as a co-owner and theExample 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax- Income, later. other co-owner contributed funds to buypayer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE
the bond. The interest shown on yourbond. He had bought the bond for $500 and had Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re- Form 1099– INT will not be reduced by thenot chosen to report the interest each year. At porting the interest on your series EE or series E amount you received as nominee for thethe date of death, interest of $200 had accrued bonds, you did not recognize taxable income other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inon the bond and its value of $700 was included when you traded the bonds for series HH or this chapter, for more information aboutin your uncle ’s estate. Your uncle ’s executor series H bonds, unless you received cash in the the reporting requirements.)chose not to include the $200 accrued interest in trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-
your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 is ries HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in- 5) You received the bond in a taxable distri-income in respect of the decedent. come up to the amount of the interest earned on bution from a retirement or profit-sharing
You are a cash method taxpayer and do not the bonds traded. When your series HH or se- plan. The interest shown on your Form
choose to report the interest each year as it is ries H bonds mature, or if you dispose of them 1099– INT will not be reduced by the inter-
earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches before maturity, you report as interest the differ- est portion of the amount taxable as a dis-
maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter- ence between their redemption value and your tribution from the plan and not taxable as
est income — the difference between maturity cost. Your cost is the sum of the amount you interest. (This amount is generally shown
value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500. paid for the traded series EE or series E bonds on Form 1099– R, Distributions From Pen-
For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane- plus any amount you had to pay at the time of sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ous itemized deduction not subject to the the trade. ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal for the year of distribution.)estate tax paid because the $200 interest was Example 1. You own series E bonds with
For more information on including the correctincluded in your uncle’s estate. accrued interest of $523 and a redemption value
amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav-of $2,723 and have postponed reporting the
ings bond interest previously reported or Nomi-Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executor interest. You trade the bonds for $2,500 in series
nee distributions under How To Report Interesthad chosen to include the $200 accrued interest HH bonds and $223 in cash. You must report the
Income, later.in your uncle’s final return, you would report only $223 as taxable income in the year of the trade.
$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-maturity. $300 is the interest earned after your Example 2. The facts are the same as in empt from state and local taxes. Theuncle’s death. Example 1. You hold the series HH bonds until Form 1099 – INT you receive will indi-
TIP
maturity, when you receive $2,500. You must cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bondsExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make or report $300 as interest income in the year of interest in box 3. Do not include this income onhave made the choice to report the increase in maturity. This is the difference between their your state or local income tax return.redemption value as interest each year, you redemption value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200
include in gross income for the year you acquire (the amount you paid for the series E bonds). (It
the bond all of the unreported increase in value is also the difference between the accrued inter-
Education Savings Bond Programof all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you est of $523 on the series E bonds and the $223
hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher- cash received on the trade.) You may be able to exclude from income all orited from your uncle. Choice to report interest in year of trade. part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
You can choose to treat all of the previously tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theExample 4. When your aunt died, she unreported accrued interest on series EE or year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-owned series H bonds that she had acquired in a series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as penses during the same year. This exclusion istrade for series E bonds. You were the benefi- income in the year of the trade. If you make this known as the Education Savings Bond Program.ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cash choice, it is treated as a change from method 1. If you are married, you can qualify for thismethod and did not choose to report the interest See Change from method 1 under Series EE exclusion only if you file a joint return with youron the series E bonds each year as it accrued. and series I bonds, earlier. spouse.Your aunt’s executor chose not to include any
interest earned before your aunt’s death on her Form 1099 – INT for U.S. savings bond
final return. Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-interest. When you cash a bond, the bank or
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings BondsThe income in respect of the decedent is the other payer that redeems it must give you a
Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-sum of the unreported interest on the series E Form 1099 – INT if the interest part of the pay-
tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.bonds and the interest, if any, payable on the ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in- 4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav- 5) Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedafter 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be ings bonds you redeem during the year are not under an employer’s adoption assistanceissued either in your name (sole owner) or in more than your qualified higher educational ex- program, andyour and your spouse ’s names (co-owners). penses for the year, you can exclude all of the
6) Deduction for student loan interest.You must be at least 24 years old before the interest. If the proceeds are more than the ex-
bond’s issue date. penses, you can exclude only part of the inter- Use the worksheet in the instructions for lineest. 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youThe date a bond is issued may be ear-
To determine the excludable amount, multi- claim any of the exclusion or deduction itemslier than the date the bond is pur-
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction. listed above (except item 6), add the amount ofchased because bonds are issued asCAUTION
!
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the the exclusion or deduction (except any deduc-of the first day of the month in which they are
qualified higher educational expenses you paid tion for student loan interest) to the amount onpurchased.
during the year. The denominator (bottom part) line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the total on
of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedBeneficiary. You can designate any individ- Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.
during the year.ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the Royalties included in modified AGI. Be-bond. cause the deduction for interest expenses attrib-Example. In February 2001, Mark and
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- utable to royalties and other investments isJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- limited to your net investment income (see In-ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
tion information from the Department of vestment Interest in chapter 3), you cannot fig-1993. They received proceeds of $7,256, repre-
Treasury. ure the deduction until you have figured thissenting principal of $5,000 and interest of
interest exclusion. Therefore, if you had interest$2,256. In 2001, they paid $4,000 of theirQualified expenses. Qualified higher educa- expenses attributable to royalties and deducti-daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingtional expenses are tuition and fees required for ble on Schedule E (Form 1040), you must makean education credit for that amount, and they doyou, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom a special computation of your deductible interestnot have an education IRA. They can excludeyou claim an exemption) to attend an eligible without regard to this exclusion to figure the net$1,244 ($2,256 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,256)) of interesteducational institution. royalty income included in your modified AGI.in 2001. They must pay tax on the remainingQualified expenses include any contribution You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-$1,012 ($2,256 − $1,244) interest.you make to a qualified state tuition program or ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the
Figuring the interest part of the proceedsto a Coverdell education savings account. For special computation. On this form, include in
(Form 8815, line 6). To figure the amount ofinformation about these programs, see Publica- your net investment income your total interest
interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use thetion 970, Tax Benefits for Higher Education. income for the year from series EE and I U.S.
Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.Qualified expenses do not include expenses savings bonds. Use the deductible interest
for room and board or for courses involving amount from this form only to figure your modi-If you previously reported any interestsports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a fied AGI. Do not attach this form to your taxfrom savings bonds cashed duringdegree program. return.2001, use the Alternate Line 6 Work- After you figure this interest exclusion, use asheet below instead.Eligible educational institutions. These separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-institutions include most public, private, and tion for investment interest expenses, and at-nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational Alternate Line 6 Worksheet tach that form to your return.schools that are accredited and are eligible to 1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, line 5participate in student aid programs run by the Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-2. Enter the face value of all post-1989
Department of Education. est exclusion, you must keep a writtenseries EE bonds cashed in 2001 ......
3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) ..... record of the qualified U.S. savingsRECORDS
Reduction for certain benefits. You must 4. Enter the face value of all series I bonds bonds you redeem. Your record must includereduce your qualified higher educational ex- cashed in 2001. ................ the serial number, issue date, face value, andpenses by certain benefits the student may have 5. Add lines 3 and 4 ...............
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ..........received. These benefits include: est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 ,7. Enter the amount of interest reported as
income in previous years .......... Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series1) Qualified scholarships that are exempt
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,from tax (see Publication 520, Scholar- result here and on Form 8815, line 6 . . . to record this information. You should also keepships and Fellowships, for information on
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-qualified scholarships), and Modified adjusted gross income limit. mentation that shows you paid qualified higherThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified2) Any other nontaxable payments (other educational expenses during the year.adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-
ceived for educational expenses, such as: • $55,750 to $70,750 for taxpayers filing sin- U.S. Treasury Bills,gle or head of household, anda) Veterans ’ educational assistance bene- Notes, and Bondsfits, • $83,650 to $113,650 for married taxpayers
filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er) Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debtsb) Benefits under a qualified state tuition
with dependent child. (obligations) of the U.S. Government.program, or
Interest income from Treasury bills, notes,You do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifc) Certain employer-provided educational and bonds is subject to federal income tax, but isyour modified AGI is equal to or more than theassistance benefits. exempt from all state and local income taxes.upper limit for your filing status. You should receive Form 1099 – INT showing
Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes the amount of interest (in box 3) that was paid toEffect of other tax benefits. Do not include
of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income (line you for the year.in your qualified expenses any expense used to:
20 of Form 1040A or line 34 of Form 1040) Payments of principal and interest generally
1) Figure an education credit on Form 8863, figured before the interest exclusion, and modi- will be credited to your designated checking or
or fied by adding back any: savings account by direct deposit through the
TREASURY DIRECT system.2) Figure how much of a distribution from an 1) Foreign earned income exclusion,education IRA you can exclude from your Treasury bills. These bills generally have aincome. 2) Foreign housing exclusion or deduction, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity period.
For information about education credits or edu- 3) Exclusion of income for bona fide re- They are issued at a discount in the amount of
cation IRAs, see Publication 970. sidents of American Samoa, $1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The difference
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
between the discounted price you pay for the • Community redevelopment agencies, andBonds Sold Between
bills and the face value you receive at maturity is • Qualified volunteer fire departments (forInterest Datesinterest income. Generally, you report this inter- certain obligations issued after 1980).est income when the bill is paid at maturity. See If you sell a bond between interest payment There are other requirements for tax-exemptDiscount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis- dates, part of the sales price represents interest bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-count on Debt Instruments, later. accrued to the date of sale. You must report that ment agency or see sections 103 and 141part of the sales price as interest income for theIf you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur- through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code andyear of sale.ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will the related regulations.If you buy a bond between interest paymentreceive payment for the difference between the
dates, part of the purchase price representsproceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less Obligations that are not bonds. Inter-interest accrued before the date of purchase.any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the est on a state or local government obli-When that interest is paid to you, treat it as anew Treasury security. However, you must re- gation may be tax exempt even if the
TIP
return of your capital investment, rather thanport the full amount of the interest income on obligation is not a bond. For example, interest oninterest income, by reducing your basis in theeach of your Treasury bills at the time it reaches a debt evidenced only by an ordinary writtenbond. See Accrued interest on bonds undermaturity. agreement of purchase and sale may be taxHow To Report Interest Income, later in this exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer onchapter, for information on reporting the pay- default by the state or political subdivision mayTreasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes ment. be tax exempt.have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-
ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury Insurancebonds are longer than 10 years. Both of these Registration requirement. A bond issued af-
ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi- Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
tered form for the interest to be tax exempt.nations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes and ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-
bonds generally pay interest every 6 months. ble. But if you receive the proceeds in
Indian tribal government. Bonds issued afterGenerally, you report this interest for the year installments, you must usually report part of
1982 by an Indian tribal government are treatedpaid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can each installment payment as interest income.
as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds isredeem these securities for face value. For more information about insurance pro- generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of anceeds received in installments, see PublicationTreasury notes and bonds are usually sold issue of which substantially all of the proceeds525.by auction with competitive bidding. If, after are to be used in the exercise of any essentialcompiling the competitive bids, a determination government function. However, interest on pri-Interest option on insurance. If you leave lifeis made that the purchase price is less than the vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds forinsurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-face value, you will receive a refund for the tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.ance company under an agreement to pay inter-difference between the purchase price and the est only, the interest paid to you is taxable.face value. This amount is considered original Original issue discount. Original issue dis-
issue discount. However, the original issue dis- count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-count rules (discussed later) do not apply if the ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
For information on the treatment of OIDdiscount is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income,
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seethe face amount multiplied by the number of full not as interest income. See Publication 939,
Tax-exempt state and local government bondsyears from the date of original issue to maturity. General Rule for Pensions and Annuities, for
under Discounted Debt Instruments in chapterSee De minimis OID under Original Issue Dis- information on taxation of pension and annuity
4.count (OID), later. If the purchase price is deter- income.
mined to be more than the face amount, the Stripped bonds or coupons. For special
difference is a premium. (See Bond Premium rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-State or LocalAmortization in chapter 3.) tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  underGovernment Obligations Original Issue Discount (OID), later.For other information on these notes or
Interest you receive on an obligation issued by abonds, write to: Information reporting requirement. If youstate or local government is generally not taxa-
must file a tax return, you are required to showble. The issuer should be able to tell youBureau of the Public Debt any tax-exempt interest you received on yourwhether the interest is taxable. The issuerCustomer Information and return. This is an information-reporting require-should also give you a periodic (or year-end)Current Income Branch ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186. est to taxable interest. See Reportinggation. If you invested in the obligation through a
tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-Or, on the Internet, visit: est Income, later in this chapter. That discussionzation should give you this information.www. publicdebt.treas.gov also explains what to do if you receive a Form
Even if interest on the obligation is not 1099– INT for tax-exempt interest.
subject to income tax, you may have to
report capital gain or loss when you sellCAUTION
!
Treasury inflation-indexed securities. it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may Taxable Interest
These securities pay interest twice a year at a apply to other dispositions of the obligation.
Interest on some state or local obligations isfixed rate, based on a principal amount that is
taxable.adjusted to take into account inflation and defla-
tion. For the tax treatment of these securities, Tax-Exempt Interest Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest onsee Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments under
federally guaranteed state or local obligationsOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later. Interest on a bond used to finance government issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This ruleoperations generally is not taxable if the bond is does not apply to interest on obligations guaran-issued by a state, the District of Columbia, aRetirement, sale, or redemption. For infor- teed by the following U.S. Government agen-U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of cies.sions. Political subdivisions include:U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or- • Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non- • Port authorities, tee was under the Northwest Power Act astaxable Trades in chapter 4 for information • Toll road commissions, in effect on July 18, 1984).about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-
tain other designated issues. • Utility services authorities, • Department of Veterans Affairs.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- local government to finance a facility used in an A debt instrument generally has OID when
tion. empowerment zone or enterprise community is the instrument is issued for a price that is less
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID• Federal Housing Administration. Publication 954. is the difference between the stated redemption
• Federal National Mortgage Association. price at maturity and the issue price.Market discount. Market discount on a
All instruments that pay no interest before• Government National Mortgage Corpora- tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If you
maturity are presumed to be issued at a dis-tion. bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you can
count. Zero coupon bonds are one example ofchoose to accrue the market discount over the• Resolution Funding Corporation. these instruments.period you own the bond and include it in your
• Student Loan Marketing Association. income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar- The OID accrual rules generally do not apply
ket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debt to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
Instruments, later. If you do not make that turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1, See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans 1993, any gain from market discount is taxable For information about the sale of a debt in-for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or when you dispose of the bond. strument with OID, see chapter 4.local government home mortgage bonds issued For more information on the treatment ofafter April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bonds market discount when you dispose of a tax-ex-are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter- De minimis OID. You can treat the discountempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instrumentsans’ mortgage bonds. as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chap- of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-ter 4.Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds plied by the number of full years from the date of
issued by state or local governments after Octo- original issue to maturity. This small discount is
ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a known as “de minimis” OID.
bond any portion of the proceeds of which is
Discount onexpected to be used to buy (or to replace funds Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
used to buy) higher yielding investments. A a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,Debt Instrumentsbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofintentionally uses any part of the proceeds of the 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10Terms you may need to knowissue in this manner. (the number of full years from the date of original(see Glossary):
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20Private activity bonds. Interest on a private discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asactivity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined Market discount zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willbelow) is taxable. Generally, a private activity recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)Market discount bondbond is part of a state or local government bond
issue that meets both of the following require- Original issue discount (OID) Example 2. The facts are the same as inments. Example 1, except that the bond was issued atPremium
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount1) More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, yousue is to be used for a private business
In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond,use. must include the OID in income as it accrues
note, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- over the term of the bond.2) More than 10% of the payment of the prin- ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at a Debt instrument bought after original is-cipal or interest is: lower than current market rate will usually be sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deissued at less than its face amount. This dis-a) Secured by an interest in property to be minimis OID at a premium, the discount is notcount is, in effect, additional interest income.used for a private business use (or pay- includible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentThe following are some of the types of dis-ments for this property), or with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountcounted debt instruments.
is reported under the market discount rules. Seeb) Derived from payments for property (or
• Corporate bonds. Market Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.borrowed money) used for a private
business use. • Municipal bonds.
Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules• Certificates of deposit.Also, a bond is generally considered a private discussed here do not apply to the following debt
activity bond if the amount of the proceeds to instruments. • Notes between individuals.
be used to make or finance loans to persons • Stripped bonds and coupons.other than government units is more than 5% 1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever is Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
less). 2) U.S. savings bonds.The discount on these instruments (except mu-
Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ- nicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The 3) Short-term debt instruments (those with aity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A discount on municipal bonds generally is not fixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearqualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ- taxable (but see State or Local Government from the date of issue).ing an enterprise zone facility bond), qualified Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also
student loan bond, qualified small issue bond 4) Obligations issued by an individual beforeREMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs, later, for
(including a tribal manufacturing facility bond), March 2, 1984.information about applying the rules discussed
qualified redevelopment bond, qualified mort- in this section to the regular interest holder of a 5) Loans between individuals, if all the follow-gage bond, qualified veterans ’ mortgage bond, real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi- ing are true.or qualified 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for nancial asset securitization investment trust, or
the benefit of certain tax-exempt organizations). other CDO. a) The lender is not in the business ofInterest that you receive on these tax-ex- lending money.empt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3) bonds), Original Issue b) The amount of the loan, plus theif issued after August 7, 1986, generally is a “tax
Discount (OID) amount of any outstanding prior loanspreference item” and may be subject to the alter-
between the same individuals, isnative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and its OID is a form of interest. You generally include $10,000 or less.instructions for more information. OID in your income as it accrues over the term of
c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofEnterprise zone facility bonds. Interest on the debt instrument, whether or not you receive
the principal purposes of the loan.certain private activity bonds issued by a state or any payments from the issuer.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
part of the total interest due and report it in theForm 1099–OID
1) You did not pay a premium. same manner as other OID.
The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro- 2) The instrument ’s adjusted basis immedi- This also applies to similar deposit arrange-ker, if you held the instrument through a broker) ately after purchase (including purchase at ments with banks, building and loan associa-should give you Form 1099– OID, Original Issue original issue) was greater than its ad- tions, etc., including:Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OID justed issue price. This is the issue pricefor the calendar year is $10 or more. Form plus the OID previously accrued, minus • Time deposits,1099– OID will show, in box 1, the amount of any payment previously made on the in- • Bonus plans,OID for the part of the year that you held the strument other than qualified stated inter-bond. It also will show, in box 2, the stated est. • Savings certificates,interest that you must include in your income. A
Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID • Deferred income certificates,copy of Form 1099– OID will be sent to the IRS.
includible in your income. For information aboutDo not file your copy with your return. Keep it for • Bonus savings certificates, andfiguring the correct amount of OID to include inyour records.
your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term • Growth savings certificates.In most cases, you must report the entire
Debt Instruments in Publication 1212.amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099– OID as
interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyRefiguring periodic interest shown on Formon Form 1099– OID, later in this discussion, and must be in registered form. (For details, see1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt instru-also Original issue discount (OID) adjustment Obligations required to be in registered formment or acquired it from another holder duringunder How To Report Interest Income, later in under Capital Gains and Losses in chapter 4.)the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interestthis chapter, for more information. Bearer CDs are CDs that are not in registeredDates, earlier, for information about the treat-
form. They are not issued in the depositor ’sment of periodic interest that may be shown inForm 1099–OID not received. name and are transferable from one individual tobox 2 of Form 1099– OID for that instrument.If you had OID for the year but did not receive another.a Form 1099– OID, see Publication 1212, which
Banks must provide the IRS and the personlists total OID on certain debt instruments and Applying the OID Rules redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099– INT.has information that will help you figure OID. If
your debt instrument is not listed in Publication The rules for reporting OID depend on the date1212, consult the issuer for further information the long-term debt instrument was issued. Time deposit open account arrangement.about the accrued OID for the year. This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity dateDebt instruments issued after 1954 and in which you make deposits on a schedule ar-Nominee. If someone else is the holder of before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a ranged between you and your bank. But there isrecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru- government instrument). For these instru- no actual or constructive receipt of interest untilment that belongs to you and receives a Form ments, you do not report the OID until the year
the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,1099– OID on your behalf, that person must give you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If
you and your bank enter into an arrangementyou a Form 1099– OID. a gain results and the instrument is a capital
under which you agree to deposit $100 eachIf you receive a Form 1099 – OID that in- asset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is
month for a period of 5 years. Interest will becludes amounts belonging to another person, ordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is
compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablesee Nominee distributions under How To Report capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the
only at the end of the 5-year period. You mustInterest Income, later. instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and
include a part of the interest in your income asno reporting of OID is required.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099 –OID. OID each year. Each year the bank must giveIn general, the amount of gain that is ordinary
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 of interest income equals the following amount: you a Form 1099– OID to show you the amount
Form 1099– OID if either of the following apply. you must include in your income for the year.
Number of full1) You bought the debt instrument after its
months you held Original Redemption before maturity. If, before theoriginal issue and paid a premium or an the instrument × Issue maturity date, you redeem a deferred interestacquisition premium. Number of full Discount account for less than its stated redemption pricemonths from date2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond or at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OIDof original issuea stripped coupon (including certain zero to date of maturity that you previously included in income but didcoupon instruments). See Figuring OID not receive.under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969in this chapter. (after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- Renewable certificates. If you renew a CD atSee Original issue discount (OID) adjustment ment), and before 1985. If you hold these maturity, it is treated as a redemption and aunder How To Report Interest Income, later in debt instruments as capital assets, you must purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-this chapter, for information about reporting the include a part of the discount in your gross
gardless of the terms of renewal.correct amount of OID. income each year that you own the instruments.
Premium. You bought a debt instrument at Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after ment is increased by the amount of OID that you Face-Amount Certificates
purchase was greater than the total of all include in your gross income.
amounts payable on the instrument after the These certificates are subject to the OID rules.
Debt instruments issued after 1984. Forpurchase date, other than qualified stated inter- They are a form of endowment contracts issued
these debt instruments, you report the total OIDest. by insurance or investment companies for either
that applies each year regardless of whetherIf you bought an OID debt instrument at a a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.premium, you generally do not have to report the face amount becoming payable on the ma-
any OID as ordinary income. turity date of the certificate.Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID that you In general, the difference between the faceQualified stated interest. In general, this is
include in your gross income.stated interest that is unconditionally payable in amount and the amount you paid for the contract
cash or property (other than debt instruments of is OID. You must include a part of the OID in
the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate. your income over the term of the certificate.Certificates of Deposit (CDs)
The issuer must give you a statement onAcquisition premium. You bought a debt
Form 1099 – OID indicating the amount youinstrument at an acquisition premium if both of If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1
the following are true. year, you must include in income each year a must include in your income each year.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond, under Capital Gains and Losses in chapterInflation-Indexed
treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp- 4.Debt Instruments
tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If 2) You must treat any partial payment of prin-If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you excess of the amount payable on the due date of come, up to the amount of the accruedmust report as OID any increase in the the coupon over your purchase price. market discount. See Partial principal pay-inflation-adjusted principal amount of the instru- ments, later in this discussion.Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID onment that occurs while you held the instrument
stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend onduring the year. In general, an inflation-indexed 3) If you borrow money to buy or carry thethe date the debt instruments were purchased,debt instrument is a debt instrument on which bond, your deduction for interest paid onnot the date issued.the payments are adjusted for inflation and de- the debt is limited. See Deferral of interestYou must refigure the OID shown on theflation (such as Treasury Inflation-Indexed Se- deduction for market discount bonds underForm 1099– OID you receive for a stripped bondcurities). You should receive Form 1099 – OID When To Deduct Investment Interest inor coupon. For information about figuring thefrom the payer showing the amount you must chapter 3.correct amount of OID on these instruments toreport as OID and any qualified stated interest
include in your income, see Figuring OID onpaid to you during the year. For more informa- Market discount. Market discount is theStripped Bonds and Coupons in Publicationtion, see Publication 1212. amount of the stated redemption price of a bond1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
at maturity that is more than your basis in thecoupons should not rely on the OID shown in
bond immediately after you acquire it. You treatSection II of Publication 1212, because theStripped Bonds and Coupons market discount as zero if it is less thanamounts listed in Section II for stripped bonds or
one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-coupons are figured without reference to theIf you strip one or more coupons from a bond
tion price of the bond multiplied by the number ofdate or price at which you acquired them.and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and
full years to maturity (after you acquire thecoupons are treated as separate debt instru- Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru- bond).ments issued with OID. ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt If a market discount bond also has OID, theThe holder of a stripped bond has the right to instruments is figured under the discount bond market discount is the sum of the bond ’s issuereceive the principal (redemption price) pay- method. This method is described in section price and the total OID includible in the grossment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the 1.1275– 7(e) of the regulations. income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, theright to receive interest on the bond.
total OID that accrued) before you acquired theStripped tax-exempt obligations. You doStripped bonds and stripped coupons in-
bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-not have to pay tax on OID on any strippedclude:
ately after you acquired it.tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought
1) Zero coupon instruments available through before June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally,the Department of the Treasury’s Separate it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID a bond that you acquired at original issue is not aTrading of Registered Interest and Princi- on it to determine its basis when you dispose of market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in apal of Securities (STRIPS) program and it. See Original issue discount (OID) on debt bond is determined by reference to the adjustedgovernment-sponsored enterprises such instruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter basis of another person who acquired the bondas the Resolution Funding Corporation 4. at original issue, you are also considered toand the Financing Corporation, and You may have to pay tax on part of the OID have acquired it at original issue.on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that2) Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-
you bought after June 10, 1987. For information Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-curities that represent ownership interests
on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherin those securities, such as obligations
Bonds and Coupons under Figuring OID on of the following is true.backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that are
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publicationoffered primarily by brokerage firms. 1) Your cost basis in the bond is less than the1212.
bond’s issue price.
Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond and Market Discount Bonds 2) The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-sell the bond or coupons, include in income the ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan-interest that accrued while you held the bond A market discount bond is any bond having ization. (This does not apply if the bond isbefore the date of sale to the extent you did not market discount except: issued in exchange for a market discountpreviously include this interest in your income. bond issued before July 19, 1984, and theFor an obligation acquired after October 22, 1) Short-term obligations (those with fixed terms and interest rates of both bonds are1986, you must also include the market discount maturity dates of up to 1 year from the the same.)that accrued before the date of sale of the date of issue),
stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did 2) Tax-exempt obligations that you bought Accrued market discount. The accrued mar-not previously include this discount in your in- before May 1, 1993, ket discount is figured in one of two ways.come.
Add the interest and market discount that 3) U.S. savings bonds, and Ratable accrual method. Treat the marketyou include in income to the basis of the bond discount as accruing in equal daily installments4) Certain installment obligations.and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be- during the period you hold the bond. Figure thetween the items you keep and the items you sell, Market discount arises when the value of a daily installments by dividing the market dis-based on the fair market value of the items. The debt obligation decreases after its issue date, count by the number of days after the date youdifference between the sale price of the bond (or generally because of an increase in interest acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (or rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- ity date. Multiply the daily installments by thecoupon) is your gain or loss from the sale. ket, it may have market discount. number of days you held the bond to figure yourTreat any item you keep as an OID bond When you buy a market discount bond, you accrued market discount.originally issued and bought by you on the sale can choose to accrue the market discount over
Constant yield method. Instead of usingdate of the other items. If you keep the bond, the period you own the bond and include it in
the ratable accrual method, you can choose totreat the amount of the redemption price of the your income currently as interest income. If you
figure the accrued discount using a constantbond that is more than the basis of the bond as do not make this choice, the following rules
interest rate (the constant yield method). Makethe OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the generally apply. 
this choice by attaching to your timely filed returnamount payable on the coupons that is more
1) You must treat any gain when you dispose a statement identifying the bond and stating thatthan the basis of the coupons as the OID.
of the bond as ordinary interest income, up you are making a constant interest rate election.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped to the amount of the accrued market dis- The choice takes effect on the date you acquired
coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on count. See Discounted Debt Instruments the bond. If you choose to use this method for
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any bond, you cannot change your choice for the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plusDiscount on
that bond. any other accrued interest payable. If youShort-Term ObligationsFor information about using the constant choose the constant yield method to figure ac-
yield method, see Figuring OID using the con- crued OID, apply it by using the obligation ’sWhen you buy a short-term obligation (one withstant yield method under Debt Instruments Is- issue price.a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from thesued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use this date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga- Choosing to include accrued acquisitionmethod to figure market discount (instead of tion, you can generally choose to accrue any discount instead of OID. You can choose toOID), treat the bond as having been issued on discount and interest payable on the obligation report accrued acquisition discount (definedthe date you acquired it. Treat the amount of and include it in income currently. If you do not earlier under Government obligations ) ratheryour basis (immediately after you acquired the make this choice, the following rules generally than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-bond) as the issue price. Then apply the formula apply. tions. Your choice will apply to the year for whichshown in Publication 1212. it is made and to all later years and cannot be1) You must treat any gain when you sell, changed without the consent of the IRS.Choosing to include market discount in in- exchange, or redeem the obligation as or- You must make your choice by the due datecome currently. You can make this choice if dinary income, up to the amount of the of your return, including extensions, for the firstyou have not revoked a prior choice to include ratable share of the discount. See Dis- year for which you are making the choice. Attachmarket discount in income currently within the counted Debt Instruments under Capital a statement to your return or amended returnlast 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at- Gains and Losses in chapter 4. indicating:taching to your timely filed return a statement in
2) If you borrow money to buy or carry thewhich you: 1) Your name, address, and social securityobligation, your deduction for interest paid
number,1) State that you have included market dis- on the debt is limited. See Deferral of inter-
count in your gross income for the year est deduction for short-term obligations 2) The choice you are making and that it isunder section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev- under When To Deduct Investment Inter- being made under section 1283(c)(2) ofenue Code, and est in chapter 3. the Internal Revenue Code,
2) Describe the method you used to figure 3) The period for which the choice is beingShort-term obligations for which no choicethe accrued market discount for the year. made and the obligation to which it ap-is available. You must include any discount or
plies, andOnce you make this choice, it will apply to all interest in current income as it accrues for any
market discount bonds that you acquire during short-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt 4) Any other information necessary to showthe tax year and in later tax years. You cannot obligation) that is: you are entitled to make this choice.revoke your choice without the consent of the
1) Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,IRS.
Choosing to include accrued discount andAlso see Election To Report All Interest as 2) Held primarily for sale to customers in the other interest in current income. If you ac-OID, later. If you make that election, you must ordinary course of your trade or business, quire short-term discount obligations that are notuse the constant yield method.
subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-3) Held by a bank, regulated investment com-Effect on basis. You increase the basis of come of the accrued discount or other interest,pany, or common trust fund,your bonds by the amount of market discount you can choose to have those rules apply. This4) Held by certain pass-through entities,you include in your income. choice applies to all short-term obligations you
acquire during the year and in all later years.5) Identified as part of a hedging transaction,Partial principal payments. If you receive a You cannot change this choice without the con-orpartial payment of principal on a market discount sent of the IRS.bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986, 6) A stripped bond or stripped coupon held The procedures to use in making this choiceand you did not choose to include the discount in by the person who stripped the bond or are the same as those described for choosing toincome currently, you must treat the payment as coupon (or by any other person whose ba- include acquisition discount instead of OID onordinary interest income up to the amount of the sis in the obligation is determined by refer- nongovernment obligations in current income.bond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the ence to the basis in the hands of that However, you should indicate that you are mak-amount of accrued market discount reportable person). ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of theas interest at disposition by that amount. Internal Revenue Code.You can choose to figure accrued market Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your Also see the following discussion. If youdiscount for this purpose: obligation by the amount of discount you include make the election to report all interest currentlyin income currently. as OID, you must use the constant yield method.1) On the basis of the constant yield method,
described earlier, Accrual methods. Figure the accrued dis-
count by using either the ratable accrual Election To Report2) In proportion to the accrual of OID for any method or the constant yield method dis- All Interest as OIDaccrual period, if the debt instrument has cussed previously in Accrued market discountOID, or under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a
3) In proportion to the amount of stated inter- debt instrument acquired during the tax year asGovernment obligations. For an obligationest paid in the accrual period, if the debt OID and include it in income currently. For pur-described above that is a short-term govern-instrument has no OID. poses of this election, interest includes statedment obligation, the amount you include in your interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimisUnder method (2) above, figure accrued income for the current year is the accrued acqui- OID, market discount, de minimis market dis-market discount for a period by multiplying the sition discount, if any, plus any other accrued count, and unstated interest as adjusted by anytotal remaining market discount by a fraction. interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the tion discount is the stated redemption price at mium. See Treasury Regulation 1.1272– 3.OID for the period, and the denominator (bottom maturity minus your basis. part) is the total remaining OID at the beginning If you choose to use the constant yieldof the period. method to figure accrued acquisition discount,Under method (3) above, figure accrued treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as themarket discount for a period by multiplying the When To Reportissue price. If you choose to use this method,total remaining market discount by a fraction. you cannot change your choice. Interest IncomeThe numerator is the stated interest paid in the
accrual period, and the denominator is the total Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
Terms you may need to knowstated interest remaining to be paid at the begin- tion listed above that is not a government obliga-
ning of the accrual period. tion, the amount you include in your income for (see Glossary):
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accrual method 5) You are reporting OID in an amount more
or less than the amount shown on FormHow To ReportCash method 1099– OID.
Interest Income
Schedule B. You must complete Part I ofWhen to report your interest income depends on
Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form 1040Terms you may need to knowwhether you use the cash method or an accrual and any of the following apply.(see Glossary):method to report income.
1) Your taxable interest income is more than
Nominee $400.Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
the cash method. If you use this method, you Original issue discount (OID) 2) You are claiming the interest exclusiongenerally report your interest income in the year under the Education Savings Bond Pro-in which you actually or constructively receive it. gram (discussed earlier).Generally, you report all of your taxable interestHowever, there are special rules for reporting
3) You had a foreign account.income on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a, Formthe discount on certain debt instruments. See
1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In- 4) You received interest from a seller-fi-You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your intereststruments, earlier. nanced mortgage, and the buyer used theincome is more than $400. Instead, you must property as a home.use Form 1040A or Form 1040.Example. On September 1, 1999, you
5) You received a Form 1099 – INT for tax-ex-In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ ifloaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-
empt interest.you must use Form 1040, as described later, orpounded annually. You are not in the business
if any of the statements listed under Schedule B,of lending money. The note stated that principal 6) You received a Form 1099 – INT for U.S.later, are true.and interest would be due on August 31, 2001. savings bond interest that includes
In 2001, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi- amounts you reported before 2001.Form 1040A. You must complete Part I ofpal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form 1040A 7) You received, as a nominee, interest thatmethod, you must include in income on your and any of the following are true. actually belongs to someone else.2001 return the $508.80 interest you received in
8) You received a Form 1099 – INT for inter-that year. 1) Your taxable interest income is more than
est on frozen deposits.$400.Constructive receipt. You constructively
9) You received a Form 1099 – INT for inter-receive income when it is credited to your ac- 2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
est on a bond that you bought betweencount or made available to you. You do not need under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
interest payment dates.to have physical possession of it. For example, gram (discussed earlier).
you are considered to receive interest, divi- 10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is3) You received interest from a seller-fi-dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- true.nanced mortgage, and the buyer used thecount in a bank, savings and loan, or similar property as a home. On line 1, Part I, list each payer’s name and thefinancial institution, or interest on life insurance
amount received from each. If you received a4) You received a Form 1099 – INT for tax-ex-policy dividends left to accumulate, when they
Form 1099– INT or Form 1099– OID from a bro-empt interest.are credited to your account and subject to your kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet 5) You received a Form 1099 – INT for U.S.
entered in your passbook. savings bond interest that includes Reporting tax-exempt interest. Report the
amounts you reported before 2001.You constructively receive income on the total of your tax-exempt interest (such as inter-
deposit or account even if you must: est or accrued OID on certain state and munici-6) You received, as a nominee, interest that
pal bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from aactually belongs to someone else.1) Make withdrawals in multiples of even mutual fund on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form
7) You received a Form 1099 – INT for inter-amounts, 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, print “TEI” in the
est on frozen deposits. space to the right of the words “Form 1040EZ”2) Give a notice to withdraw before making on line 2. After “TEI,” show the amount of yourList each payer’s name and the amount of inter-the withdrawal, tax-exempt interest, but do not add tax-exemptest income received from each payer on line 1. If
3) Withdraw all or part of the account to with- interest in the total on Form 1040EZ, line 2.you received a Form 1099 – INT or Form
draw the earnings, or You should not have received a Form1099– OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-
1099– INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you did,age firm as the payer.4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless you must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) orYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must usethe interest you are to receive on an early Schedule B (Form 1040). See the Schedule 1 orForm 1040, as described next.withdrawal or redemption is substantially Schedule B instructions for how to report this. Beless than the interest payable at maturity. sure to also show this tax-exempt interest on lineForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead
8b.of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
Accrual method. If you use an accrual Do not report interest from an individ-1) You forfeited interest income because of
ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asmethod, you report your interest income when the early withdrawal of a time deposit,
tax-exempt interest.you earn it, whether or not you have received it. CAUTION
!
2) You received or paid accrued interest onInterest is earned over the term of the debt
securities transferred between interestinstrument. Form 1099 – INT. Your taxable interest in-payment dates,
come, except for interest from U.S. savingsExample. If, in the previous example, you 3) You had a financial account in a foreign bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in boxuse an accrual method, you must include the country, unless the combined value of all 1 of Form 1099 – INT. Add this amount to anyinterest in your income as you earn it. You would foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur- other taxable interest income you received. Youreport the interest as follows: 1999, $80; 2000, ing all of 2001 or the accounts were with must report all of your taxable interest income$249.60; and 2001, $179.20. certain U.S. military banking facilities, even if you do not receive a Form 1099 – INT.
4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 If you forfeited interest income because of
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is and choose to reduce interest income from the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and the bonds by any amortizable bond pre- ductible amount will be shown on Form
payable. It does not matter when you mail the mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond 1099– INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
coupon for payment. Premium Amortization), or drawal of savings, later.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(Keep for your records.)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2001
Box 3 of Form 1099– INT shows the amount Box 4 of Form 1099 – OID will contain an You received no other taxable interest for
of interest income you received from U.S. sav- amount if you were subject to backup withhold- 2001. You file Form 1040A.
ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form On line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 1040EZ, line 8, on Form 1040A, line 37, or on enter your interest income as shown on Form
to any other taxable interest income you re- Form 1040, line 59. 1099– INT —  $1,100.80. (If you had other taxa-
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was Box 7 of Form 1099– OID shows investment ble interest income, you would enter it next and
previously included in your interest income. If expenses you may be able to deduct as an then enter a subtotal, as described earlier,
part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ- itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- before going to the next step.) Several lines
ously included in your interest income, see U.S. ment expenses. above line 2, print “U.S. Savings Bond Interest
savings bond interest previously reported, later. Previously Reported ” and enter $1,058.00If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought U.S. savings bond interest previously ($1,100.80 − $42.80). Subtract $1,058.00 fromafter 1989 and you paid qualified educational reported. If you received a Form 1099 – INT $1,100.80 and enter $42.80 on line 2. Enterexpenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu- for U.S. savings bond interest, the form may $42.80 on line 4 of Schedule 1 and on line 8a ofcation Savings Bond Program, later. show interest you do not have to report. See Form 1040A.Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form Form 1099 – INT for U.S. savings bond interest
1099– INT will contain an amount if you were under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. Example 2. Your uncle died and left you asubject to backup withholding. Report the On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040), $1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondamount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 8, on or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), when it reaches maturity.Form 1040A, line 37, or on Form 1040, line 59. report all the interest shown on your Form Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500Box 5 of Form 1099 – INT shows investment 1099– INT. Then follow these steps. of the amount you receive upon redemption isexpenses you may be able to deduct as an interest income. Your uncle’s executor includeditemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- 1) Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal in your uncle ’s final return $200 of the interestment expenses. of all interest listed on line 1. that had accrued at the time of your uncle ’sYou may be able to take a credit for the 2) Below the subtotal print “U.S. Savings death. You have to include only $300 in youramount shown in box 6 (foreign tax paid) unless Bond Interest Previously Reported” and income.you deduct any amount on Schedule A of Form enter amounts previously reported or inter- The bank where you redeem the bond gives1040 as “Other taxes.” To take the credit, you est accrued before you received the bond. you a Form 1099– INT showing interest incomemay have to file Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit.
of $500. You also receive a Form 1099 – INTFor more information, see Publication 514, For- 3) Subtract these amounts from the subtotal
showing taxable interest income of $300 fromeign Tax Credit for Individuals. and enter the result on line 2.
your savings account.
Form 1099 –OID. The taxable OID on a dis- You file Form 1040 and you completeExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-counted obligation for the part of the year you Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list theings bonds for you when you were a child. Theowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099 – OID. $500 and $300 interest amounts shown on yourbonds were issued in your name, and the inter-Include this amount in your total taxable interest Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you putest on the bonds was reported each year as itincome. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, printaccrued. (See Choice to report interest each1099– OID under Original Issue Discount (OID), “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)earlier. ported” and enter the $200 interest included inIn April 2001, you redeemed one of theYou must report all taxable OID even if you your uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 frombonds —  a $1,000 series EE bond. The bonddo not receive a Form 1099– OID. the subtotal and write $600 on line 2. You thenwas originally issued in March 1983. When youBox 2 of Form 1099– OID shows any taxable complete the rest of the form.redeemed the bond, you received $1,600.80 forinterest on the obligation other than OID. Add
it. Worksheet for savings bonds distributedthis amount to the OID shown in box 1 and
from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. IfThe Form 1099 – INT you received showsinclude the result in your total taxable income.
you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxableinterest income of $1,100.80. However, sinceIf you forfeited interest or principal on the
distribution from a retirement or profit-sharingthe interest on your savings bonds was reportedobligation because of an early withdrawal, the
plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds,yearly, you need only include the $42.80 interestdeductible amount will be shown in box 3. See
earlier), your interest income does not includethat accrued from January 2001 to April 2001.Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the interest accrued before the distribution and on line 6 of Form 8815 and on line 1 of either as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099– INT for
taxed as a distribution from the plan. Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form each other owner and show that person as the
1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the “Recipient.” However, you do not have to fileUse the worksheet below to figure the result from line 14 (Form 8815) on line 3 of Form 1099 – INT to show payments for youramount you subtract from the interest Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or line 3 of Schedule spouse. For more information about the report-shown on Form 1099– INT. B (Form 1040). ing requirements and the penalties for failure to
file (or furnish) certain information returns, seeInterest on seller-financed mortgage. If anA. Write the amount of cash received upon the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,individual buys his or her home from you in aredemption of the bond ........... 5498, and W2– G.
B. Write the value of the bond at the time of sale that you finance, you must report the Similar rules apply to OID reported to you asdistribution by the plan ............ buyer’s name, address, and social security num- a nominee on Form 1099 – OID. You must file aC. Subtract the amount on line B from the ber on line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or line Form 1099 – OID with Form 1096 to show theamount on line A. This is the amount of 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040). If you do not, youinterest accrued on the bond since it was proper distributions of the OID.may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer maydistributed by the plan ............
have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does notD. Write the amount of interest shown on Example. You and your sister have a joint
your Form 1099 – I N T ............ give you this information. savings account that paid $1,500 interest forE. Subtract the amount on line C from the You must also give your name, address, and 2001. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds inamount on line D. This is the amount you social security number (or employer identifica- this account, and you and she have agreed toinclude in “U.S. Savings Bond Interest tion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you mayPreviously Reported” ............. share the yearly interest income in proportion to
have to pay a $50 penalty. the amount that each of you has invested. Be-Your employer should tell you the value of cause your social security number was given toFrozen deposits. Even if you receive a Formeach bond on the date it was distributed. the bank, you received a Form 1099 – INT for1099– INT for interest on deposits that you could 2001 that includes the interest income belongingnot withdraw at the end of 2001, you must ex-Example. You received a distribution of se- to your sister. This amount is $450, or 30% ofclude these amounts from your gross income.ries EE U.S. savings bonds in January 2000 the total interest of $1,500.(See Interest income on frozen deposits underfrom your company’s profit-sharing plan. You must give your sister a Form 1099– INTInterest Income, earlier.) Do not include thisIn April 2001, you redeemed a $100 series by January 31, 2002, showing $450 of interestincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040.EE bond that was part of the distribution you income that she earned for 2001. You must alsoIn Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Part I ofreceived in 2000. You received $93.04 for the send a copy of the nominee Form 1099 – INT,Schedule B (Form 1040), include the full amountbond the company bought in May 1990. The along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenueof interest shown on your Form 1099 – INT onvalue of the bond at the time of distribution in Service Center by February 28, 2002 (April1,line 1. Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal2000 was $87.68. (This is the amount you in- 2002, if you file form 1099 – INT electronically).of all interest income. Below this subtotal, writecluded on your 2000 return.) The bank gave you Show your own name, address, and social se-“Frozen Deposits” and show the amount of inter-a Form 1099 – INT that shows $43.04 interest curity number as that of the “Payer” on the Formest that you are excluding. Subtract this amount(the total interest from the date the bond was 1099– INT. Show your sister ’s name, address,from the subtotal and write the result on line 2.purchased to the date of redemption). Since a and social security number in the blocks pro-part of the interest was included in your income Accrued interest on bonds. If you received a vided for identification of the “Recipient.”in 2000, you need to include in your 2001 in- Form 1099 – INT that reflects accrued interest When you prepare your own federal incomecome only the interest that accrued after the paid on a bond you bought between interest tax return, report the total amount of interestbond was distributed to you. payment dates, include the full amount shown income, $1,500, on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1On line 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040), include as interest on the Form 1099– INT on line 1, Part (Form 1040A) or line 1, Part I of Schedule Ball the interest shown on your Form 1099 – INT I of Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, below a (Form 1040), and identify the name of the bankas well as any other taxable interest income you subtotal of all interest income listed, print “Ac- that paid this interest. Show the amount belong-received. Several lines above line 2, put a sub- crued Interest” and the amount of accrued inter- ing to your sister, $450, as a subtraction from atotal of all interest listed on line 1. Below this est that you paid to the seller. That amount is subtotal of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Sched-subtotal print “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previ- taxable to the seller, not you. Subtract that ule B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomi-ously Reported” and enter the amount figured amount from the interest income subtotal. Enter nee Distribution. ” (Your sister will report theon the worksheet below. the result on line 2 and also on Form 1040, line $450 of interest income on her own tax return, if
8a. she has to file a return, and identify you as theA. Write the amount of cash received upon
redemption of the bond ........... $93.04 For more information, see Bonds Sold Be- payer of that amount.)
B. Write the value of the bond at the time of tween Interest Dates, earlier. Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. Ifdistribution by the plan ............ 87.68
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the you are reporting OID in an amount greater orNominee distributions. If you received a
amount on line A. This is the amount of less than the amount shown on Form 1099– OIDForm 1099 – INT that includes an amount youinterest accrued on the bond since it was or other written statement (such as for a REMICreceived as a nominee for the real owner, reportdistributed by the plan ............  5.36
regular interest), include the full amount of OIDthe full amount shown as interest on the FormD. Write the amount of interest shown on
shown on your Form 1099 – OID or other state-1099– INT on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Formyour Form 1099 – I N T ............ $43.04
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the ment on line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be-
amount on line D. This is the amount you 1040). If the OID to be reported is less than thelow a subtotal of all interest income listed, writeinclude in “U.S. Savings Bond Interest amount shown on Form 1099 – OID, show the“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac-Previously Reported” ............. $37.68 OID you do not have to report below a subtotaltually belongs to someone else. Subtract that
Subtract $37.68 from the subtotal and enter the of the interest and OID listed. Identify theamount from the interest income subtotal. Enter
result on line 2 of Schedule B. You then com- amount as “OID Adjustment” and subtract it fromthe result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form
plete the rest of the form. the subtotal. If the OID to be reported is greater1040A or 1040.
than the amount shown on Form 1099 – OID,Interest excluded under the Education Sav- File Form 1099 –INT with the IRS. If you show the additional OID below the subtotal.ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815, to fig- received interest as a nominee in 2001, you Identify the amount as “OID Adjustment ” andure your interest exclusion when you redeem must file a Form 1099 – INT for that interest with add it to the subtotal.qualified savings bonds and pay qualified higher the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099 – INT with a
educational expenses during the same year. Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. If
For more information on the exclusion and of U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal you withdraw funds from a time-savings or other
qualified higher educational expenses, see the Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2002 deferred interest account before matur ity, you
earlier discussion under Education Savings (April 1, 2002 if you file Form 1099 – INT elec- may be charged a penalty. The Form 1099 – INT
Bond Program. tronically). Give the actual owner of the interest or similar statement given to you by the financial
You must show your total interest from quali- Copy B of the Form 1099 – INT by January 31, institution will show the total amount of interest
fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2001 2002. On Form 1099 – INT, you should be listed in box 1 and will show the penalty separately in
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
box 2. You must include in income all the inter- or December payable to shareholders of record ally receive them. However, they a re not in-
est shown in box 1. You can deduct the penalty on a date in one of those months but actually cluded on Form 1099 – DIV. Instead, they are
on line 30, Form 1040. Deduct the entire penalty pays the dividend during January of the next reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-
even if it is more than your interest income. calendar year, you are considered to have re- holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
ceived the dividend on December 31. You report Gains.
the dividend in the year it was declared. The Form 2439 will also show how much, if
any, of the undistributed capital gains is:
Dividends and Ordinary Dividends • Qualified 5-year gain (box 1c),
Other Corporate Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1d),
mon type of distribution from a corporation. They orDistributions are paid out of the earnings and profits of a
• Gain from qualified small business stockcorporation and are ordinary income to you. This
(section 1202 gain, box 1e).Dividends are distributions of money, stock, or means they are not capital gains. You can as-
other property paid to you by a corporation. You sume that any dividend you receive on common For information about these terms, see Capitalalso may receive dividends through a partner- or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that is the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a oftaxed as a corporation. However, some nary dividends will be shown in box 1 of the
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains in columnamounts you receive that are called dividends Form 1099– DIV you receive.
are actually interest income. (See Dividends that (f) on line 11 of Schedule D (Form 1040). Enter
Dividends used to buy more stock.  Theare actually interest under Taxable Interest — on line 2 of the Qualified 5-Year Gain Worksheet
corporation in which you own stock may have aGeneral, earlier.) in the Schedule D instructions the part reported
dividend reinvestment plan. This plan lets youThe most common kinds of distributions are: to you as qualified 5-year gain. Enter on line 11
choose to use your dividends to buy (through an of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Work-• Ordinary dividends, agent) more shares of stock in the corporation sheet in the Schedule D instructions the part
instead of receiving the dividends in cash. If you• Capital gain distributions, and reported to you as unrecaptured section 1250
are a member of this type of plan and you use gain. For any gain on qualified small business• Nontaxable distributions. your dividends to buy more stock at a price stock, follow the reporting instructions under
equal to its fair market value, you still mustMost distributions are paid in cash (check). Section 1202 Exclusion in chapter 4.
report the dividends as income.However, distributions can consist of more The tax paid on these gains by the mutualIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest-stock, stock rights, other property, or services. fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price You take credit for this tax by including it on lineless than its fair market value, you must reportForm 1099–DIV. Most corporations use Form 65, Form 1040, and checking box a on that line.as dividend income the fair market value of the1099– DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, andadditional stock on the dividend payment date.you the distributions you received from them keep Copy C for your records.You also must report as dividend income anyduring the year. Keep this form with your rec-
service charge subtracted from your cash divi- Basis adjustment. Increase your basis inords. You do not have to attach it to your tax
dends before the dividends are used to buy the your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byreturn. Even if you do not receive Form
additional stock. But you may be able to deduct the difference between the gain you report and1099– DIV, you must still report all of your taxa-
the service charge. See Expenses of Producing the credit you claim for the tax paid.ble dividend income.
Income in chapter 3.Nominees. If someone receives distribu- In some dividend reinvestment plans, you Nontaxable Distributionstions as a nominee for you, that person will give can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at ayou a Form 1099– DIV, which will show distribu- price less than fair market value. If you choose You may receive a return of capital or a tax-freetions received on your behalf. to do this, you must report as dividend income distribution of more shares of stock or stockIf you receive a Form 1099 – DIV that in- the difference between the cash you invest and rights. These distributions are not treated thecludes amounts belonging to another person, the fair market value of the stock you buy. When same as ordinary dividends or capital gain distri-see Nominees under How To Report Dividend figuring this amount, use the fair market value of butions.Income, later, for more information. the stock on the dividend payment date.
Form 1099 – MISC. Certain substitute pay- Money market funds. Report amounts you Return of Capitalments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest receive from money market funds as dividendthat are received by a broker on your behalf income. Money market funds are a type of mu- A return of capital is a distribution that is not paidmust be reported to you on Form 1099 – MISC, tual fund and should not be confused with bank out of the earnings and profits of a corporation. ItMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement. money market accounts that pay interest. is a return of your investment in the stock of theSee also Reporting Substitute Payments under company. You should receive a FormShort Sales in chapter 4. 1099– DIV or other statement from the corpora-Capital Gain Distributions
tion showing you what part of the distribution is aIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If
Capital gain distributions (also called capital return of capital. On Form 1099– DIV, a nontax-you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to able return of capital will be shown in box 3. Ifamount (or other incorrect information), you
your account by regulated investment compa- you do not receive such a statement, you reportshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. The
nies (commonly called mutual funds) and real the distribution as an ordinary dividend.new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-
estate investment trusts (REITs). They will berected.”
shown in box 2a of the Form 1099 – DIV you Basis adjustment. A return of capital reducesDividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, receive from the mutual fund or REIT. the basis of your stock. It is not taxed until yourexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a Report capital gain distributions as long-term basis in the stock is fully recovered. If you buydividend is declared, but before it is paid, the capital gains, regardless of how long you owned stock in a corporation in different lots at differentowner of record (usually the payee shown on the your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See times, and you cannot definitely identify thedividend check) must include the dividend in Capital gain distributions under How To Report shares subject to the return of capital, reduceincome. Dividend Income, later in this chapter. the basis of your earliest purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been re-Dividends received in January. If a regu- Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
duced to zero, report any additional return oflated investment company (mutual fund) or real and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs
capital that you receive as a capital gain.estate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi- keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on
Whether you report it as a long-term ordend (including any exempt-interest dividend or them. You must treat your share of these gains
capital gain distribution) in October, November, as distributions, even though you did not actu- short-term capital gain depends on how long
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in than 10% of the issue price on stock not
1) You or any other shareholder has thechapter 4. redeemable for 5 years from the issue
choice to receive cash or other property date or is in the nature of a penalty for
instead of stock or stock rights.Example. You bought stock in 1989 for making a premature redemption.
$100. In 1992, you received a return of capital of 2) The distribution gives cash or other prop- 2) The stock was issued after October 9,$80. You did not include this amount in your erty to some shareholders and an increase 1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-income, but you reduced the basis of your stock in the percentage interest in the able solely at the option of the issuer), andto $20. You received a return of capital of $30 in corporation’s assets or earnings and prof- the redemption premium is “de minimis.”2001. The first $20 of this amount reduced your its to other shareholders. The redemption premium is de minimis if itbasis to zero. You report the other $10 as a
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the3) The distribution is in convertible preferredlong-term capital gain for 2001. You must report
redemption price multiplied by the numberstock and has the same result as in (2).as a long-term capital gain any return of capital
of full years from the date of issue to theyou receive on this stock in later years. 4) The distribution gives preferred stock to date redeemable.some common stock shareholders andLiquidating distributions. Liquidating distri- 3) The stock was issued after October 9,common stock to other common stockbutions, sometimes called liquidating dividends, 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-shareholders.are distributions you receive during a partial or fied time or is redeemable at your option,complete liquidation of a corporation. These dis- 5) The distribution is on preferred stock. (The but the redemption is unlikely because it istributions are, at least in part, one form of a distribution, however, is not taxable if it is subject to a contingency outside your con-return of capital. They may be paid in one or an increase in the conversion ratio of con- trol (not including the possibility of default,more installments. You will receive Form vertible preferred stock made solely to insolvency, etc.).1099– DIV from the corporation showing you the take into account a stock dividend, stock
amount of the liquidating distribution in box 8 or split, or similar event that would otherwise 4) The stock was issued after December 19,
9. result in reducing the conversion right.) 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-
Any liquidating distribution you receive is not tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-The term “stock” includes rights to acquiretaxable to you until you have recovered the mium is in the nature of a penalty forstock, and the term “shareholder” includes abasis of your stock. After the basis of your stock premature redemption or redemption is notholder of rights or convertible securities.has been reduced to zero, you must report the more likely than not to occur. The redemp-If you receive taxable stock dividends orliquidating distribution as a capital gain (except tion will be treated under a “safe harbor”stock rights, include their fair market value at thein certain instances involving collapsible corpo- as not more likely than not to occur if all oftime of the distribution in your income.rations). Whether you report the gain as a the following are true.
long-term or short-term capital gain depends on Constructive distributions. You must treat
a) You and the issuer are not relatedhow long you have held the stock. See Holding certain transactions that increase your propor-
under the rules discussed in chapter 4Period in chapter 4. tionate interest in the earnings and profits or
under Related Party Transactions, sub-assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-Stock acquired at different times. If you stituting “20%” for “50%.”tions of stock or stock rights. These constructiveacquired stock in the same corporation in more
distributions are taxable if they have the same b) There are no plans, arrangements, orthan one transaction, you own more than one
result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4), agreements that effectively require orblock of stock in the corporation. If you receive
or (5) of the above discussion. are intended to compel the issuer todistributions from the corporation in complete
This treatment applies to a change in your redeem the stock.liquidation, you must divide the distribution
stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, aamong the blocks of stock you own in the follow- c) The redemption would not reduce thedifference between your stock ’s redemptioning proportion: the number of shares in that stock’s yield.price and issue price, a redemption that is notblock over the total number of shares you own.
treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, andDivide distributions in partial liquidation among
any other transaction having a similar effect onthat part of the stock that is redeemed in the Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-your interest in the corporation.partial liquidation. After the basis of a block of ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketstock is reduced to zero, you must report the Preferred stock redeemable at a premium. value when distributed. If you receive stock orpart of any later distribution for that block as a If you hold preferred stock having a redemption stock rights that are not taxable to you, seecapital gain. price higher than its issue price, the difference Stocks and Bonds in chapter 4 for information on(the redemption premium) generally is taxableDistributions less than basis. If the total how to figure their basis.as a constructive distribution of additional stockliquidating distributions you receive are less on the preferred stock.than the basis of your stock, you may have a Fractional shares. You may not own enoughFor stock issued before October 10, 1990,capital loss. You can report a capital loss only stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofyou include the redemption premium in yourafter you have received the final distribution in stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-income ratably over the period during which theliquidation that results in the redemption or can- dend. However, with the approval of the share-stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedcellation of the stock. Whether you report the holders, the corporation may set up a plan inafter October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss which fractional shares are not issued, but in-tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-depends on how long you held the stock. See stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givencrual over the period during which the stockHolding Period in chapter 4. to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forcannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue fractional shares under such a plan is treated asdiscount on a debt instrument. See Original Is- an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalsue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.Distributions of Stock shares. You must determine your gain or lossThe redemption premium is not a construc-and Stock Rights and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, in
ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is thethe following situations.Distributions by a corporation of its own stock difference between the cash you receive and theare commonly known as stock dividends. Stock basis of the fractional shares sold.1) The stock was issued before October 10,rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri- 1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the Example. You own one share of commondeemable solely at the option of the is-corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividends stock that you bought on January 3, 1993, forsuer), and the redemption premium isand stock rights are not taxable to you, and you $100. The corporation declared a common stock“reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc-do not report them on your return. dividend of 5% on June 30, 2001. The fair mar-tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-
ket value of the stock at the time the stockTaxable stock dividends and stock rights. demption premium that is not “reasonable”
dividend was declared was $200. You were paidDistributions of stock dividends and stock rights is a constructive distribution.) The redemp-
$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underare taxable to you if any of the following apply. tion premium is reasonable if it is not more
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0110
Dividends and
Distributions
RECIPIENT’S identification numberPAYER’S Federal identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
Form 1099-DIV Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue Service
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(Keep for your records.)
Form 1099-DIV
Federal income tax withheld4
$
Cash liquidation distr.8
$
Foreign tax paid6
$
3 Nontaxable distributions
$
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation distr.9
$
7 Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
2d Unrecap. sec. 1250 gain
$$
Qualified 5-year gain2c
$
Section 1202 gain2e
$
Ordinary dividends1
$
28% rate gain2b
2001
a plan described in the above paragraph. You Exempt-interest dividends are not shown on
1) Property bought for your personal use, orfigure your gain or loss as follows: Form 1099 – DIV or Form 1099– INT.
2) Capital assets or depreciable propertyInformation reporting requirement. Al-Fair market value of old stock ......... $200.00 bought for use in your business. But youthough exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-Fair market value of stock dividend
must reduce the basis (cost) of the items(cash received) ..................  +10.00 ble, you must show them on your tax return if
bought. If the dividend is more than theFair market value of old stock and stock you have to file a return. This is an informationdividend ...................... $210.00 adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-reporting requirement and does not change theBasis (cost) of old stock port the excess as income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income.after the stock dividend
See Reporting tax-exempt interest under How(($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ............. $  95.24 These rules are the same whether the coop-
Basis (cost) of stock dividend To Report Interest Income, earlier. erative paying the dividend is a taxable or
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .............. +  4.76 tax-exempt cooperative.Alternative minimum tax treatment.Total ........................ $100.00
Exempt-interest dividends paid from specified Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notCash received .................. $  10.00 private activity bonds may be subject to the report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-Basis (cost) of stock dividend ......... − 4.76
alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and its port these amounts on line 21 of Form 1040, line
instructions for more information.Gain $ 5.24 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Because you had held the share of stock for Dividends on insurance policies. Insurance
more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend How To Reportpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is to pay your premiums are not taxable. However, Dividend Incomea long-term capital gain. you must report as taxable interest income the
Terms you may need to knowinterest that is paid or credited on dividends leftScrip dividends. A corporation that de- (see Glossary):with the insurance company.clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip  If dividends on an insurance contract (othercertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. than a modified endowment contract) are distrib-The certificate is generally nontaxable when you Nomineeuted to you, they are a partial return of thereceive it. If you choose to have the corporation Restricted stockpremiums you paid. Do not include them in yoursell the certificate for you and give you the pro- gross income until they are more than the total ofceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- all net premiums you paid for the contract. (Fortween the proceeds and the part of your basis in Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orinformation on the treatment of a distributionthe corporation ’s stock that is allocated to the Form 1040A to report your dividend income.from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-certificate. Report the total of your ordinary dividends onbution Before Annuity Starting Date From aHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate line 9 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-that you can choose to redeem for cash instead If you receive capital gain distributions, youodic Payments in Publication 575, Pension andof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- may be able to use Form 1040A or you mayAnnuity Income. ) Report any taxable distribu-ceive it. You must include its fair market value in have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-tions on insurance policies on line 16b (Formincome on the date you receive it. butions, later. If you receive nontaxable distribu-1040) or line 12b (Form 1040A).
tions required to be reported as capital gains,
Dividends on veterans ’ insurance. Divi-Other Distributions you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form
dends you receive on veterans ’ insurance poli- 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.
You may receive any of the following distribu- cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on Form 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on whichtions during the year. dividends left with the Department of Veterans you received $10 or more in dividends and otherAffairs is not taxable.Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest distributions, you should receive a Form
dividends you receive from a regulated invest- Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage 1099 – DIV. Even if you do not receive a Form
ment company (mutual fund) are not included in dividends you receive in money from a coopera- 1099 – DIV, you must report all of your taxable
your taxable income. You will receive a notice tive organization are included in your income. dividend income. 
from the mutual fund telling you the amount of Do not include in your income patronage See Form 1099 – DIV for more information
the exempt-interest dividends you received. dividends you receive on: on how to report dividend income.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040A. You must complete Part II of dividends, do not include the dividends in your must file a Form 1099 – DIV for those dividends
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to your wages reported on line 7, Form 1040. Attach a with the IRS. Send the Form 1099 – DIV with a
Form 1040A, if: statement to your Form 1040 explaining why the Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal
amount shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 is of U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Form different from the amount shown on your Form Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2002
1099– DIV) are more than $400, or W– 2. (April 1, 2002, if you file Form 1099 – DIV elec-
tronically). Give the actual owner of the divi-2) You received, as a nominee, dividends Independent contractor. If you received dends Copy B of the Form 1099 – DIV bythat actually belong to someone else. restricted stock for services as an independent January 31, 2002. On Form 1099 – DIV, youcontractor, the rules in the previous discussionList on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount should be listed as the “Payer.” The other ownerapply. Generally, you must treat dividends youof ordinary dividends you received. If you re- should be listed as the “Recipient.” You do not,receive on the stock as income from self-em-ceived a Form 1099– DIV from a brokerage firm, however, have to file a Form 1099– DIV to showployment.list the brokerage firm as the payer. payments for your spouse. For more informationEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed Capital gain distributions. How to report about the reporting requirements and the penal-on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9, Form capital gain distributions depends on whether ties for failure to file (or furnish) certain informa-1040A. you have any other capital gains or losses. If you tion returns, see the General Instructions for
do, report capital gain distributions (box 2a of Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W– 2G.Form 1040. You must fill in Part II of Schedule
Form 1099– DIV) in column (f) of line 13, Part IIB and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
of Schedule D (Form 1040). If you do not have Liquidating distributions. If you receive a
1) Your ordinary dividends ( box 1 of Form any other capital gains or losses, you may be liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation
1099– DIV) are more than $400, or able to report your capital gain distributions di- will give you a Form 1099 – DIV showing the
rectly on line 13 of Form 1040 or line 10 of Form amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 82) You received, as a nominee, dividends 1040A. In either case, see Reporting Capital and 9.that actually belong to someone else. Gains and Losses in chapter 4 for more informa- For a discussion of the treatment of liquidat-If your ordinary dividends are more than $400, tion. ing distributions, see Return of Capital underyou must also complete Part III of Schedule B. The mutual fund or real estate investment Nontaxable Distributions, earlier in this chapter.List on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, each trust (REIT) making the distribution should tell
payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi- you how much of it is:
dends you received. If your securities are held • Qualified 5-year gain (box 2c),by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list the
Strippedname of the brokerage firm that is shown on • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2d),
Form 1099 – DIV as the payer. If your stock is or
Preferred Stockheld by a nominee who is the owner of record, • Section 1202 gain (box 2e).and the nominee credited or paid you dividends
on the stock, show the name of the nominee and For information about these terms, see Capital
If the dividend rights are stripped from cer-the dividends you received or for which you were Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
tain preferred stock, the holder of the strippedcredited. Enter on line 2 of the Qualified 5-Year Gain preferred stock may have to include amounts inEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions the income equal to the amounts that would haveon line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a part reported to you as qualified 5-year gain. been included if the stock were a bond withnominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section original issue discount (OID).total on line 9, Form 1040. 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
tions the part reported to you as unrecapturedDividends received on restricted stock. Re- Stripped preferred stock defined. Strippedsection 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualifiedstricted stock is stock that you get from your preferred stock is any stock that meets both ofsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), followemployer for services you perform and that is the following tests.the reporting instructions under Section 1202nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk
Exclusion in chapter 4.of forfeiture. You do not have to include the 1) There has been a separation in ownershipvalue of the stock in your income when you between the stock and any dividend on theNontaxable (return of capital) distributions.receive it. However, if you get dividends on re- stock that has not become payable.Report return of capital distributions (box 3 ofstricted stock, you must include them in your Form 1099 – DIV) only after your basis in the 2) The stock:income as wages, not dividends. See Restricted stock has been reduced to zero. After the basisProperty in Publication 525 for information on of your stock has been reduced to zero, you a) Is limited and preferred as to dividends,restricted stock dividends. must show this amount on line 1, Part I ofYour employer should include these divi- b) Does not participate in corporateSchedule D, if you held the stock 1 year or less.dends in the wages shown on your Form W– 2. If growth to any significant extent, andShow it on line 8, Part II of Schedule D, if youyou also get a Form 1099 – DIV for these divi- held the stock for more than 1 year. Print “Divi- c) Has a fixed redemption price.dends, list them on line 5 of Schedule B (Form dend R.O.C. Exceeding Basis” in column (a) of1040), with the other dividends you received. Schedule D and the name of the company. Re-Enter a subtotal of all your dividend income port your gain in column (f). Your gain is the Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre-several lines above line 6. Below the subtotal, amount of the distribution that is more than your ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-write “Dividends on restricted stock reported as basis in the stock. clude certain amounts in your gross incomewages on line 7, Form 1040, ” and enter the
while you hold the stock. These amounts areamount of the dividends included in your wages Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends
ordinary income. They are equal to the amountson line 7, Form 1040. Subtract this amount from as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your
you would have included in gross income if thethe subtotal and enter the result on line 6, Part II name but actually belong to someone else),
stock were a bond that:of Schedule B. include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Form
1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). SeveralElection. You can choose to include the 1) Was issued on the purchase date of thelines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividendvalue of restricted stock in gross income as pay stock, andincome listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, writefor services. If you make this choice, report the “Nominee Distributions” and show the amounts 2) Has OID equal to:dividends on the stock like any other dividends. received as a nominee. Subtract the total of yourList them on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, along a) The redemption price for the stock, mi-nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enterwith your other dividends (if the amount of ordi- nusthe result on line 6.nary dividends received from all sources is more
b) The price at which you bought thethan $400). If you receive both a Form File Form 1099 –DIV with the IRS. If you
stock.1099– DIV and a Form W – 2 showing these received dividends as a nominee in 2001, you
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report these amounts as other income on line Because income under an accrual method is not Any amount that you receive on the ret ire-
21 of Form 1040. For information about OID, determined by the receipt of cash, you may have ment of a debt instrument is treated in the same
see Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. to include OID or interest income in your taxable way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-
This treatment also applies to you if you income even if you have not received any cash ment. A debt instrument is retired when i t is
acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by payments. reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-
gift) that your basis in the stock is determined by celed.
Forms 1099 – INT and 1099 – OID. Youusing a buyer’s basis. Sale or exchange of a regular interest.should receive a copy of Form 1099 – INT or Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of aTreatment of person stripping stock. If you Form 1099– OID from the REMIC. You will also REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.strip the rights to one or more dividends from receive a written statement by March 15, 2002 (if The ordinary income part, if any, is:stripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- you are a calendar year taxpayer), that provides
ing purchased the stock. You are treated as additional information. The statement should
• The amount that would have been in-
making the purchase on the date you disposed contain enough information to enable you to cluded in your income if the yield to matur-
of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the figure your accrual of market discount or amor- ity on the regular interest had been 110%
stripped preferred stock is treated as your tizable bond premium. of the applicable federal rate at the begin-
purchase price. The rules described in Treat- ning of your holding period minusForm 1099 – INT shows the amount of inter-ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. est income that accrued to you for the period you • The amount you included in your income.held the regular interest.
Form 1099 – OID shows the amount of OID
Residual Interestand interest, if any, that accrued to you for the
REMICs, FASITs, period you held the regular interest. You will not
A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC thatneed to make any adjustments to the amounts
and Other CDOs is not a regular interest. It is designated as areported even if you held the regular interest for
residual interest by the REMIC.only a part of the calendar year. However, if youHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in- If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset you must take into account, on a quarterly basis,quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and your daily portion of the taxable income or netForm 1099 – OID under Original Issue Discountother collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax(OID), earlier.must follow special rules for reporting income year that you hold the residual interest. You
and any expenses from these investment prod- must report these amounts as ordinary incomeYou may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-
ucts. or loss.tions and other persons specified in Regulation
1.6049– 7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. These Basis in the residual interest. Your basis inREMICs persons and fiscal year taxpayers may obtain the residual interest is increased by the amounttax information by contacting the REMIC or the of taxable income you take into account. YourA real estate mortgage investment conduit issuer of the CDO, if they hold directly from the basis is decreased (but not below zero) by the(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur- REMIC or issuer of the CDO. Publication 938, amount of cash or the fair market value of anypose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se- Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduits property distributed to you, and by the amount ofcured by interests in real property. A REMIC (REMICs) Reporting Information, explains how any net loss you have taken into account. If youissues regular and residual interests to inves- to request this information. sell your residual interest, you must adjust yourtors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally basis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s taxa-Publication 938 is available only on thetreated as a partnership with the residual inter- ble income or net loss immediately before theInternet at www.irs.gov.est holders treated as the partners. The regular sale. See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for moreinterests are treated as debt instruments. information about selling a residual interest.REMIC income or loss is not income or loss If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughfrom a passive activity. Treatment of distributions. You must in-a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-For more information about the qualifications clude in your gross income the part of any distri-quest the information from the nominee in theand the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and bution that is more than your adjusted basis.manner prescribed in Regulationthe interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec- Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or1.6049– 7(f)(7)(i).tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve- exchange of your residual interest.
nue Code, and the regulations under those Allocated investment expenses. Regular in- Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residualsections. terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Formdeduct the REMIC ’s investment expenses, but 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net LossRegular Interest single-class REMIC is one that generally would Allocation, and instructions from the REMICbe classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadA REMIC can have several classes (also known each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate yournot elected REMIC status.as “tranches”) of regular interests. A regular share of the REMIC ’s quarterly taxable income
The single-class REMIC will report yourinterest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- (or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your
share of its investment expenses in box 5 ofceive a specified principal amount (or other simi- tax return. Keep it for your records.
Form 1099– INT or box 7 of Form 1099– OID. Itlar amount). Use Part IV of Schedule E (Form 1040) to
will also include this amount in box 1 of FormA REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt report your total share of the REMIC ’s taxable
1099– INT or box 2 of Form 1099 – OID, and oninstrument for income tax purposes. Accord- income (or loss) for each quarter included in
the additional written statement.ingly, the OID, market discount, and income your tax year.
You may be able to take a deduction forreporting rules that apply to bonds and other For more information about reporting your
these expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsodebt instruments as described earlier in this income (or loss) from a residual interest in a
applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedpublication under Discount on Debt Instruments REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and
deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.apply, with certain modifications discussed be- Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.
low. Redemption of regular interests at maturity. Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-Generally, you report your income from a Redemption of debt instruments at their maturity gross-income limit, you may be able to claim aregular interest on line 8a, Form 1040. For more is treated as a sale or exchange. You must miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-information on how to report interest and OID, report redemptions on your tax return whether or dinary and necessary expenses that you paid orsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier. not you realize gain or loss on the transaction. incurred in connection with your investment in a
Holders must use accrual method. Holders Your basis is your adjusted issue price, which REMIC. These expenses may include certain
of regular interests must use an accrual method includes any OID you previously reported in expense items incurred by the REMIC a nd
of accounting to report OID and interest income. income. passed through to you. The REMIC will report
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
these expenses to you on line 3b of Schedule Q. holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use
See chapter 3 for information on how to report an accrual method of accounting to report OID Investment Clubs
these expenses. and interest income.
For more information about FASITs, see An investment club is formed when a group of
friends, neighbors, business associates, orsections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-Collateralized Debt
others pool their money to invest in stock orenue Code.Obligations (CDOs)
other securities. The club may or may not have a
written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a
Usually the group operates informally withdebt instrument, other than a REMIC regular
members pledging to pay a regular amount intointerest, that is secured by a pool of mortgages S Corporations the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeeor other evidence of debt and that has principal
that gathers information on securities, selectspayments that are subject to acceleration. In general, an S corporation does not pay a tax the most promising securities, and recommends(Note: While REMIC regular interests are collat- on its income. Instead, its income and expenses that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateeralized debt obligations, they have unique rules are passed through to the shareholders, who these responsibilities among all their members.that do not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) then report these items on their own income tax Most clubs require all members to vote for orCDOs, also known as “pay-through bonds,” are returns. against all investments, sales, trades, and othercommonly divided into different classes (also If you are an S corporation shareholder, all transactions.called “tranches”). current year income or loss and other tax itemsCDOs can be secured by a pool of mort- Identifying number. Each club must have anare taxed to you at the corporation ’s year endgages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or employer identification number (EIN) to use(generally, the end of the calendar year)credit card receivables. when filing its return. The club ’s EIN also maywhether or not you actually receive any amount.For more information about the qualifications have to be given to the payer of dividends orGenerally, those items increase or decrease theand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of a other income from investments recorded in thebasis of your S corporation stock as appropriate.CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internal club’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get FormFor more information on basis adjustments for SRevenue Code and the regulations under that SS–4, Application for Employer Identificationcorporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds undersection. Number, from the Internal Revenue Service orBasis of Investment Property in chapter 4.The OID, market discount, and income-re- your nearest Social Security Administration of-Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-porting rules that apply to bonds and other debt fice. See chapter 5 of this publication for morecept dividend distributions, are considered a re-instruments, as described earlier in this chapter information about how to get this form.under Discount on Debt Instruments, also apply turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stock
Investments in name of member. Whento a CDO. of the corporation. The part of any distribution
an investment is recorded in the name of oneYou must include interest income from your that is more than your basis is treated as a gain
club member, this member must give his or herCDO in your gross income under your regular from the sale or exchange of property. The
social security number (SSN) to the payer ofmethod of accounting. Also include any OID corporation’s distributions may be in the form of
investment income. (When an investment isaccrued on your CDO during the tax year. cash or property.
held in the names of two or more club members,Generally, you report your income from a S corporation distributions are not treated as the SSN of only one member must be given toCDO on line 8a, Form 1040. For more informa- dividends except in certain cases in which the the payer.) This member is considered as thetion about reporting these amounts on your re- corporation has accumulated earnings and prof- record owner for the actual owner, the invest-turn, see How To Report Interest Income, its from years before it became an S corporation. ment club. This member is a “nominee” andearlier.
must file an information return with the IRS. ForReporting S corporation income, deduc-Forms 1099 – INT and 1099 – OID. You example, the nominee member must file Formtions, and credits. The S corporation shouldshould receive a copy of Form 1099 – INT or 1099– DIV for dividend income, showing thesend you a copy of Schedule K– 1 (Form 1120S)Form 1099– OID. You will also receive a written club as the owner of the dividend, his or hershowing your share of the S corporation ’s in-statement by March 15, 2002, that provides ad- SSN, and the EIN of the club.come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.ditional information. The statement should con-
You must report your distributive share of the S Tax treatment of the club. Generally, an in-tain enough information about the CDO to
corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, or vestment club is treated as a partnership forenable you to figure your accrual of market dis-
federal tax purposes unless it chooses other-credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofcount or amortizable bond premium.
wise. In some situations, however, it is taxed asyour Form 1040.Form 1099 – INT shows the amount of inter-
a corporation or a trust.est income paid to you for the period you held For more information about your treatment of
the CDO. S corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In- Clubs formed before 1997. Before 1997,Form 1099 – OID shows the amount of OID structions for Schedule K– 1 (Form 1120S). the rules for determining how an investment clubaccrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to is treated were different from those explained inLimit on losses and deductions. The de-you for the period you held the CDO. You should the following discussions. An investment clubduction for your share of losses and deductionsnot need to make any adjustments to the that existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsshown on Schedule K – 1 (Form 1120S) is lim-amounts reported even if you held the CDO for the same way it was treated before 1997, unlessited to the adjusted basis of your stock and anyonly a part of the calendar year. However, if you it chooses to be treated a different way under thedebt the corporation owes you. Any loss or de-bought the CDO at a premium or acquisition new rules. To make that choice, the club mustduction not allowed because of this limit is car-premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.ried over and treated as a loss or deduction in1099– OID under Original Issue Discount (OID),
the next tax year.earlier.
Club as a PartnershipIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see You Passive activity losses. Rules apply that
may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier. limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a
Schedule K – 1 and its instructions will explain trust, it will be treated as a partnership.
FASITs the limits and tell you where on your return to
Club files Form 1065. If your investment clubreport your share of S corporation items from
A financial asset securitization investment is treated as a partnership, it must file Formpassive activities.trust (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt 1065. However, as a partner in the club, you
Form 8582. If you have a passive activityobligations such as credit card receivables, must report on your individual return your share
loss from an S corporation, you must completehome equity loans, and automobile loans. of the club ’s income, gains, losses, deductions,
Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, toA regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a and credits for the club ’s tax year. (Its tax year
figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterdebt instrument. The rules described under Col- generally must be the same tax year as that of
on your return. See Publication 925 for morelaterized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap- the partners owning a majority interest.) You
information.ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a must report these items whether or not you actu-
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ally receive any distribution from the partner- lecting interest or dividends for its members ’ reported on Form 1099– DIV if total distributions
ship. accounts, a member ’s share of income is not to the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.
You should receive a copy of Schedule K– 1 earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol- You must report any distributions that you
(Form 1065), Partner’s Share of Income, Cred- untarily pay the self-employment tax to increase receive from the club on your individual return.
its, Deductions, etc., from the partnership. The your social security coverage and ultimate bene- You should receive a copy of Form 1099 – DIV
amounts shown on Schedule K – 1 are your fits. from the club showing the distributions you re-share of the partnership ’s income, deductions, ceived.and credits. Report each amount on the appro- Club as a Corporation Some corporations can choose not to bepriate lines and schedules of your income tax taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-return. An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed ers. See S Corporations, earlier.The club’s expenses for producing or collect- as a corporation if:
For more information about corporations,ing income, for managing investment property,
see Publication 542, Corporations.or for determining any tax are listed separately 1) It is formed under a federal or state law
on Schedule K – 1. Each individual partner who that refers to it as incorporated or as a
itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) corporation, body corporate, or body poli- Club as a Trust
can deduct his or her share of those expenses. tic,
In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aThe expenses are listed on line 22 of Schedule 2) It is formed under a state law that refers toA along with other miscellaneous itemized de- trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementit as a joint-stock company or joint-stockductions subject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 through which trustees take title to property forassociation, orfor more information on the 2% limit. the purpose of protecting or conserving it for the
For more information about reporting your 3) It chooses to be taxed as a corporation. beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied in
income from a partnership, see the Schedule chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is
K– 1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposeChoosing to be taxed as a corporation. ToPartnerships. is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingchoose to be taxed as a corporation, the club and conserving property for beneficiaries whoPassive activity losses. Rules apply that cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) or
cannot share in that responsibility and so are notlimit losses from passive activities. Your copy of otherwise subject to special treatment under the
associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofSchedule K – 1 (Form 1065) and its instructions tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to make
business for profit. If you need more informationwill tell you where on your return to report your the choice.
share of partnership items from passive activi- about trusts, see section 301.7701 – 4 of the
ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a regulations.Club files Form 1120. If your club is taxed aspartnership, you must complete Form 8582 to a corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or Formfigure the amount of the allowable loss to enter Club files Form 1041. If your club is taxed as1120– A). In that case, you do not report any ofon your tax return. a trust, it must file Form 1041. You should re-its income or expenses on your individual return.
ceive a copy of Schedule K– 1 (Form 1041) fromAll ordinary income and expenses and capitalNo social security coverage for investment
the trust. Report the amounts shown on Sched-gains and losses must be reported on the Formclub earnings. If an investment club
ule K– 1 on the appropriate lines and schedules1120 (or Form 1120 – A). Any distribution thepartnership’s activities are limited to investing in
of your income tax return.savings certificates, stock, or securities, and col- club makes that qualifies as a dividend must be
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ization of the substance of the transaction. come, losses, and credits from passive
Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax- activities, see Publication 925.
payer generally risks little. 2) Registration of tax shelters. Generally,2. Abusive tax shelters commonly involve the organizers of certain tax shelters mustpackage deals that are designed from the start register the shelter with the IRS. The IRSto generate losses, deductions, or credits that will then assign the tax shelter a registra-will be far more than present or future invest- tion number. If you are an investor in a taxTax Shelters ment. Or, they may promise investors from the shelter, the seller (or the transferor) muststart that future inflated appraisals will enable provide you with the tax shelter registrationthem, for example, to reap charitable contribu- number at the time of sale (or transfer) ortion deductions based on those appraisals. (ButIntroduction within 20 days after the seller or transferorsee the appraisal requirements discussed under receives the number if that date is later.Investments that yield tax benefits are some- Curbing Abusive Tax Shelters. ) They are com- See Investor Reporting, later, for more in-times called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con- monly marketed in terms of the ratio of tax de- formation about reporting this numbergress has concluded that the loss of revenue is ductions allegedly available to each dollar when filing your tax return.an acceptable side effect of special tax provi- invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) is frequentlysions designed to encourage taxpayers to make said to be several times greater than 3) List of tax shelter investors. Organizerscertain types of investments. In many cases, one-to-one. and sellers of any potentially abusive taxhowever, losses from tax shelters produce little Since there are many abusive tax shelters, it shelter must maintain a list identifyingor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are is not possible to list all the factors you should each investor. The list must be availableexaggerated beyond those intended. Those consider in determining whether an offering is for inspection by the IRS, and the informa-cases are called “abusive tax shelters. ” An in- an abusive tax shelter. However, you should ask tion required to be included on the list gen-vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- the following questions, which might provide a erally must be kept for 7 years. Seeject to restrictions, including the requirement clue to the abusive nature of the plan. Transfer of interests in a tax shelter, later,that it be registered, as discussed later, unless it for more information.• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-is a projected income investment (defined later).
nomic benefits? 4) Appraisals of donated property. Gener-
ally, if you donate property valued at moreTopics • Is this a transaction you would seriously
than $5,000 ($10,000 in the case of pri-This chapter discusses: consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you
vately traded stock), you must get a writtenhoped to make a profit?
“qualified” appraisal of the property’s fair• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter,
• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, market value and attach an appraisal sum-• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax are they insured for less than their mary to your income tax return. The ap-shelters, purchase price? praisal must be done by a “qualified”
• Investors’ reporting requirements, and appraiser who is not the taxpayer, a party• Is there a nontax justification for the way
to a transaction in which the taxpayer ac-profits and losses are allocated to part-• Penalties that may apply. quired the property, the donee, or an em-ners?
ployee or related party of any of the
• Do the facts and supporting documents preceding persons. (Related parties areUseful Items make economic sense? In that connec- defined under Related Party TransactionsYou may want to see: tion, are there sales and resales of the tax in chapter 4.) For more information aboutshelter property at ever increasing prices? appraisals, see Publication 561.Publication
• Does the investment plan involve a gim- 5) Interest on penalties. If you are assessed❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods mick, device, or sham to hide the eco- an accuracy-related or civil fraud penaltynomic reality of the transaction?❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal (as discussed under Penalties, later), inter-
Rights, and Claims for Refund est will be imposed on the amount of the• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-
penalty from the due date of the returnments after the close of the year? Are you❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
(including any extensions) to the date youinstructed to backdate checks coveringProperty
pay the penalty.your investment?❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
6) Accounting methods and capitalization• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured
rules. Tax shelters generally cannot useby the promoter that you will never have toForm (and Instructions)
the cash method of accounting. Also, uni-pay it?
❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter form capitalization rules generally apply to• Does this transaction involve launderingRegistration Number producing property or acquiring it for re-United States-source income through for- sale. Under those rules, the direct cost and❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha- part of the indirect cost of the propertyven and owned by United States❏ 8275–R Regulation Disclosure must be capitalized or included in inven-shareholders?Statement tory. For more information, see Publication
538.
See chapter 5 for information about getting Curbing Abusivethese publications and forms. Tax Shelters Projected income investment. Special rules
apply to a projected income investment. To
Congress has enacted a series of income tax qualify as a projected income investment, a tax
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive tax shelter must not be expected to reduce the cu-Abusive Tax Shelters shelters. These provisions include the following. mulative tax liability of any investor during any
year of the first 5 years ending after the date theAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes 1) Passive activity losses and credits.  The investment was offered for sale. In addition, thethat involve artificial transactions with little or no passive activity loss and credit rules limit assets of a projected income investment musteconomic reality. They often make use of un- the amount of losses and credits that can not include or relate to more than an incidentalrealistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses be claimed from passive activities and limit interest in: in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- the amount that can offset nonpassive in-
matching of income and deductions, financing come, such as certain portfolio income 1) Master sound recordings,techniques that do not conform to standard com- from investments. For more detailed infor-
2) Motion picture or television films,mercial business practices, or the mischaracter- mation about determining and reporting in-
Page 26 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters

Page 27 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Videotapes, believe that you have authority for the positions est. This notice must be substantially in
the following form:taken on your tax return.4) Lithograph plates,
The courts have generally been un-5) Copyrights, You have acquired an interest in [name andsympathetic to taxpayers involved in address of tax shelter]. If you transfer your interest6) Literary, musical, or artistic compositions, abusive tax shelter schemes and haveCAUTION
!
in this tax shelter to another person, you are
or ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the required by the Internal Revenue Service to keep a
cases in which these shelters have been chal- list containing that person’s name, address,7) Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs, taxpayer identification number, the date on whichlenged.antiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, or you transferred the interest, and the name,
alcoholic beverages). address, and tax shelter registration number of this
tax shelter. If you do not want to keep such a list,Investor ReportingTax shelters that qualify as projected income you must (1) send the information specified above
investments are not subject to the registration to [name and address of designated person], whoIf you include on your tax return any deduction, will keep the list for this tax shelter, and (2) give arules for tax shelters, described earlier. How- loss, credit or other tax benefit, or any income, copy of this notice to the person to whom youever, the requirement to maintain a list of inves- from an interest in a tax shelter required to be transfer your interest.tors that is in effect for tax shelters also applies registered, you must report the registration num-to any projected income investment, except for If you do not maintain the required list ofber that the tax shelter provided to you. (Seeone an investor later transfers. See Transfer of investors, or do not delegate a designated per-Registration of tax shelters, earlier.) Completeinterests in a tax shelter, later. son or seller to maintain the list, you will beand attach Form 8271 to your return to reportA tax shelter that previously qualified as a subject to a penalty of $50 for each personthe number and to provide other informationprojected income investment may later be dis- required to be on the list. But, you will not have toabout the tax shelter and its benefits. You mustqualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reduces pay the penalty if you can show that the failure toalso attach Form 8271 to any application forthe cumulative tax liability of any investor. In that comply with this requirement was due to reason-tentative refund (Form 1045) and to anycase, the tax shelter becomes subject to the able cause and not willful neglect. The maxi-amended return (Form 1040X) on which theseregistration rules for tax shelters, described ear- mum penalty under this provision is $100,000benefits are claimed or income is reported. If youlier. for each tax shelter in each calendar year.do not include the registration number with your
Special rule for projected income invest-return, you will be subject to a penalty of $250Pre-filing notification letter. If you are an in-
ment. If you are an investor who later transfersfor each such failure, unless the failure is due tovestor in an abusive tax shelter promotion, the
an interest in a projected income investment,reasonable cause.IRS may send you a “pre-filing notification letter”
described earlier, you are not required to main-if it determines that it is highly likely that there is:
tain a list of investors unless the tax shelter wasTransfer of interests in a tax shelter. If you
1) A gross valuation overstatement, or no longer a projected income investment, orhold an investment interest in a tax shelter and
otherwise became subject to the registration re-later transfer that interest to another person, you2) A false or fraudulent statement regarding quirements, before the transfer.must provide the tax shelter ’s registration num-the tax benefits to be derived from the tax ber to each person to whom you transferred yourshelter entity or arrangement. interest. (However, this does not apply if your Penalties
This letter will advise you that, based upon a interest is in a projected income investment,
review of the promotion, it is believed that the Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be andescribed earlier.) You must also provide a no-
purported tax benefits are not allowable. The expensive proposition when you consider all oftice substantially in the following form:
letter also will advise you of the possible tax the consequences. First, the promoter generallyYou have acquired an interest in [name andconsequences if you claim the benefits on your charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer
income tax return. amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-identification number is [if any]. The Internal
You also may receive a notification letter mined, you will be faced with payment of moreRevenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]
after you file your tax return. If you have already the following tax shelter registration number: tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a
[number]. You must report this registrationclaimed the benefits on your tax return, you will 20% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% civil
number to the Internal Revenue Service, if yoube advised that you can file an amended return. fraud penalty. You may also be subject to the
claim any deduction, loss, credit, or other taxHowever, any penalties that apply still can be penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties arebenefit or report any income by reason of yourasserted. explained in the following paragraphs.investment in [name of tax shelter]. You mustIf you claim the benefits after receiving the report the registration number (as well as the Accuracy-related penalties. An accuracy-pre-filing notification or if you fail to amend your name and taxpayer identification number of [name
related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-return, you will be notified that your tax return is of tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must be
derpayments of tax due to:being examined. Normal audit and appeal pro- attached to the return on which you claim the
deduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit orcedures will be followed during the examination,
1) Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-report any income. Issuance of a registrationand accuracy-related, civil or criminal fraud, and
number does not indicate that this investment or tions,other penalties will be considered and, when
the claimed tax benefits have been reviewed,appropriate, asserted. For information on the 2) Substantial understatement of tax, orexamined, or approved by the Internal Revenueexamination of returns, see Publication 556. Service. 3) Substantial valuation misstatement.
The following requirements also apply.Revenue rulings. The IRS has published nu- This penalty will not be imposed if you can showmerous revenue rulings concluding that the that you had reasonable cause for any under-1) Maintaining a list. You must maintain aclaimed tax benefits of various abusive tax shel- statement of tax and that you acted in good faith.list identifying each person to whom youters should be disallowed. A revenue ruling is transferred your interest. Or, you may re- If you are charged an accuracy-related pen-the conclusion of the IRS on how the law is quire a designated person or seller to alty, interest will be imposed on the amount ofapplied to a particular set of facts. Revenue maintain the list. However, see Special the penalty from the due date of the return (in-rulings are published in the Internal Revenue rule for projected income investment, later, cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen-Bulletin for taxpayers’ guidance and information for an exception to this requirement. If you alty.and also for use by IRS officials. So, if your choose to delegate this requirement, youreturn is examined and an abusive tax shelter is Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-must give the designated person or selleridentified and challenged, a published revenue tions. The penalty for negligence or disregardall of the information that you would other-ruling dealing with that type of shelter, which of rules or regulations is imposed only on thewise have to maintain on the list.disallows certain claimed tax shelter benefits, part of the underpayment that is due to negli-
2) Providing notice. If the tax shelter is not acould serve as the basis for the examining gence or disregard of rules or regulations. The
projected income investment, describedofficial’s challenge of the tax benefits that you penalty will not be charged if you can show that
earlier, you must provide a notice to eachclaimed. In such a case, the examiner will not you had reasonable cause for understating your
person to whom you transferred your inter-compromise even if you or your representative tax and that you acted in good faith.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters Page 27

Page 28 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Negligence includes any failure to make a the tax treatment of the item and reasona- You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a
reasonable attempt to comply with the provi- bly believed that the tax treatment chosen gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate
sions of the Internal Revenue Code. was more likely than not the proper one. the value or the adjusted basis of property by
Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or 400% or more of the amount determined to be2) Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a taxintentional disregard. The penalty for disregard correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,return does not reduce the amount of theof rules and regulations can be avoided if both of instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaidunderstatement.the following are true. because of the gross valuation misstatement.For other than tax shelters, you can file Form• You have a reasonable basis for your po- The penalty rate is also 40% if the property ’s8275 or Form 8275 – R to disclose items thatsition on the tax issue. correct value or adjusted basis is zero.could cause a substantial understatement of in-
• You make an adequate disclosure of your come tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub-
position. stantial understatement penalty if you have a Civil fraud penalty. If there is any underpay-
reasonable basis for your position on the taxUse Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty
issue.attach it to your tax return. To disclose a position of 75% of the underpayment will be added to
contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275–R. Also, the understatement penalty will not be your tax.
imposed if you can show that there was reason-Substantial understatement of tax. An Joint return. The fraud penalty on a jointable cause for the underpayment caused by theunderstatement is considered to be substantial if return applies to a spouse only if some part ofunderstatement and that you acted in good faith.it is more than the greater of: the underpayment is due to the fraud of thatAn important factor in establishing reasonable
spouse.1) 10% of the tax required to be shown on cause and good faith will be the extent of your
the return, or effort to determine your proper tax liability under
the law.2) $5,000. Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed
Valuation misstatement. In general, you and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forAn “understatement” is the amount of tax re- are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantial payment, an investor can be penalized with upquired to be shown on your return for a tax year valuation misstatement if all of the following areminus the amount of tax shown on the return, to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to paytrue.reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen- continues.
erally means a decrease in the tax shown on 1) The value or adjusted basis of any prop-your original return as the result of your filing an Whether To Investerty claimed on the return is 200% or moreamended return or claim for refund. of the correct amount.Two special rules apply in the case of an In light of the adverse tax consequences and the
understatement due to a tax shelter. 2) You underpaid your tax by more than substantial amount of penalties and interest that
$5,000 because of the misstatement. will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-1) An understatement of tax does not include
lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-3) You cannot establish that you had reason-any tax due to a tax shelter item (such as
ments carefully and seek competent legal andable cause for the underpayment and thatan item of income, gain, loss, deduction, or
financial advice.credit) if you had substantial authority for you acted in good faith.
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters

Page 29 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
explained later in this chapter under Expenses tion of your passive activity income or loss:
of Producing Income.
1) Expenses (other than interest) that are3.
clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to
lio income, ormost income-producing activities. These rules
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the 2) Interest expense properly allocable to port-Investment amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, folio income.this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basis
However, this interest and other expenses mayof property you contribute to the activity. It alsoExpenses be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-includes money you borrow for use in the activity
plained in the rest of this chapter.if you are personally liable for repayment or if
you use property not used in the activity asTerms you may need to know Additional information. For more informa-
security for the loan. For more information, see(see Glossary): tion about determining and reporting income
Publication 925. and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.At-risk rules Passive activity losses and credits. The
amount of losses and tax credits you can claimPassive activity
from passive activities is limited. Generally, you
Portfolio income are allowed to deduct passive activity losses Interest Expensesonly up to the amount of your passive activity
income. Also, you can use credits from passive This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income fromTopics may be able to deduct as an investor.passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-This chapter discusses: For information on business interest, seetain activities, such as rental real estate activi- chapter 5 of Publication 535.ties.• Limits on deductions, You cannot deduct personal interest ex-
Passive activity. A passive activity gener- penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest expenses, ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, and
• Bond premium amortization, trade or business in which you do not materially interest on certain student loans, as explained in
participate and any rental activity. However, if Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Higher Educa-• Expenses of producing income,
you are involved in renting real estate, the activ- tion.
• Nondeductible expenses, and ity is not a passive activity if both of the following
are true.• How to report investment expenses. Investment Interest
1) More than one-half of the personal ser- If you borrow money to buy property you hold for
Useful Items vices you perform during the year in all investment, the interest you pay is investment
trades or businesses are performed in realYou may want to see: interest. You can deduct investment interest
property trades or businesses in which you subject to the limit discussed later. However,
materially participate.Publication you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-
duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-2) You perform more than 750 hours of ser-❏ 535 Business Expenses come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norvices during the year in real property
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules trades or businesses in which you materi-
also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.ally participate.❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyDependents The term trade or business generally means qualified home mortgage interest or any interest
any activity that involves the conduct of a trade taken into account in computing income or loss❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction or business, is conducted in anticipation of start- from a passive activity.
ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-Form (and Instructions) Investment property. Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,
vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certain❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedactivities treated as incidental to holding prop-Deductions in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Iterty for investment.❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense also includes property that produces gain or lossYou are considered to materially participateDeduction (not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orin an activity if you are involved on a regular, business) from the sale or trade of propertycontinuous, and substantial basis in the opera-See chapter 5 for information about getting producing these types of income or held fortions of the activity.these publications and forms. investment (other than an interest in a passive
Other income (nonpassive income). Gen- activity). Investment property also includes an
erally, you can use losses from passive activities interest in a trade or business activity in which
only to offset income from passive activities. you did not materially participate (other than a
You generally cannot use passive activity losses passive activity).Limits on Deductions
to offset your other income, such as your wages Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-Your deductions for investment expenses may To determine your investment interest, combinecludes gross income from interest, dividends,be limited by: your share of investment interest from a partner-annuities, or royalties that is not derived in the ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your• The at-risk rules, ordinary course of a trade or business. It also other investment interest.includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-• The passive activity loss limits,
nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
• The limit on investment interest, or or trade of property (other than an interest in a Allocation of Interest Expensepassive activity) producing portfolio income or• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous
held for investment. This includes capital gain If you borrow money for business or personalitemized deductions.
distributions from mutual funds and real estate purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment trusts.The at-risk rules and passive activity rules are allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
explained briefly in this section. The limit on You cannot use passive activity losses to the interest expense on the part of the  debt used
investment interest is explained later in this offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. for investment purposes is treated as inve st-
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 29

Page 30 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interestment interest. The allocation is not affected by entity, you can make the allocation using any
expense before the year of disposition. Youthe use of property that secures the debt. reasonable method.
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-Additional allocation rules. For more infor-Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use pense in any year before the year you dispose ofmation about allocating interest expense, see$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to the bond, up to your net interest income from thechapter 5 of Publication 535.buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt bond during the year. The rest of the disallowed
is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- interest expense remains deductible in the year
poses, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- you dispose of the bond.
When To Deductment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible Net interest income. This is the interestInvestment Interestpersonal interest. income (including OID) from the bond that you
If you use the cash method of accounting, you include in income for the year, minus the interestDebt proceeds received in cash. If you re- must pay the interest before you can deduct it. expense paid or accrued during the year toceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are If you use an accrual method of accounting, purchase or carry the bond.generally not treated as investment property. you can deduct interest over the period it ac-
Deferral of interest deduction for short-termcrues, regardless of when you pay it. For anDebt proceeds deposited in account. If you obligations. If the current income inclusionexception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onlated party under When To Report Investmentposit is treated as investment property, regard- Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExpenses, later in this chapter.less of whether the account bears interest. But, if amount you can deduct for interest expense youyou withdraw the funds and use them for an- paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to short-term obligation is limited.tember 6, 2001, payable in 90 days at 12%determine the amount considered to be for in- The interest is deductible only to the extent itinterest. On December 5, 2001, you paid thisvestment purposes. is more than:with a new note for $1,030, due on March 5,
2002. If you use the cash method of accounting,Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you 1) The amount of acquisition discount or OIDyou cannot deduct any part of the $30 interestborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- on the obligation for the tax year, pluson your return for 2001 because you did notately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you 2) The amount of any interest payable on thebuy the household items until June 1. You had may be able to deduct a portion of the interest on obligation for the year that is not includeddeposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no the loans through December 31, 2001, on your in income because of your accountingother transactions on the bank account and return for 2001. method (other than interest taken into ac-made no principal payments on the debt. The
count in determining the amount of acqui-$2,000 is treated as being used for an invest- Interest paid in advance. Generally, if you sition discount or OID).ment purpose for the 3-month period. Your total pay interest in advance for a period that goes
interest expense for 3 months on this debt is beyond the end of the tax year, you must spread The method of determining acquisition discount
investment interest. In June, you must begin to the interest over the tax years to which it belongs and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
allocate 80% of the debt and the interest ex- under the OID rules. You can deduct in each in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-
pense to investment purposes and 20% to per- year only the interest for that year. gations.
sonal purposes. Interest on margin accounts. If you are a Disallowed interest expense. In the year
Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interest you dispose of the obligation, or if you choose, in
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- on margin accounts to buy taxable securities as another year in which you have net interest
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat investment interest in the year you paid it. You income from the obligation, you can deduct the
any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) are considered to have paid interest on these amount of any interest expense you were not
made from any account you own, or from cash, accounts only when you actually pay the broker allowed to deduct for an earlier year. Follow the
as made from those proceeds. This applies to or when payment becomes available to the bro- same rules provided in the earlier discussion
any payment made within 30 days before or ker through your account. Payment may be- under Deferral of interest deduction for market
after the proceeds are received in cash or de- come available to the broker through your discount bonds.
posited in your account. account when the broker collects dividends or
interest for your account, or sells securities heldIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, Limit on Deductionfor you or received from you.you can treat the payment as made on the date
You cannot deduct any interest on moneyyou received the cash instead of the date you Generally, your deduction for investment inter-
borrowed for personal reasons.actually made the payment. est expense is limited to the amount of your net
investment income.Deferral of interest deduction for market dis-Payments on debt may require new alloca- You can carry over the amount of investmentcount bonds. The amount you can deduct fortion. As you repay a debt used for more than interest that you could not deduct because ofinterest expense you paid or accrued during theone purpose, you must reallocate the balance. this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedyear to buy or carry a market discount bond mayYou must first reduce the amount allocated to over is treated as investment interest paid orbe limited. This limit does not apply if you accruepersonal purposes by the repayment. You then accrued in that next year.the market discount and include it in your in-reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is You can carry over disallowed investmentcome currently.for investment purposes. interest to the next tax year even if it is more thanUnder this limit, the interest is deductible
your taxable income in the year the interest wasonly to the extent it is more than:Example 3. If, in Example 2, you repay paid or accrued.$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is 1) The total interest and OID includible inapplied against the amount allocated to per- gross income for the bond for the year,sonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- Net Investment Incomepluscated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
2) The market discount for the number of$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next Determine the amount of your net investment
days you held the bond during the year.reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ income by subtracting your investment ex-
$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is penses (other than interest expense) from yourFigure the amount in (2) above using the rulesallocated to investment. investment income.for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
under Market Discount Bonds.Pass-through entities. If you use borrowed Investment income. This generally includes
funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S Disallowed interest expense. In the year your gross income from property held for invest-
corporation, then the interest on those funds you dispose of the bond, you can deduct the ment (such as interest, dividends, annu ities, and
must be allocated based on the assets of the amount of any interest expense you were not royalties). Investment income does not i nclude
entity. If you contribute to the capital of the allowed to deduct in earlier years. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. 
Page 30 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 31 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include net capital gain. In- the amount figured under Child’s Alaska Perma- investment income − $980 other investment ex-
vestment income generally does not include net nent Fund dividends, earlier). penses).
capital gain from disposing of investment prop- Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated at the end of
erty (including capital gain distributions from mu- Investment expenses. Investment expenses the chapter. Her investment interest expense
tual funds). However, you can choose to include include all income-producing expenses (other deduction is limited to $11,020, the amount of
all or part of your net capital gain in investment than interest expense) relating to investment her net investment income. The $1,480 disal-
income. property that are allowable deductions after ap- lowed investment interest expense is carried
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneousYou make this choice by completing line 4e forward to 2002.
itemized deductions. Use the smaller of:of Form 4952 according to its instructions.
Exception to use of Form 4952. You do notIf you choose to include any amount of your 1) The investment expenses included on line have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yournet capital gain in investment income, you must 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or return if you meet all of the following tests.reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for
the lower capital gains tax rates by the same 2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A. • Your investment interest expense is notamount. See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for a more than your investment income fromFor more information about the capital gains discussion of the 2% limit. interest and ordinary dividends.rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
• You do not have any other deductible in-Losses from passive activities. Income orBefore making this choice, consider vestment expenses.expenses that you used in computing income orthe overall effect on your tax liability.
loss from a passive activity are not included in • You have no carryover of investment inter-Compare your tax if you make this
TIP
determining your investment income or invest- est expense from 2000.choice with your tax if you do not.
ment expenses (including investment interest If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct allexpense). See Publication 925 for information of your investment interest.Investment income of child reported on about passive activities.parent’s return. Investment income includes
the part of your child ’s interest and dividend Example. Ted is a partner in a partnershipincome that you choose to report on your return. that operates a business. However, he does notIf the child does not have Alaska Permanent materially participate in the partnership ’s busi- Bond PremiumFund dividends or capital gain distributions, this ness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814, Parents’ Amortizationered a passive activity.Election To Report Child ’s Interest and Divi- Ted’s investment income from interest anddends. Include it on line 4a of Form 4952. If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-dividends is $10,000. His investment expenses mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the(other than interest) are $3,200 after taking intoExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest bond yields taxable interest, you can choose toaccount the 2% limit on miscellaneous itemizedincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on amortize the premium. This generally meansdeductions. His investment interest expense isyour own return. You enter $2,000 on lines 1a that each year, over the life of the bond, you use$8,000. Ted also has income from the partner-and 4 of Form 8814 and $500 on line 6 of Form a part of the premium to reduce the amount ofship of $2,000.8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. Your investment interest includible in your income. If you makeincome includes this $500. Ted figures his net investment income and this choice, you must reduce your basis in thethe limit on his investment interest expense de- bond by the amortization for the year.Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. duction in the following way:If part of the amount you report is your child ’s If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part must amortize the premium. This amortizedTotal investment income ............ $10,000
does not count as investment income. To figure Minus: Investment expenses (other than amount is not deductible in determining taxable
interest) ...................... 3,200the amount of your child ’s income that you can income. However, each year you must reduceNet investment income ............. $6,800consider your investment income, start with the your basis in the bond by the amortization for the
amount on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that year.Deductible investment interest expense foramount by a percentage that is equal to the the year ...................... $6,800
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by Bond premium. Bond premium is the amount
the total amount of interest and dividend income The $2,000 of income from the passive activ- by which your basis in the bond right after you
on lines 1a and 2 of Form 8814. Subtract the ity is not used in determining Ted ’s net invest- get it is more than the total of all amounts pay-
result from the amount on line 6 of Form 8814. ment income. His investment interest deduction able on the bond after you get it (other than
for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount of payments of qualified stated interest). For exam-
Example. Your 10-year-old child has taxa- his net investment income. ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000
ble interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per- generally would have a $50 premium if you buy it
manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose for $1,050.
to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 on Form 4952
Basis. In general, your basis for figuringline 1a of Form 8814, $2,000 on line 2, and
bond premium amortization is the same as yourUse Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,500 on line 6
basis for figuring any loss on the sale of theDeduction, to figure your deduction for invest-of Form 8814 and line 21 of Form 1040. You
bond. However, you may need to use a differentment interest.figure the amount of your child’s income that you
basis for convertible bonds, bonds you got in acan consider your investment income as follows:
Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2001 trade, and bonds whose basis has to be deter-
$4,500 − ($4,500 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000))  = $3,000 income includes $3,000 in dividends and a net mined using the basis of the person who trans-
capital gain of $9,000 from the sale of invest- ferred the bond to you. See section 1.171 – 1(e)You include this $3,000 on line 4a of Form 4952. ment property. She incurred $12,500 of invest- of the regulations.
ment interest expense. Her other investmentChild’s capital gain distributions. If part
expenses directly connected with the production Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyoneof the amount you report is your child ’s capital
of investment income total $980 after applying who holds them mainly for sale to customers ingain distributions, that part (which is reported on
the 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- the ordinary course of a trade or business orline 13 of Schedule D or line 13 of Form 1040)
tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). who would properly include bonds in inventorygenerally does not count as investment income.
at the close of the tax year) cannot claim aHowever, you can choose to include all or part of For 2001, Jane chooses to include all of her
deduction for amortizable bond premium.it in investment income, as explained in Choos- net capital gain in investment income. Her total
ing to include net capital gain, earlier. investment income is $12,000 ($3,000 divi- See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code
dends + $9,000 net capital gain). Her net invest-Your investment income also includes the for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in
ment income is $11,020 ($12,000 totalamount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable, tax-exempt bonds.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-Bonds Issued BeforeHow To Figure
quired before 1988.September 28, 1985Amortization
Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you The amortization of the premium on these bondsmium using any reasonable method. Reasona-must amortize bond premium using a constant is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-ble methods include: yield method on the basis of the bond ’s yield to ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
maturity, determined by using the bond ’s basis 1) The straight-line method, and Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butand compounding at the close of each accrual before 1988. The amortization of the premium2) The Revenue Ruling 82 – 10 method.period. on these bonds is investment interest expense
subject to the investment interest limit, unlessStraight-line method. Under this method, theConstant yield method. Figure the bond pre- you choose to treat it as an offset to interestamount of your bond premium amortization ismium amortization for each accrual period as income on the bond.the same each month. Divide the number offollows. months you held the bond during the year by the
number of months from the beginning of the taxStep 1: determine your yield. Your yield is
year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to thethe discount rate that, when used in figuring the
date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply Expenses ofpresent value of all remaining payments to be
the result by the bond premium (reduced by anymade on the bond (including payments of quali-
Producing Incomebond premium amortization claimed in earlierfied stated interest), produces an amount equal
years). This gives you your bond premium amor-to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of You deduct investment expenses (other thantization for the year.the date you got the bond. It must be constant interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemizedover the term of the bond and must be figured to Revenue Ruling 82 –10 method. Under this deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To beat least two decimal places when expressed as method, the amount of your bond premium deductible, these expenses must be ordinarya percentage. amortization increases each month over the life and necessary expenses paid or incurred: If you do not know the yield, consult your of the bond. This method is explained in Reve-
broker or tax advisor. nue Ruling 82– 10. 1) To produce or collect income, or
Step 2: determine the accrual periods. 2) To manage property held for producing in-Choosing To AmortizeYou can choose the accrual periods to use. come.
They may be of any length and may vary in You choose to amortize the premium on taxable The expenses must be directly related to thelength over the term of the bond, but each ac- bonds by reporting the amortization for the year income or income-producing property, and thecrual period can be no longer than 1 year and on your income tax return for the first tax year for income must be taxable to you.each scheduled payment of principal or interest which you want the choice to apply. You should The deduction for most income-producingmust occur either on the first or the final day of attach a statement to your return that you are expenses is subject to a 2% limit that alsoan accrual period. The computation is simplest if making this choice under section 171. See How applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedaccrual periods are the same as the intervals To Report Amortization, next. deductions. The amount deductible is limited tobetween interest payment dates. This choice is binding for the year you make the total of these miscellaneous deductions that
Step 3: determine the bond premium for it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable is more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.
bonds you own in the year you make the choicethe accrual period. To do this, multiply your For information on how to report expenses of
and also to those you acquire in later years.adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the producing income, see How To Report Invest-
You can change your decision to amortizeaccrual period by your yield. Then subtract the ment Expenses, later.
bond premium only with the written approval ofresult from the qualified stated interest for the
the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,period. Attorney or accounting fees. You can de-
Application for Change in Accounting Method. duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-
sary to produce or collect taxable income.ning of the first accrual period is the same as
However, in some cases, attorney or accountingHow To Reportyour basis. After that, it is your basis decreased
fees are part of the basis of property. See Basisby the amount of bond premium amortized for Amortization
of Investment Property in chapter 4.earlier periods and the amount of any payment
Subtract the bond premium amortization frompreviously made on the bond other than a pay-
Automatic investment service and dividendyour interest income from these bonds.ment of qualified stated interest. reinvestment plans. A bank may offer itsReport the bond’s interest on line 1 of Sched-
checking account customers an automatic in-Example. On February 1, 2000, you bought ule B (Form 1040). Several lines above line 2,
vestment service so that, for a charge, eachput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a
customer can choose to invest a part of theBelow this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” andstated principal amount of $100,000, payable at
checking account each month in common stock.the amortization amount. Subtract this amountmaturity on February 1, 2007, making your pre- Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forfrom the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2.mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The a number of publicly-owned corporations maybond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000 Bond premium amortization more than in- set up an automatic dividend reinvestment ser-on February 1 of each year. Your yield is terest. If the amount of your bond premium vice. Through that service, cash dividends are8.0745% compounded annually. You choose to amortization for an accrual period is more than reinvested in more shares of stock, after theuse annual accrual periods ending on February the qualified stated interest for the period, you bank deducts a service charge.1 of each year. To find your bond premium can deduct the difference as a miscellaneous A corporation in which you own stock alsoamortization for the accrual period ending on itemized deduction on line 27 of Schedule A may have a dividend reinvestment plan. ThisFebruary 1, 2001, you multiply the adjusted ac- (Form 1040). plan lets you choose to use your dividends toquisition price at the beginning of the period  But your deduction is limited to the amount buy more shares of stock in the corporation($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract the by which your total interest inclusions on the instead of receiving the dividends in cash.result ($8,882) from the qualified stated interest bond in prior accrual periods is more than your You can deduct the monthly service chargefor the period ($10,000), you find that your bond total bond premium deductions on the bond in you pay to a bank to participate in an automaticpremium amortization for the period is $1,118. prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct investment service. If you participate in a divi-because of this limit can be carried forward toSpecial rules. For special rules that apply dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anythe next accrual period.to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
and bonds that provide for alternative payment Pre-1998 election to amortize bond premium. dends before the dividends are used to buy
schedules or remote or incidental contingen- Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in the
cies, see section 1.171– 3 of the regulations. premium before 1998, the above treatment of year you pay them.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Clerical help and office rent. You can deduct tax-exempt income or for managing property to attend stockholders ’ meetings of companies
office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, that produces tax-exempt income. in which you have no interest other than owning
that you pay in connection with your investments If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the stock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-
and collecting the taxable income on them. commissions for several years in advance, you ing is to get information that would be useful in
must deduct a part of the commission each year. making further investments.Cost of replacing missing securities. To re- You cannot deduct the entire amount in the yearplace your taxable securities that are mislaid, you pay it. Investment-related seminar. You cannot de-lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to post duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-Investment expenses from pass-throughan indemnity bond. You can deduct the premium nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.entities. If you hold an interest in a partner-you pay to buy the indemnity bond and the
ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage invest-related incidental expenses. Single-premium life insurance, endowment,ment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offeredYou may, however, get a refund of part of the and annuity contracts. You cannot deductregulated investment company (mutual fund),bond premium if the missing securities are re- interest on money you borrow to buy or carry ayou can deduct your share of that entity’s invest-covered within a specified time. Under certain single-premium life insurance, endowment, orment expenses. A partnership or S corporationtypes of insurance policies, you can recover annuity contract.will show your share of these expenses on yoursome of the expenses.
Schedule K – 1. A nonpublicly offered mutualIf you receive the refund in the tax year you Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-
fund will indicate your share of these expensespay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ- mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain or
in box 5 of Form 1099– DIV, or on an equivalentence between the expenses paid and the continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct
statement. Publicly-offered mutual funds areamount refunded. If the refund is made in a later any interest on the loan that is collateralized by
discussed later.tax year, you must include the refund in income the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-in the year you received it, but only to the extent est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
penses relating to your residual interest invest-that the expenses decreased your tax in the year rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the
ment will be shown on line 3b of Schedule Qyou deducted them. lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used
(Form 1066) . Any expenses relating to your as collateral or the amount of the loan.Fees to collect income. You can deduct fees regular interest investment will appear in box 5
you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar of Form 1099– INT or box 7 of Form 1099– OID. Borrowing on insurance. Generally, youagent to collect investment income, such as Report your share of these investment ex- cannot deduct interest on money you borrow toyour taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, ordividends on shares of stock. the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other annuity contract if you plan to systematically
investment expenses.Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct a borrow part or all of the increases in the cash
fee you pay to a broker to acquire investment value of the contract. This rule applies to theIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expenses
property, such as stocks or bonds. You must interest on the total amount borrowed to buy orin income. Your share of the investment ex-
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis carry the contract, not just the interest on thepenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered
of Investment Property in chapter 4. borrowed increases in the cash value.mutual fund, as described above, are consid-
You cannot deduct any broker ’s fees, com- ered to be indirect deductions through that
missions, or option premiums you pay (or that Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-pass-through entity. You must include in your
were netted out) in connection with the sale of penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-gross income an amount equal to the amount of
investment property. They can be used only to come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneythe expenses allocated to you, whether or not
figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities oryou are able to claim a deduction for those
Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more shares in a regulated investment company (mu-expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub-
information about the treatment of these sale tual fund) that distributes only exempt-interestlicly offered mutual fund, you must include on
expenses. dividends.your return the full amount of ordinary dividends
or other distributions of stock, as shown in box 1Investment counsel and advice. You can Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowingof Form 1099 – DIV or an equivalent statement.deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exemptIf you are a residual interest holder in a REMIC,about investments that produce taxable income. securities applies to amounts you pay in con-you must report as ordinary income on ScheduleThis includes amounts you pay for investment nection with personal property used in a shortE (Form 1040) the total amounts shown on linesadvisory services. sale or amounts paid by others for the use of any1b and 3b of Schedule Q (Form 1066). If you are collateral in connection with the short sale. How-Safe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent a REMIC regular interest holder, you must in- ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incuryou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the box clude the amount of any expense allocation you if you deposit cash as collateral for the propertyto store taxable income-producing stocks, received on line 8a of Form 1040. used in the short sale and the cash does notbonds, or other investment-related papers and earn a material return during the period of thePublicly-offered mutual funds. Publicly-of-documents. If you also use the box to store sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.fered mutual funds, generally, are funds that aretax-exempt securities or personal items, you can traded on an established securities exchange. Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxablededuct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt These funds do not pass investment expenses income. You may have expenses that are forincome under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to through to you. Instead, the dividend income both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-figure what part you can deduct. they report to you in box 1 of Form 1099– DIV is not specifically identify what part of the ex-already reduced by your share of investmentState and local transfer taxes. You cannot penses is for each type of income, you canexpenses. Therefore, you cannot deduct the ex-deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-penses on your return.when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these tions based on facts and circumstances. YouInclude the amount from box 1 of Formtransfer taxes when you buy securities, you must attach a statement to your return showing1099– DIV in your income.must treat them as part of the cost of the prop- how you divided the expenses and stating thaterty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you each deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- empt income.tion in the amount realized. One accepted method for dividing expensesNondeductible is to do it in the same proportion that each typeTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust.
of income is to the total income. If the expensesIf you set up a revocable trust and have its Expenses relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeincome distributed to you, you can deduct the
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thiscommission you pay the trustee for managing Some expenses that you incur as an investor proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatthe trust to the extent it is to produce or collect are not deductible. is for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-taxable income or to manage property. How-
empt income by the total income and multiplyever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis- Stockholders’ meetings. You cannot deduct
your expenses by the result.sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You received $6,000 interest; a) Interest on indebtedness incurred or the total on line 23 with your other miscellaneous
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable. continued to buy or carry the personal deductions that are subject to the 2% limit.
In earning this income, you had $500 of ex- property, and For information on how to report amortizable
penses. You cannot specifically identify the bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza-b) All other amounts (including charges toamount of each expense item that is for each tion, earlier in this chapter.insure, store, or transport the personalincome item, so you must divide your expenses. property) paid or incurred to carry the80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided by
personal property.$6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for the
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400 When To Report2) Subtract from the amount in (1):(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because they a) Interest (including OID) includible in Investment Expensesare for the taxable interest. gross income for the year on the per-
State income taxes. If you itemize your de- sonal property, If you use the cash method to report income and
ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in- expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,b) Any income from the personal propertycome taxes on interest income that is exempt except for certain prepaid interest, in the yeartreated as ordinary income on the dis-from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct, you pay them.position of short-term government obli-as either taxes or investment expenses, state If you use an accrual method, you generallygations or as ordinary income under theincome taxes on other exempt income. deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilitymarket discount and short-term bond
Interest expense and carrying charges on for them, rather than when you pay them.provisions —  see Discount on Debt In-
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-struments in chapter 1,carrying charges that are allocable to personal est, earlier in this chapter.c) The dividends includible in gross in-property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-
come for the year from the personalductible interest and carrying charges are added Unpaid expenses owed to related party. Ifproperty, andto the basis of the straddle property. However, you use an accrual method, you cannot deductthis treatment does not apply if: interest and other expenses owed to a relatedd) Any payment on a loan of the personal
cash-basis person until payment is made andproperty for use in a short sale that is1) All the offsetting positions making up the
the amount is includible in the gross income ofincludible in gross income.straddle either consist of one or more qual-
that person. The relationship, for purposes ofified covered call options and the optioned
this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxstock or consist of section 1256 contracts Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible year for which the interest or expense would(and the straddle is not part of a larger amount to the basis of your straddle property. otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is deniedstraddle), or
under this rule, this rule will continue to apply2) The straddle is a hedging transaction. even if your relationship with the person ceases
For information about straddles, including defini- to exist before the amount is includible in theHow To Reporttions of the terms used in this discussion, see gross income of that person.
chapter 4. This rule generally applies to those relation-Investment ExpensesInterest includes any amount you pay or in- ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
cur in connection with personal property used in Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-To deduct your investment expenses, you musta short sale. However, you must first apply the nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).rules discussed in Short Sale Expenses under shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-Enter your deductible investment interest ex-Short Sales in chapter 4. tions to shareholders.pense on line 13, Schedule A. Include any de-To determine the interest on market discount The postponement of deductions for unpaidductible short sale expenses. (See Short Salesbonds and short-term obligations that are part of
expenses and interest under the related partyin chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-
rule does not apply to original issue discountAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedcussed under Deferral of interest deduction for
(OID), regardless of when payment is made.that form to figure your investment interest ex-market discount bonds  and Deferral of interest
This rule also does not apply to loans withpense.deduction for short-term obligations (both under
below-market interest rates or to certain pay-Interest Expenses, earlier). Enter the total amount of your other invest-
ments for the use of property and services whenment expenses (other than interest expenses)Nondeductible amount. Figure the nonde- the lender or recipient has to include paymentson line 22, Schedule A. List the type and amountductible amount of interest and carrying charges periodically in income, even if a payment has notof each expense on the dotted lines next to lineon straddle property as follows. been made.22. (If necessary, you can show the required
1) Add: information on an attached statement.) Include
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
9,000
9,000
0
9,000
12,000
980
11,020
1,480
11,020
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 72
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2001. See instructions1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2000 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net gain from the disposition of
property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses. See instructions5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4f. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
c Net capital gain from the disposition of property held for investment
d Subtract line 4c from line 4b. If zero or less, enter -0-
e Enter the amount from line 4c that you elect to include in investment income. Do not enter more
than the amount on line 4b. See instructions /H17075
f Investment income. Add lines 4a, 4d, and 4e. See instructions
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2002. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
4d
4e
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
2001
(99)
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Capital gains and losses, and
1) The redemption is not essentially
• How to report your gain or loss. equivalent to a dividend —  see Dividends
4. and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-
ter 1,Useful Items
You may want to see: 2) There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,Sales and
Publication 3) There is a complete redemption of all the
stock of the corporation owned by the❏ 551 Basis of AssetsTrades of
shareholder, or❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
4) The redemption is a distribution in partialInvestment liquidation of a corporation.Form (and Instructions)
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Property
and Losses demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their
maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-1256 Contracts and StraddlesIntroduction counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations nary Gain or Loss, later.This chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
In addition, a significant modification of aand trades of investment property. ❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges bond is treated as a trade of the original bond for
a new bond. For details, see section 1.1001 – 3Investment property. This is property that See chapter 5 for information about getting of the regulations.produces investment income. Examples include these publications and forms.stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by aProperty used in a trade or business is not in- dominant shareholder who retains control of thevestment property. corporation is treated as a contribution to capital
rather than as an immediate loss deductibleWhat Is aForm 1099 –B. If you sold property such as from taxable income. The surrendering share-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a Sale or Trade? holder must reallocate his or her basis in thebroker during the year, you should receive, for surrendered shares to the shares he or sheeach sale, a Form 1099 – B, Proceeds From Terms you may need to know retains.Broker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an (see Glossary): Trade of investment property for an annuity.equivalent statement from the broker. You
The transfer of investment property to a corpora-should receive the statement by January 31 of
Equity option tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-the next year. It will show the gross proceeds
tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract thatfrom the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of Futures contract will make guaranteed annual payments to youForm 1099– B from the broker.
Marked to market for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofUse Form 1099 – B (or an equivalent state-
the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-ment received from your broker) to complete Nonequity option erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearSchedule D of Form 1040. For more information,
Options dealer of the trade. Figure the present value of thesee Form 1099– B transactions under Reporting
annuity according to factors used by commercialCapital Gains and Losses, later. Regulated futures contract insurance companies issuing annuities.
Section 1256 contractOther property transactions. Certain trans- Transfer by inheritance. The transfer offers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- Short sale property of a decedent to the executor or admin-cations. These include: istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
• Sale of your main home, discussed in ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable
This section explains what is a sale or trade. ItPublication 523, Selling Your Home, gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.
also explains certain transactions and events
Termination of certain rights and obliga-• Installment sales, covered in Publication that are treated as sales or trades.
tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, or537, Installment Sales, A sale is generally a transfer of property for
other termination of a right or obligation withmoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise to• Various types of transactions involving respect to property that is a capital asset (or thatpay money. A trade is a transfer of property forbusiness property, discussed in Publica- would be a capital asset if you acquired it) isother property or services, and may be taxed intion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of treated as a sale. Any gain or loss is treated as athe same way as a sale.Assets, capital gain or loss.
Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction This rule does not apply to the retirement of a• Transfers of property at death, covered in
is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property debt instrument. See Redemption or retirementPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and
for cash and immediately buy similar property to of bonds, earlier.Administrators, and
replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges Worthless Securitiestivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- under Nontaxable Trades, later.sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanRedemption of stock. A redemption of stock those held for sale by a securities dealer) thatis treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the became worthless during the tax year areTopics capital gain or loss provisions unless the re- treated as though they were sold on the last dayThis chapter discusses: demption is a dividend or other distribution on of the tax year. This affects whether your capitalstock. loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe-• What a sale or trade is,
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a riod, later.• Basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
or other distribution depends on the circum- payments on a negotiable promissory note that• Adjusted basis,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect you issued for stock that became worthless, you• Figuring gain or loss, ownership of stock will be considered. The re- can deduct these payments as losses in the
• Nontaxable trades, demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: years you actually make the payments. Do not
Page 36 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 37 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct them in the year the stock became worth- security is not a constructive sale if it settles tively sold the other appreciat ed financial posi-
less. within 1 year of the date you enter into it. tion.
Exception for certain closed transactions.How to report loss. Report worthless securi- Section 1256 ContractsDo not treat a transaction as a constructive saleties on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form if all of the following are true. Marked to Market1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and
(d), print “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your 1) You closed the transaction before the end If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end ofloss in parentheses in column (f). of the 30th day after the end of your tax the tax year, you generally must treat it as sold
year. at its fair market value on the last business dayFiling a claim for refund. If you do not claim a
of the tax year.loss for a worthless security on your original 2) You held the appreciated financial position
return for the year it becomes worthless, you can throughout the 60-day period beginning on
file a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. the date you closed the transaction. Section 1256 ContractYou must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
3) Your risk of loss was not reduced at anyvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return A section 1256 contract is any:time during that 60-day period by holdingfor the year the security became worthless. You
certain other positions.must file it within 7 years from the date your 1) Regulated futures contract,
original return for that year had to be filed, or 2 If a closed transaction is reestablished in a 2) Foreign currency contract,years from the date you paid the tax, whichever substantially similar position during the 60-day
is later. (Claims not due to worthless securities period beginning on the date the first transaction 3) Nonequity option,
or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 was closed, this exception still applies if the 4) Dealer equity option, oryears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years reestablished position is closed before the end
from the date the tax is paid.) For more informa- 5) Dealer securities futures contract.of the 30th day after the end of your tax year in
tion about filing a claim, see Publication 556, which the first transaction was closed and, after
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and that closing, (2) and (3) above are true. Regulated futures contract. This is a con-Claims for Refund. tract that: 
Appreciated financial position. This is any
1) Provides that amounts that must be de-interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtConstructive Sales
posited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourinstrument (including a futures or forward con-of Appreciated margin account depend on daily markettract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofFinancial Positions conditions (a system of marking to mar-the interest would result in a gain.
ket), andYou are treated as having made a constructive Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-
2) Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, asale when you enter into certain transactions tion does not include the following.
qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedinvolving an appreciated financial position (de-
1) Any position from which all of the appreci- board of exchange is a domestic board offined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or
ation is accounted for under marked to trade designated as a contract market bycertain debt instruments. You must recognize
market rules, including section 1256 con- the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair
tracts (described later under Section 1256 sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-market value on the date of the constructive
Contracts Marked to Market). proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,sale. This gives you a new holding period for the
or a national securities exchange regis-position that begins on the date of the construc- 2) Any position in a debt instrument if: tered with the Securities and Exchangetive sale. Then, when you close the transaction,
Commission.you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by a) The position unconditionally entitles the
the gain recognized on the constructive sale. holder to receive a specified principal
Foreign currency contract. This is a contractamount,Constructive sale. You are treated as having that:b) The interest payments (or other similarmade a constructive sale of an appreciated fi-
amounts) with respect to the positionnancial position if you: 1) Requires delivery of a foreign currency
are payable at a fixed rate or a variable that has positions traded through regulated1) Enter into a short sale of the same or sub- rate described in section futures contracts (or settlement of whichstantially identical property, 1.860G– 1(a)(3) of the regulations, and depends on the value of that type of for-
eign currency),2) Enter into an offsetting notional principal c) The position is not convertible, either
contract relating to the same or substan- directly or indirectly, into stock of the 2) Is traded in the interbank market, andtially identical property, issuer (or any related person).
3) Is entered into at arm ’s length at a price
3) Enter into a futures or forward contract to determined by reference to the price in the3) Any hedge with respect to a position de-deliver the same or substantially identical interbank market.scribed in (2).property (including a forward contract that
Bank forward contracts with maturity datesprovides for cash settlement), or Certain trust instruments treated as stock. that are longer than the maturities ordinarily
4) Acquire the same or substantially identical For the constructive sale rules, an interest in an available for regulated futures contracts are con-
property (if the appreciated financial posi- actively traded trust is treated as stock unless sidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur-
tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional substantially all of the value of the property held rency contract if the above three conditions are
principal contract, or a futures or forward by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep- satisfied.
contract). tion to the definition of an appreciated financial Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-
position (explained in (2) above). rency transactions. These transactions may re-You are also treated as having made a con-
sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. Forstructive sale of an appreciated financial posi- Sale of appreciated financial position. A details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988tion if a person related to you enters into a transaction treated as a constructive sale of an and regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) andtransaction described above with a view toward appreciated financial position is not treated as a 1.988-3.avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-this purpose, a related person is any related cial position, as long as you continue to hold the Nonequity option. This is any listed optionparty described under Related Party Transac- original position. However, if you hold another (defined later) that is not an equity option. None-tions, later in this chapter. appreciated financial position and dispose of the quity options include debt options, commodity
Exception for nonmarketable securities. original position before closing the transaction futures options, currency options, and
A contract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, that resulted in the constructive sale, you are broad-based stock index options. A
or partnership interest that is not a marketable treated as if, at the same time, you construc- broad-based stock index is based upon the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 37

Page 38 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of a group of diversified stocks or securi- account in figuring your gain or loss when you gain of 40% of the amount of net  section 1256
ties (such as the Standard and Poor ’s 500 in- later dispose of the contract, as shown in the contracts loss absorbed in the carryback years
dex). example under 60/40 rule, below. and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%
Warrants based on a stock index that are of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatHedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionHedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index. 1256 contracts for that year.
60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys-Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op- Net section 1256 contracts loss. This loss
tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will betions based on a stock index and either traded is the lesser of:
treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andon or subject to the rules of a qualified board of
1) The net capital loss for your tax year deter-40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainexchange are nonequity options if the Securities
mined by taking into account only theor loss. This is true regardless of how long youand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines
gains and losses from section 1256 con-actually held the property.that the stock index is broad based.
tracts, orThis rule does not apply to options estab-
Example. On June 23, 2000, you bought alished before the SEC determines that the stock 2) The capital loss carryover to the next taxregulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based. year determined without this election.cember 31, 2000 (the last business day of your
Listed option. This is any option that is tax year), the fair market value of the contract Net section 1256 contracts gain. This gaintraded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain on is the lesser of:board or exchange (as discussed earlier under your 2000 tax return, treated as 60% long-term
Regulated futures contract ). A listed option, and 40% short-term capital gain. 1) The capital gain net income for the car-however, does not include an option that is a On February 2, 2001, you sold the contract ryback year determined by taking into ac-right to acquire stock from the issuer. for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000 count only gains and losses from section
gain on your 2000 return, you recognize a 1256 contracts, orDealer equity option. This is any listed option $1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2001that, for an options dealer: 2) The capital gain net income for that year.tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%
short-term capital loss.1) Is an equity option, Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for
any carryback year without regard to the netLimited partners or entrepreneurs. The2) Is bought or granted by that dealer in the section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-normal course of the dealer’s business ac- any later tax year.tions or dealer securities futures contracts thattivity of dealing in options, and
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or3) Is listed on the qualified board of exchange partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts iswhere that dealer is registered. under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these capital gain or loss subject to the marked topersons should treat all these gains or losses asAn options dealer is any person registered market rules. However, this does not apply toshort term under the marked to market system.with an appropriate national securities ex- contracts held for purposes of hedging propertychange as a market maker or specialist in listed if any loss from the property would be an ordi-Terminations and transfers. The marked tooptions. nary loss.market rules also apply if your obligation or
Equity option. This is any option: rights under section 1256 contracts are termi- Treatment of underlying property. Thenated or transferred during the tax year. In this determination of whether an individual’s gain or1) To buy or sell stock, or case, use the fair market value of each section loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-2) That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- or loss is made without regard to the fact that thefer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orerence to any stock or narrow-based se- individual is actively engaged in dealing in ortransfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-curity index. trading section 1256 contracts related to thatery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli- property.Equity options include options on a group of gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.
stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock
Loss carryback election. An individual orindex. How To Reportpartnership having a net section 1256 contractsDealer securities futures contract. For loss (defined later) for 2001 can elect to carry If you disposed of regulated futures or foreignany dealer in securities futures contracts or op- this loss back 3 years, instead of carrying it over currency contracts in 2001 (or had unrealizedtions on those contracts, this is a securities fu- to the next year. See How To Report, later, for profit or loss on these contracts that were opentures contract (or option on such a contract) that: information about reporting this election on your at the end of 2000 or 2001), you should receivereturn.1) Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the Form 1099– B, or an equivalent statement, fromThe loss carried back to any year under thiscase of an option, is purchased or granted your broker.election cannot be more than the net sectionby the dealer) in the normal course of the
1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, the Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gainsdealer’s activity of dealing in this type of
amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax year and Losses From Section 1256 Contracts andcontract (or option), and
cannot increase or produce a net operating loss Straddles, to report your gains and losses from2) Is traded on a qualified board or exchange for that year. all section 1256 contracts that are open at the(as defined under Regulated futures con- The loss is carried to the earliest carryback end of the year or that were closed out duringtract, earlier). year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can the year. This includes the amount shown in box
then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In 9 of Form 1099 – B. Then enter the net amountA securities futures contract that is not a dealer
each carryback year, treat 60% of the carryback of these gains and losses on Schedule D (Formsecurities futures contract is treated as de-
amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as a 1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with yourscribed later under Securities Futures Con-
short-term capital loss from section 1256 con- income tax return.tracts.
tracts. If the Form 1099 – B you receive includes a
If only a portion of the net section 1256 con- straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it
tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back, may be necessary to show certain adjustmentsMarked to Market Rules
the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward, on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc-
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end under the capital loss carryover rules, to the year tions for completing Part I.
of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at following the loss. (See Capital Losses under
its fair market value on the last business day of Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig- Loss carryback election. To carry back your
the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the loss loss under the election proc edures described
loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into year, you had an additional short-term capital earlier, file Form 1040X or app ropriate amended
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return for the year to which you are carrying the transaction occurred. The term “unrecognized buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy or
loss with an amended Form 6781 attached. Fol- gain ” has the same meaning as defined under sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
low the instructions for completing Form 6781 Straddles, later. all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,
for the loss year to make this election. around the same date, may be helpful in figuring
Sale of property used in a hedge. Once you fair market value.
identify personal property as being part of a
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from itsHedging Transactions
sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital Property Received for ServicesThe marked to market rules, described earlier, gain.
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac- If you receive investment property for services,
tion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow- you must include the property’s fair market value
ing conditions are met. Self-Employment Income in income. The amount you include in income
then becomes your basis in the property. If the1) You entered into the transaction in the nor- Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course services were performed for a price that wasmal course of your trade or business pri- of a commodity or option dealer ’s trading in agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedmarily to manage the risk of: section 1256 contracts and property related to as the fair market value of the property if there isthese contracts are included in net earningsa) Price changes or currency fluctuations no evidence to the contrary.from self-employment. In addition, the rules re-on ordinary property you hold (or will lating to contributions to self-employment retire-hold), or Restricted property. If you receive, as pay-ment plans apply. For information on retirement
ment for services, property that is subject toplan contributions, see chapter 3 of Publicationb) Interest rate or price changes, or cur-
certain restrictions, your basis in the property535, Business Expenses, Publication 560, Re-rency fluctuations, on your current or
generally is its fair market value when it be-tirement Plans for Small Business, and Publica-future borrowings or ordinary obliga-
comes substantially vested. Property becomestion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementstions.
(IRAs). substantially vested when it is transferable or is
2) You clearly identified the transaction as no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,
being a hedging transaction before the whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
close of the day on which you entered into erty in Publication 525 for more information.
it. Basis of
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentThis hedging transaction exception does not Investment Property property at less than fair market value, as pay-apply to transactions entered into by or for any
ment for services, you must include the differ-syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor- Terms you may need to know ence in income. Your basis in the property is theporation, or other entity (other than a regular (see Glossary): price you pay plus the amount you include incorporation) that allocates more than 35% of its
losses to limited partners or limited entrepre- income.
neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who Basis
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as a Fair market value Property Receivedlimited partner) and who does not actively par-
ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Original issue discount (OID) in Taxable Trades
est is not considered held by a limited partner
If you received investment property in trade foror entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
Basis is a way of measuring your investment in other property, the basis of the new property isparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years)
property for tax purposes. You must know the its fair market value at the time of the tradein the management of the entity, or is the
basis of your property to determine whether you unless you received the property in a nontaxablespouse, child (including a legally adopted
have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-child), grandchild, or parent of an individual trade.
tion.who actively participates in the management of
Investment property you buy normally has an Example. You trade A Company stock for Bthe entity.
original basis equal to its cost. If you get property Company stock having a fair market value of
Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner in some way other than buying it, such as by gift $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company
or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a or inheritance, its fair market value may be im- stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable
hedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging portant in figuring the basis. gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A
loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- company stock is more than $1,200, you have aductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg- Cost Basis deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your Bing transaction (determined without regard to Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the Bthe limit) are more than the income received or The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gainaccrued during the tax year from this transac- The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt of $100.tion. obligations, or other property or services.
Any hedging loss that is allocated to you for
the tax year is limited to your taxable income for Unstated interest. If you buy property under a Property Receivedthat year from the trade or business in which the deferred-payment plan that charges little or no in Nontaxable Tradeshedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg- interest, you may have to treat part of the
ing transaction items in determining this taxable purchase price as interest. You must subtract If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal- this amount, if any, from your cost to find your ognize gain or loss until you dispose of thelowed because of this limit, you can carry it over basis. For more information, see Unstated Inter- property you received in the trade. See Nontax-to the next tax year as a deduction resulting from est in Publication 537. able Trades, later.a hedging transaction. The basis of property you received in a non-If the hedging transaction relates to property Basis Other Than Cost taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generallyother than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-
the same as the adjusted basis of the propertying losses applies if the limited partner or entre- There are times when you must use a basis you gave up. Increase this amount by any cashpreneur is an individual. other than cost. In these cases, you may need to
you paid, additional costs you had, and any gainThe limit on hedging losses does not apply to know the property ’s fair market value or the
recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash orany hedging loss to the extent that it is more adjusted basis of the previous owner.
unlike property you received, any loss recog-than all your unrecognized gains from hedging
nized, and any liability of yours that was as-transactions at the end of the tax year that are Fair market value. This is the price at which
sumed or treated as assumed.from the trade or business in which the hedging the property would change hands between a
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appreciated property you gave the dece-loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plusProperty Received
dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-the amount of gift tax paid.From Your Spouse
erty that you inherited is the decedent’s adjusted
If property is transferred to you from your spouse Example 2. The facts are the same as in basis in the property immediately before death
(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to Example 1 except that the gift tax paid was rather than its fair market value. This applies to
your divorce), your basis is the same as your $1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor ’s ad- appreciated property that you or your spouse
spouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis just justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to gave the decedent as a gift during the one-year
before the transfer. See Transfers Between the fair market value of the stock at the time of period ending on the date of death. Appreciated
Spouses, later. the gift. property is any property whose fair market value
on the day you gave it to the decedent was moreRecordkeeping. The transferor must Gift received after 1976. If you received than its adjusted basis.give you the records necessary to de- property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the
termine the adjusted basis and holding donor’s adjusted basis increased by the part ofRECORDS
More information. See Publication 551, Ba-period of the property as of the date of the the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in sis of Assets, for more information on the basistransfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply- of inherited property, including community prop-
ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The erty, a joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a
numerator (top part) is the net increase in value qualified joint interest, and a farm or business.
of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Gift the amount of the gift. Adjusted BasisThe net increase in value of the gift is the fairTo figure your basis in property that you re-
market value of the gift minus the donor ’s ad-ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valuebasis to the donor just before it was given to you, exchange, or other disposition of property orfor gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-its fair market value at the time it was given to figure allowable depreciation, depletion, ornual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the amortization, you usually must make certain ad-tion that applies to the gift.date it was given to you. justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-
sis of the property. The result of theseFair market value less than donor’s adjusted Example. In 2001, you received a gift of adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.basis. If the fair market value of the property at property from your mother. At the time of the gift, Adjustments to the basis of stocks andthe time of the gift was less than the donor ’s the property had a fair market value of $100,000 bonds are explained in the following discussion.adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. The For information about other adjustments to ba-gain on its sale or other disposition is the same amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was sis, see Publication 551.as the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any $90,000 ($100,000 minus the $10,000 annual
required adjustments to basis during the period exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax of Stocks and Bondsyou hold the property. Your basis for loss is its $21,000. You figure your basis in the following
fair market value at the time of the gift plus or way: The basis of stocks or bonds you own generallyminus any required adjustments to basis during is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,Fair market value ..............  $100,000the period you hold the property. such as commissions and recording or transferMinus: Adjusted basis ........... 40,000
Net increase in value of gift ....... $  60,000 fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanNo gain or loss. If you use the basis for
by purchase, your basis is usually determinedfiguring a gain and the result is a loss, and then
Gift tax paid ................. $  21,000 by fair market value or the previous owner ’suse the basis for figuring a loss and the result is Multiplied by .667 ($60,000 ÷ $90,000) .667 adjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basisa gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. Gift tax due to net increase in value . . $ 14,007
Other Than Cost.Plus: Adjusted basis of property to your
Example. You receive a gift of investment The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-mother .................... 40,000
Your basis in the property $ 54,007property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
the time of the gift. The fair market value at the ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable
time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the stock dividends or stock splits, you must reducePart sale, part gift. If you get property in a
property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor the basis of your original stock. You must alsotransfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, your
loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and reduce your basis when you receive nontaxablebasis is the larger of the amount you paid for the
$10,000 minus $9,500 results in a $500 loss. distributions, because these are a return of capi-property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in the
Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and tal.property at the time of the transfer. Add to that
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. amount the amount of any gift tax paid on the
Identifying stock or bonds sold. If you cangift, as described in the preceding discussion.
Fair market value equal to or more than adequately identify the shares of stock or theFor figuring loss, your basis is limited to the
donor’s adjusted basis. If the fair market bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or otherproperty’s fair market value at the time of the
value of the property at the time of the gift was basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.transfer.
equal to or more than the donor’s adjusted basis Identification not possible. If you buy andjust before the gift, your basis for gain or loss Gift tax information. For information on gift sell securities at various times in varying quanti-on its sale or other disposition is the donor ’s tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate ties and you cannot adequately identify theadjusted basis plus or minus any required ad- and Gift Taxes. shares you sell, the basis of the securities youjustments to basis during the period you hold the sell is the basis of the securities you acquiredproperty. Also, you may be allowed to add to the first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-Property Received as Inheritancedonor’s adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax cussed later, you cannot use the average pricepaid, depending on the date of the gift. per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of theIf you inherited property, your basis in that prop-
Gift received before 1977. If you received shares.erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-
property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the praised value on the federal estate tax return)
Example. You bought 100 shares of stockproperty is the donor’s adjusted basis increased on:
of XYZ Corporation in 1988 for $10 a share. Inby the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,
January 1989 you bought another 200 shares1) The date of the decedent ’s death, oryour basis cannot be more than the fair market
for $11 a share. In July 1989 you gave your sonvalue of the gift at the time it was given to you. 2) The later alternate valuation date if the es- 50 shares. In December 1991 you bought 100tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-Example 1. You were given XYZ Company shares for $9 a share. In April 2001 you sold 130nate valuation.stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-
had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’s If no federal estate tax return was filed, use the posed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a appraised value on the date of death for state quired first to figure the basis. The  shares of
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or inheritance or transmission taxes. stock you gave your son had a basis of $5 00 (50
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares of gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your them. The basis of your common s tock is $75
stock you sold in 2001 as follows: basis in the stock by the difference between the ($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the new
amount you included and the amount of tax paid preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).
50 shares (50 × $10) balance of stock for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed Stock bought at various times. Figure thebought in 1988 ................. $ 5 0 0 capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  under80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in basis of stock dividends received on stock youCapital Gain Distributions in chapter 1.January 1989 .................. 8 8 0 bought at various times and at different prices byTotal basis of stock sold in 2001  $1,380 allocating to each lot of stock the share of theAutomatic investment service. If you partici- stock dividends due to it.pate in an automatic investment service, yourAdequate identification. You will make an basis for each share of stock, including frac- Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi-adequate identification if you show that certifi- tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis ofcates representing shares of stock from a lot that is the purchase price plus a share of the broker’s your new stock is its fair market value on theyou bought on a certain date or for a certain commission. date of distribution. The basis of your old stockprice were delivered to your broker or other
does not change.agent. Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici-
pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveBroker holds stock. If you have left the Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits instock from the corporation at a discount, yourstock certificates with your broker or other the same way as stock dividends if identicalbasis is the full fair market value of the stock onagent, you will make an adequate identification if stock is distributed on the stock held.the dividend payment date. You must includeyou: 
the amount of the discount in your income. Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Public utilities. If, before 1986, you ex- a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it maylar stock to be sold or transferred at the cluded from income the value of stock you had be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.time of the sale or transfer, and received under a qualified public utility reinvest- Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receive
2) Receive a written confirmation of this from ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero. them. See Distributions of Stock and Stock
your broker or other agent within a reason- Rights under Nontaxable Distributions in chap-
Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-able time. ter 1.
butions made by a corporation of its own stock. Taxable stock rights. If you receive stockGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable toSingle stock certificate. If you bought rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isyou. However, see Distributions of Stock andstock in different lots at different times and you their fair market value at the time of distribution.Stock Rights under Nontaxable Distributions inhold a single stock certificate for this stock, you The basis of the old stock does not change.chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-will make an adequate identification if you:
dends are not taxable, you must divide your Nontaxable stock rights. If you receive
1) Tell your broker or other agent the particu- basis for the old stock between the old and new nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-
lar stock to be sold or transferred when stock. pire, they have no basis.
you deliver the certificate to your broker or If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stockNew and old stock identical. If the newother agent, and rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockstock you received as a nontaxable dividend is
rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of2) Receive a written confirmation of this from identical to the old stock on which the dividend
the fair market value of the old stock, you mustyour broker or other agent within a reason- was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-able time. old stock by the number of shares of old and
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use anew stock. The result is your basis for eachStock identified this way is the stock sold or ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalshare of stock.transferred even if stock certificates from a dif- fair market value of both at the time of distribu-ferent lot are delivered to the broker or other tion.Example 1. You owned one share of com-agent. mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- If the fair market value of the stock rights wasIf you sell part of the stock represented by a tion distributed two new shares of common less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, yousingle certificate directly to the buyer instead of stock for each share held. You then had three can choose to divide the basis of the old stockthrough a broker, you will make an adequate shares of common stock. Your basis in each between the old stock and the stock rights. Toidentification if you keep a written record of the share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3). make the choice, attach a statement to yourparticular stock that you intend to sell. return for the year in which you received the
Example 2. You owned two shares of com- rights, stating that you choose to divide the basisBonds. These methods of identification
mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the of the stock.also apply to bonds sold or transferred.
other for $45. The corporation distributed two Basis of new stock. If you exercise thenew shares of common stock for each shareShares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its costheld. You had six shares after the distribution—of shares in a regulated investment company plus the basis of the stock rights exercised.three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) and(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust
three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).(REIT) is generally figured in the same way as Example. You own 100 shares of ABCthe basis of other stock. New and old stock not identical. If the Company stock, which cost you $22 per share.
new stock you received as a nontaxable divi- The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxableMutual fund load charges. Your cost basis
dend is not identical to the old stock on which it stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 morein a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, also
was declared, the basis of the new stock is shares at $26 per share. At the time the stockknown as a load charge. But, in certain cases,
calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basis rights were distributed, the stock had a marketyou cannot include the entire amount of a load
of the old stock between the old and the new value of $30, not including the stock rights. Eachcharge in your basis if the charge gives you a
stock in the ratio of the fair market value of each stock right had a market value of $3. The marketreinvestment right. For more information, see
lot of stock to the total fair market value of both value of the stock rights was less than 15% ofPublication 564.
lots on the date of distribution of the new stock. the market value of the stock, but you chose toChoosing average basis for mutual fund divide the basis of your stock between the stockshares. You can choose to use the average Example. You bought a share of common and the rights. You figure the basis of the rightsbasis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed and the basis of the old stock as follows:shares at various times and prices and left them a share of preferred stock for each share ofon deposit in an account kept by a custodian or 100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old stockcommon stock held. At the date of distribution,agent. The methods you can use to figure aver- your common stock had a fair market value of 100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of oldage basis are explained in Publication 564. $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market stock
value of $50. You figure the basis of the old andUndistributed capital gains. If you had to
new stock by dividing your $100 basis between 10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rightsinclude in your income any undistributed capital
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Short sales. If you cannot deduct payments Increase your basis in the stripped tax-ex-
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, new you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on empt bond or coupon by the taxable and nontax-basis of old stock stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to able accrued OID. Also increase your basis by
the lender is a capital expense, and you must the interest that accrued (but was not paid, and($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of rights
add it to the basis of the stock used to close the was not previously reflected in your basis)If you sell the rights, the basis for figuring short sale. before the date you sold the bond or coupon. Ingain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If See Short Sale Expenses, later, for informa- addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987,you exercise the rights, the basis of the stock tion about deducting payments in lieu of divi- add to your basis any accrued market discountyou acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the dends. not previously reflected in basis.basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18
per share. The remaining basis of the old stock Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at a
is $21.78 per share. premium, the premium is treated as part of your
basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize the How To FigureInvestment property received in liquidation. premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-In general, if you receive investment property as duce the basis of the bond by the amortized part Gain or Lossa distribution in partial or complete liquidation of of the premium each year over the life of thea corporation and if you recognize gain or loss bond. You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofwhen you acquire the property, your basis in the Although you cannot deduct the premium on property by comparing the amount you realizeproperty is its fair market value at the time of the a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de- with the adjusted basis of the property.distribution. termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You
must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-S corporation stock. You must increase Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or
mium you amortized for the period you held theyour basis in stock of an S corporation by your trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
bond.pro rata share of the following items. property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter
• All income items of the S corporation, in- 3 for more information. Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youcluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa- transfer is more than the amount you realize, therately stated and passed through to you as Market discount on bonds. If you include difference is a loss.a shareholder. market discount on a bond in income currently,
increase the basis of your bond by the amount of Amount realized. The amount you realize• The nonseparately stated income of the S market discount you include in your income. See from a sale or trade of property is everything youcorporation. Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for more receive for the property. This includes the• The amount of the deduction for depletion information. money you receive plus the fair market value of(other than oil and gas depletion) that is any property or services you receive.Acquisition discount on short-termmore than the basis of the property being If you finance the buyer ’s purchase of yourobligations. If you include acquisition dis-depleted. property and the debt instrument does not pro-count on a short-term obligation in your income
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedcurrently, increase the basis of the obligation byYou must decrease your basis in stock of an interest will reduce the amount realized. Forthe amount of acquisition discount you include inS corporation by your pro rata share of the more information, see Publication 537.your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-following items.
gations in chapter 1 for more information. Fair market value. Fair market value is the• Distributions by the S corporation that price at which property would change handswere not included in your income. Original issue discount (OID) on debt between a buyer and a seller, neither beinginstruments. Increase the basis of a debt in-• All loss and deduction items of the S cor- forced to buy or sell and both having reasonablestrument by the amount of OID that you includeporation that are separately stated and knowledge of all the relevant facts.in your income. See Original Issue Discountpassed through to you. The fair market value of notes or other debt(OID) in chapter 1. instruments you receive as a part of the sale• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OID price is usually the best amount you can getcorporation. on tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxa- from selling them to, or discounting them with, a
• Any expense of the S corporation that is ble. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex- bank or other buyer of debt instruments.
not deductible in figuring its taxable in- empt obligation issued after September 3, 1982,
come and not properly chargeable to a that you acquired after March 1, 1984, you must Example. You trade A Company stock with
capital account. accrue OID on the obligation to determine its an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to the stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which• The amount of your deduction for deple- basis of the obligation to determine your gain or is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000tion of oil and gas wells to the extent the loss. ($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive adeduction is not more than your share of For information on determining OID on a note for $6,000 that has a discount value ofthe adjusted basis of the wells. long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is- $4,000, your gain is $7,000 ($10,000 plus
However, your basis in the stock cannot be sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985 or $4,000 minus $7,000).
reduced below zero. Debt Instruments Issued After 1984,  whichever Debt paid off. A debt against the property,applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID or against you, that is paid off as a part of theSpecialized small business investment com- on Long-Term Debt Instruments. transaction or that is assumed by the buyer mustpany stock or partnership interest. If you If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of be included in the amount realized. This is truebought this stock or interest as replacement 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for even if neither you nor the buyer is personallyproperty for publicly traded securities you sold at acquisition discount on short-term obligations. liable for the debt. For example, if you sell ora gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock or See Discount on Short-Term Obligations in trade property that is subject to a nonrecourseinterest by the amount of any postponed gain on chapter 1. loan, the amount you realize generally includesthat sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly
Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac- the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerTraded Securities, later.
quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon even if the amount of the note is more than the
Qualified small business stock. If you after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on fair market value of the property.
bought this stock as replacement property for it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-
other qualified small business stock you sold at pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or Example. You sell stock that you had
a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re- coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of pledged as security for a bank loan o f $8,000.
placement stock by the amount of any post- this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on these obligations in the manner described in pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in
Qualified Small Business Stock, later. chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons. cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 predominantly outside the United States Example. On April 18, 2001, KP1 Corpora-
are not like property. tion was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You heldminus $6,000).
100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of $3,500.5) The property to be received must be iden-Payment of cash. If you trade property and As a result of the acquisition, you received 70tified within 45 days after the date youcash for other property, the amount you realize shares of KP2 stock in exchange for your KP1transfer the property given up in the trade.is the fair market value of the property you re- stock. You do not recognize gain or loss on theceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- 6) The property to be received must be re- transaction. Your basis in the 70 shares of thetracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis ceived by the earlier of: new stock is still $3,500.of the property you traded in from the amount
you realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a) The 180th day after the date on which Stock for stock of the same corporation.a gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a you transfer the property given up in You can exchange common stock for commonloss. the trade, or stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
same corporation without having a recognizedb) The due date, including extensions, forNo gain or loss. You may have to use a basis gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twoyour tax return for the year in which thefor figuring gain that is different from the basis stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-transfer of the property given up oc-used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have holder and the corporation.curs.neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
Money or other property received. If in anthe discussion on the basis of property you re- If you trade property with a related party in a otherwise nontaxable trade you receive moneyceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost, like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. or other property in addition to stock, then yourearlier. See Related Party Transactions,  later in this gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up tochapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544 the amount of the money or other property. Anyfor more information on exchanges of business loss is not recognized.property and special rules for exchanges using
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali-Nontaxable Trades qualified intermediaries or involving multiple
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-properties.
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies toThis section discusses trades that generally do
Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receive preferred stock with one or more of the followingnot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
cash or unlike property in addition to the like features.For more information on nontaxable trades, see
property, and the preceding six conditions arechapter 1 of Publication 544. • The holder has the right to require themet, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are
issuer or a related person to redeem ortaxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theLike-Kind Exchanges purchase the stock.amount of the cash and the fair market value of
the unlike property you receive. You cannot de- • The issuer or a related person is requiredIf you trade business or investment property for
duct a loss. to redeem or purchase the stock.other business or investment property of a like
kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct Like property and unlike property trans- • The issuer or a related person has theany loss until you sell or dispose of the property ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- right to redeem the stock, and on the issueyou receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must tion to the like property, you must recognize gain date, it is more likely than not that the rightmeet all six of the following conditions. or loss on the unlike property you give up. The will be exercised.
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-
1) The property must be business or invest- • The dividend rate on the stock varies withjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair
ment property. You must hold both the reference to interest rates, commoditymarket value.
property you trade and the property you prices, or similar indices.
receive for productive use in your trade or Like property and money transferred. If For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre-business or for investment. Neither prop- conditions (1) —  (6) are met, you have a non- ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter-erty may be property used for personal taxable trade even if you pay money in addition nal Revenue Code.purposes, such as your home or family to the like property.
car. Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener-Basis of property received. You figure your ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you2) The property must not be held primarily for basis in property received in a nontaxable or convert bonds into stock or preferred stock intosale. The property you trade and the prop- partly nontaxable trade as explained earlier common stock of the same corporation accord-erty you receive must not be property you under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier. ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of thesell to customers, such as merchandise.
bond or the preferred stock certificate.How to report. You must report the trade of3) The property must not be stocks, bonds,
like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-notes, choses in action, certificates of trust Example. In November, you bought for $1 aognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onor beneficial interest, or other securities or right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, onSchedule D of Form 1040 or on Form 4797,evidences of indebtedness or interest, in- payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issuedSales of Business Property, whichever applies.cluding partnership interests. However, by that corporation.For information on using Form 4797, seeyou can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- On December 2, you subscribed to the bond,chapter 4 of Publication 544.rate stocks under a different rule, as dis- which was issued on December 9. The bondcussed later. contained a clause stating that you would re-Corporate Stocks ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common4) There must be a trade of like property. The
stock on surrender of one bond and the paymenttrade of real estate for real estate, or per- The following trades of corporate stocks gener- of $50.sonal property for similar personal prop- ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductible
Later, you presented the bond and $50 anderty, is a trade of like property. The trade loss.
received one share of XYZ Corporation commonof an apartment house for a store building,
stock. You did not have a recognized gain oror a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
loss. This is true whether the fair market value oftrade of like property. The trade of a piece stances, a company will give you common stock
the stock was more or less than $150 on theof machinery for a store building is not a for preferred stock, preferred stock for common
date of the conversion.trade of like property. Real property lo- stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
cated in the United States and real prop- The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 +another corporation. If this is a result of a
erty located outside the United States are $99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Yourmerger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled
not like property. Also, personal property holding period for the part based on your owner-corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-
used predominantly within the United ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
States and personal property used ber 2. Your holding period for the part based onzation, you do not recognize gain or loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the The basis of any other property you receive
day after you acquired the share of stock. is its fair market value on the date of the trade. Transfers Between
Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Insurance Policies and SpousesGenerally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-
Annuitiesration into common stock of another corporation,
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on aaccording to the terms of the bond issue, you
transfer of property from an individual to (or inYou will not have a recognized gain or loss if youmust recognize gain or loss up to the difference
trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident totrade:between the fair market value of the stock re-
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitionceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex- 1) A life insurance contract for another life rule does not apply if the recipient spouse orchanged. In some instances, however, such as insurance contract or for an endowment or former spouse is a nonresident alien. The ruletrades that are part of mergers or other corpo- annuity contract, also does not apply to a transfer in trust to therate reorganizations, you will have no recog-
extent the adjusted basis of the property is lessnized gain or loss if certain requirements are 2) An endowment contract for an annuity
than the amount of the liabilities assumed plusmet. For more information about the tax conse- contract or for another endowment con-
any liabilities on the property.quences of converting securities of one corpora- tract that provides for regular payments
Any transfer of property to a spouse or for-tion into common stock of another corporation, beginning at a date not later than the be-
mer spouse on which gain or loss is not recog-under circumstances such as those just de- ginning date under the old contract, or
nized is treated by the recipient as a gift and isscribed, consult the respective corporations and 3) An annuity contract for another annuity not considered a sale or exchange. Thethe terms of the bond issue. This information is contract. recipient’s basis in the property will be the samealso available on the prospectus of the bond
as the adjusted basis of the giver immediatelyissue. The insured or annuitant must be the same
before the transfer. This carryover basis ruleunder both contracts. Exchanges of contractsProperty for stock of a controlled corpora- applies whether the adjusted basis of the trans-not included in this list, such as an annuity con-tion. If you transfer property to a corporation ferred property is less than, equal to, or greatertract for an endowment contract, or an annuity orsolely in exchange for stock in that corporation, than either its fair market value at the time ofendowment contract for a life insurance con-and immediately after the trade you are in con- transfer or any consideration paid by the recipi-tract, are taxable.trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not ent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both ing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized onDemutualization of Lifeto individuals and to groups who transfer prop- a transfer in trust increases the basis.Insurance Companieserty to a corporation. It does not apply if the A transfer of property is incident to a divorcecorporation is an investment company. if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the dateA life insurance company may change from aIf you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer ismutual company to a stock company. This isceeding and you transfer property to a controlled related to the ending of the marriage. For morecommonly called demutualization. If you were acorporation under a plan, other than a reorgani- information, see Property Settlements in Publi-policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.pany, you may have received either stock in thestock you receive in the exchange is used to pay
stock company or cash in exchange for youroff your debts.
equity interest in the mutual company.For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
If the demutualization transaction qualifiesration, you or your group of transferors must
as a tax-free reorganization under section Related Partyown, immediately after the exchange, at least
368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain80% of the total combined voting power of all
or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your Transactionsclasses of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%
holding period for the new stock includes theof the outstanding shares of each class of non-
period you held an equity interest in the mutual Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-voting stock of the corporation.
company as a policyholder or annuitant. erty between related parties.If this provision applies to you, you must
If the demutualization transaction does notattach to your return a complete statement of all
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-facts pertinent to the exchange. Gain on Sale or Trade
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, you of Depreciable PropertyMoney or other property received. If, in an must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-
otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor- ing period for the stock does not include the Your gain from the sale or trade of property to aporate stock, you also receive money or prop- period you held an equity interest in the mutual related party may be ordinary income, rathererty other than stock, you may have a taxable company. than capital gain, if the property can be depreci-gain. However, you are taxed only up to the If you received cash in exchange for your ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 inamount of money plus the fair market value of equity interest, you must recognize a capital Publication 544 for more information.the other property you receive. The rules for gain or loss. If you held an equity interest for
figuring taxable gain in this situation generally more than 1 year, your gain or loss is long-term.
follow those for a partially nontaxable exchange Like-Kind Exchangesdiscussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. If U.S. Treasurythe property you give up includes depreciable Generally, if you trade business or investmentNotes or Bondsproperty, the taxable gain may have to be re- property for other business or investment prop-ported as ordinary income because of deprecia- erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasurytion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No loss See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-obligations for other issues, designated by theis recognized. taxable Trades.Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or lossNonqualified preferred stock (described ear- This rule also applies to trades of propertyrecognized on the trade.lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora- between related parties, defined next underSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S.tion) received is generally treated as property Losses on Sales or Trades of Property. How-Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for informationother than stock. ever, if either you or the related party disposes ofabout income from these investments.
Basis of stock or other property received. the like property within 2 years after the trade,
The basis of the stock you receive is generally you both must report any gain or loss not recog-
the adjusted basis of the property you transfer. nized on the original trade on your return for the
Increase this amount by any amount that was year in which the later disposition occurs.
treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized This rule generally does not apply to:
on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash
you received and the fair market value of any • Dispositions due to the death of either re-
other property you received. lated party,
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of 6) Two corporations, one of which is an S Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for
corporation, if the same persons own more $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brotherPublication 544), or
than 50% in value of the outstanding stock cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell• Trades and later dispositions whose main of each corporation. the same stock to an unrelated party forpurpose is not the avoidance of federal $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-7) An executor and a beneficiary of an estateincome tax. able gain is $500 —  the $2,900 gain minus the(except in the case of a sale or trade to $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.satisfy a pecuniary bequest).If a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop-
erty is substantially diminished during any pe- Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the8) Two corporations that are members of theriod, that period is not counted in determining stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-same controlled group (under certain con-whether the property was disposed of within 2 nized loss is only $700 —  your $7,600 basisditions, however, these losses are not dis-years. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub- minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss thatallowed but must be deferred).stantially diminished by: was not allowed to your brother.9) Two partnerships if the same persons
• The holding of a put on the property, own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
of the capital interests or the profit inter-• The holding by another person of a right to ests in both partnerships.acquire the property, or Capital Gains
• A short sale or any other transaction. Multiple property sales or trades. If you sell and Losses
or trade to a related party a number of blocks of
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you Terms you may need to knowLosses on Sales or
must figure the gain or loss separately for each (see Glossary):Trades of Property
block of stock or piece of property. The gain on
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of each item may be taxable. However, you cannot Callproperty, other than a distribution in complete deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannot
liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is reduce gains from the sales of any of these Commodity future
items by losses on the sales of any of the otherdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow- Conversion transactionitems.ing related parties.
Forward contractIndirect transactions. You cannot deduct1) Members of your family. This includes only Limited partneryour loss on the sale of stock through youryour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- Listed optionparty buys the same stock you had owned. Thisents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de- Nonequity optiondoes not apply to a trade between related par-scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).  
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci- Options dealer2) A partnership in which you directly or indi- dental and is not prearranged.
rectly own more than 50% of the capital Put
Constructive ownership of stock. In deter-interest or the profits interest. Regulated futures contractmining whether a person directly or indirectly3) A corporation in which you directly or indi- owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora- Section 1256 contractrectly own more than 50% in value of the tion, the following rules apply. Straddleoutstanding stock (see Constructive own-
Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byership of stock, later). Wash saleor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational or- is considered owned proportionately by or for itsganization that is directly or indirectly con- shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. This section discusses the tax treatment oftrolled, in any manner or by any method,
gains and losses from different types of invest-Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownby you or by a member of your family,
ment transactions.the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orwhether or not this control is legally en-
for his or her family. Family includes only broth-forceable. Character of gain or loss. You need to clas-ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orIn addition, a loss on the sale or trade of property spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyis not deductible if the transaction is directly or
your capital gains and losses as either shortRule 3. An individual owning, other than byindirectly between the following related parties.
term or long term. If you have long-term gainsapplying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is
and losses, you must identify your 28% rate1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary considered to own the stock that is directly or
gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,and beneficiary, of any trust. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
you must also identify your qualified 5-year gain2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock and any unrecaptured section 1250 gain.constructively owned by a person under rule 1 isfiduciary and beneficiary of two different The correct classification and identificationtreated as actually owned by that person. Buttrusts, if the same person is the grantor of helps you figure the limit on capital losses andstock constructively owned by an individualboth trusts. the correct tax on capital gains. For informationunder rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by about determining whether your capital gain or3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which that individual for again applying either rule 2 or loss is short term or long term, see Holdingmore than 50% in value of the outstanding rule 3 to make another person the constructive Period, later. For information about 28% ratestock is directly or indirectly owned by or owner of the stock. gain or loss, qualified 5-year gain, and unrecap-for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the
tured section 1250 gain, see Reporting Capitaltrust. Property received from a related party. If Gains and Losses and Capital Gains Tax Rates,you sell or trade at a gain property that you4) A corporation and a partnership if the later.acquired from a related party, you recognize thesame persons own more than 50% in gain only to the extent that it is more than thevalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- Capital or Ordinaryloss previously disallowed to the related party.poration and more than 50% of the capital This rule applies only if you are the original Gain or Lossinterest, or the profits interest, in the part- transferee and you acquired the property bynership. purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss
5) Two S corporations if the same persons if the related party ’s loss was disallowed be- from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain
own more than 50% in value of the out- cause of the wash sale rules, described later or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on
standing stock of each corporation. under Wash Sales. the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a capital asset (defined next) results in a capital see section 1221 of the Internal Revenue acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your
Code. part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figuregain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of thesegenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- 8) Hedging transactions, but only if the bonds, reduce the amount realized by your partpending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on transaction is clearly identified as a hedg- of the OID.a sale or trade of property used in a trade or ing transaction before the close of the day If the bonds were issued after September 3,business may be treated as either capital or on which it was acquired, originated, or 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In entered into. For more information, see the crease the adjusted basis by your part of thesome situations, part of your gain or loss may be definition of “hedging transaction” earlier, OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationa capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- and the discussion of hedging transactions on the basis of these bonds, see Discountednary gain or loss. under Commodity Futures, later. tax-exempt obligations under Stocks and
9) Supplies of a type you regularly use or Bonds, earlier in this chapter.
consume in the ordinary course of your Any gain from market discount is usuallyCapital Assets and trade or business. taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-Noncapital Assets empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before May
1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capitalInvestment property. Investment property isFor the most part, everything you own and use
gain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale orfor personal purposes, pleasure, or investment
1993, the gain from market discount is ordinarytrade generally is a capital gain or loss.is a capital asset. Some examples are:
income.Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- You figure market discount by subtractingThese are capital assets except when they arecount, the price you paid for the bond from the sum ofheld for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from the original issue price of the bond and the• A house owned and used by you and your their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or amount of accumulated OID from the date ofloss.family, issue that represented interest to any earlier
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of• Household furnishings, holders. For more information, see Market Dis-
these, including stock received as a dividend, count Bonds in chapter 1.• A car used for pleasure or commuting, are capital assets except when they are held for A loss on the sale or other disposition of a
sale by a securities dealer. However, see• Coin or stamp collections, tax-exempt state or local government bond is
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock deductible as a capital loss.• Gems and jewelry, and and Losses on Small Business Investment Redeemed before maturity. If a state orCompany Stock, later.• Gold, silver, or any other metal. local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,
Personal use property. Property held for per- is redeemed before it matures, the OID is notAny property you own is a capital asset, ex- sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a taxable to you.cept the following noncapital assets. capital asset, and you must report a gain from its If a state or local bond issued after June 8,
sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of1) Property held mainly for sale to cus- deduct a loss from selling personal use property. the OID that is earned while you hold the bond istomers or property that will physically be- not taxable to you. However, you must report thecome a part of the merchandise that is for unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.sale to customers.
Discounted Debt Instruments Example. On July 1, 1990, the date of is-2) Depreciable property used in your trade
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondor business, even if fully depreciated. Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
for $800. The face amount of the bond wasor retirement of a bond or other debt instrument3) Real property used in your trade or busi- $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timeoriginally issued at a discount or bought at aness. the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentiondiscount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or artis- plained in the following discussions.
callable at its face amount beginning 10 yearstic composition, a letter or memoran- Short-term government obligations. Treat after the issue date.dum, or similar property — gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov- The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-a) Created by your personal efforts, 11 years (July 1, 2001) for its face amount of
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Theb) Prepared or produced for you (in the share of the acquisition discount. This treatment OID earned during the time you held the bond,case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- applies to obligations that have a fixed maturity $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annuallar property), or date not more than 1 year from the date of issue. interest also is not taxable. However, you must
Acquisition discount is the stated redemption report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as ac) Acquired under circumstances (for ex- price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- capital gain.ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis tion.of the person who created the property However, do not treat these gains as income Long-term debt instruments issued afteror for whom it was prepared or pro- 1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julyto the extent you previously included the dis-duced. 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If youcount in income. See Discount on Short-Term
sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseObligations in chapter 1 for more information.5) Accounts or notes receivable acquired debt instruments, the part of your gain that is notShort-term nongovernment obligations.in the ordinary course of a trade or busi- more than your ratable share of the OID at theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-ness for services rendered or from the sale time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.gations as ordinary income up to your ratableof property described in (1). The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga- there was an intention to call the debt instrument6) U.S. Government publications that you tions that have a fixed maturity date of not more before maturity, all of your gain that is not morereceived from the government free or for than 1 year from the date of issue. than the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomeless than the normal sales price, or that However, to the extent you previously in- at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxableyou acquired under circumstances entitling cluded the discount in income, you do not have gain also applies to corporate instruments is-you to the basis of someone who received to include it in income again. See Discount on sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-the publications free or for less than the Short-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for more mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andnormal sales price. information. at all times thereafter.
7) Certain commodities derivative finan- Tax-exempt state and local government
cial instruments held by commodities de- bonds. If these bonds were originally issued Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
rivatives dealers. For more information, at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Obligations required to be in registered1, 1982, and sold it for $900 on April 20, 2001, accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on
form. Any obligation must be in registeredfor a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000. its disposition. If you did not choose to include
form unless:At the time of original issue, there was no inten- the discount in income as it accrued, you must
tion to call the bond before maturity. You have report gain as ordinary interest income up to the 1) It is issued by a natural person,held the bond for 228 full months. Do not count instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar-
the additional days that are less than a full ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the 2) It is not of a type offered to the public,
month. The number of complete months from gain is capital gain. 3) It has a maturity at the date of issue of notdate of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30 However, a different rule applies if you dis- more than 1 year, oryears). The fraction 228/360 multiplied by the pose of a market discount bond that was:
discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to 4) It was issued before 1983.
$190. This is your ratable share of OID for the 1) Issued before July 19, 1984, and
period you owned the bond. You must treat any 2) Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.part of the gain up to $190 as ordinary income. Deposit in Insolvent orAs a result, $190 is treated as ordinary income In that case, any gain is treated as interest Bankrupt Financial Institutionand $10 is capital gain. income up to the amount of your deferred inter-
est deduction for the year you dispose of the If you lose money you have on deposit in aLong-term debt instruments issued after bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (De- qualified financial institution that becomes insol-May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- ferred interest deduction for market discount vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deducternment instrument). If you hold one of these bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under When To your loss in one of three ways.debt instruments, you must include a part of the Deduct Investment Interest.)OID in your gross income each year that you 1) Ordinary loss,Report the sale or trade of a market discountown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in- bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 2) Casualty loss, orstrument is increased by the amount of OID that 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didyou have included in your gross income. See 3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalnot choose to include market discount in incomeOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. loss).currently, enter “Accrued Market Discount ” onIf you sell or trade the debt instrument before the next line in column (a) and the amount of thematurity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you canaccrued market discount as a loss in column (f).at the time the instrument was originally issued reasonably estimate your loss, you can chooseAlso report the amount of accrued market dis-there was an intention to call it before its matur- to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinarycount in column (f) as interest income on Sched-ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eitherule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asextent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-“Accrued Market Discount.”of OID previously includible in your income. In tion.this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain. If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aRetirement of debt instrument. Any amountAn intention to call a debt instrument before miscellaneous itemized deduction on line 22 ofthat you receive on the retirement of a debtmaturity means there is a written or oral agree- Schedule A (Form 1040). The maximum amountinstrument is treated in the same way as if youment or understanding not provided for in the you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you arehad sold or traded that instrument.debt instrument between the issuer and original married filing separately) reduced by any ex-holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru- pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isNotes of individuals. If you hold an obligationment before maturity. In the case of debt instru- subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeof an individual that was issued with OID afterments that are part of an issue, the agreement or limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryMarch 1, 1984, you generally must include theunderstanding must be between the issuer and loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.OID in your income currently, and your gain orthe original holders of a substantial amount of If you claim a casualty loss, attach Formloss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalthe debt instruments in the issue. 4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalExample 1. On February 4, 1999, you plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones als and all of the following requirements are met. of your adjusted gross income.Corporation’s 10-year, 5% bond which has a You cannot choose either of these methods1) The lender is not in the business of lendingstated redemption price at maturity of $10,000. if:money.On February 3, 2001, you sold the bond for
$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of the 1) You own at least 1% of the financial insti-2) The amount of the loan, plus the amountOID in your gross income and increased your tution,of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000basis in the bond by that amount. This includes or less. 2) You are an officer of the institution, orthe amount accrued for 2001. Your basis is now
3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-$7,934. If at the time of the original issue there 3) You are related to such an owner or of-
cipal purposes of the loan.was no intention to call the bond before maturity, ficer. You are related if you and the owner
your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized or officer are “related parties,” as definedIf the exception applies, or the obligation wasminus $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain. earlier under Related Party Transactions,issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include
or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orthe OID in your income currently. When you sellExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of niece of the owner or officer.or redeem the obligation, the part of your gainoriginal issue there was an intention to call the that is not more than your accrued share of the If the actual loss that is finally determined isbond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinary OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of more than the amount you deducted as an esti-income. You figure this as follows: the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a
sale or redemption is capital loss.1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated redemption bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the
price at maturity minus $7,600 issue price) $2,400 amount deducted as an estimated loss, you
2) Minus: Amount previously included must include in income (in the final determina-in income ..................... 3 3 4 Bearer Obligations tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-3) Maximum amount of ordinary income . . . $2,066
eries in Publication 525, Taxable andYou cannot deduct any loss on an obligationBecause the amount in (3) is more than your Nontaxable Income.required to be in registered form that is insteadgain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choosecome.
sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss
nary income. However, if the issuer was subjectMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the
to a tax when the obligation was issued, thenment has market discount and you chose to amount of the actual loss is determined and
you can deduct any loss, and any gain mayinclude the discount in income as it accrued, deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.
increase your basis in the debt instrument by the qualify for capital gain treatment. Report it as a short-term capital loss on S ched-
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi- Applicable rate. If the term of the conver- purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a
sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate future date for a fixed price.ness Bad Debts, later.
is the federal short-term rate in effect under If the contract is a regulated futures contract,
section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code the rules described earlier under Section 1256
Sale of Annuity during the period of the conversion transaction, Contracts Marked To Market apply to it.
compounded daily. The termination of a commodity futures con-The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity In all other cases, the applicable rate is the tract generally results in capital gain or losscontract before its maturity date that is based on “applicable federal rate ” determined as if the unless the contract is a hedging transaction.interest accumulated on the contract is ordinary conversion transaction were a debt instrument
income. and compounded semi-annually. Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that
The rates discussed above are published by is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-Conversion Transactions can contact the IRS to get these rates. See ing transaction if you enter into the contract in
chapter 5 for information on contacting IRS. the ordinary course of your business primarily toGenerally, all or part of a gain on a conversion manage the risk of interest rate or price changestransaction is treated as ordinary income. This Net investment. To determine your net in- or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinaryapplies to gain on the disposition or other termi- vestment in a conversion transaction, include property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-nation of any position you held as part of a the fair market value of any position at the time it dinary property or obligations are those that can-conversion transaction that you entered into af- becomes part of the transaction. This means not produce capital gain or loss under anyter April 30, 1993. that your net investment generally will be the circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-A conversion transaction is any transaction total amount you invested, less any amount you cise of a futures contract that protects againstthat meets both of these tests. received for entering into the position (for exam- price changes in your business inventory resultsple, a premium you received for writing a call). in an ordinary gain or loss.1) Substantially all of your expected return For more information about hedging transac-Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap-from the transaction is due to the time tions, see section 1.1221 – 2 of the regulations.plies when a position with a built-in loss be-value of your net investment. In other Also, see Hedging Transactions under Sectioncomes part of a conversion transaction. Awords, the return on your investment is, in 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.built-in loss is any loss that you would havesubstance, like interest on a loan.
realized if you had disposed of or otherwise If you have numerous transactions in2) The transaction is one of the following. terminated the position at its fair market value at the commodity futures market during
the time it became part of the conversion trans- the year, the burden of proof is on youa) A straddle as defined under Straddles,
RECORDS
action. to show which transactions are hedging transac-later, but including any set of offsetting When applying the conversion transaction tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionspositions on stock. rules to a position with a built-in loss, use the on your books and records before the end of the
b) Any transaction in which you acquire position’s fair market value at the time it became day you entered into the transaction. It may be
property (whether or not actively part of the transaction. But, when you dispose of helpful to have separate brokerage accounts for
traded) at substantially the same time or otherwise terminate the position in a transac- your hedging and nonhedging transactions. For
that you contract to sell the same prop- tion in which you recognize gain or loss, you specific requirements concerning identification
erty, or substantially identical property, must recognize the built-in loss. The conversion of hedging transactions and the underlying item,
at a price set in the contract. transaction rules do not affect whether the items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,
built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capital see section 1.1221– 2(e) of the regulations.c) Any other transaction that is marketed loss.or sold as producing capital gains from
a transaction described in (1). Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
tions. Before determining the amount of gain Gains From Certain Constructive
treated as ordinary income, you can net certain Ownership Transactions
Amount treated as ordinary income. The gains and losses from positions of the same
If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipamount of gain treated as ordinary income is the conversion transaction. To do this, you have to
transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-smaller of: dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-
volving a financial asset (discussed later) andriod that is within a single tax year. You cannot
1) The gain recognized on the disposition or the gain normally would be treated as long-termnet the built-in loss against the gain.
other termination of the position, or capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treatedYou can net gains and losses only if instead as ordinary income. In addition, if any2) The “applicable imputed income amount.” you identify the conversion transaction gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isas an identified netting transaction onRECORDS
increased by an interest charge.your books and records. Each position of theApplicable imputed income amount. Figure conversion transaction must be identified before Constructive ownership transactions. Thethis amount as follows. the end of the day on which the position be- following are constructive ownership transac-
comes part of the conversion transaction. For tions.1) Figure the amount of interest that would
conversion transactions entered into beforehave accrued on your net investment in
February 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the 1) A notional principal contract in which youthe conversion transaction for the period
identification was made by that date. have the right to receive substantially all ofending on the earlier of:
the investment yield on a financial asset
a) The date when you dispose of the posi- and you are obligated to reimburse sub-Options dealers and commodities traders.
tion, or stantially all of any decline in value of theThese rules do not apply to options dealers and
financial asset.commodities traders.b) The date when the transaction stops
being a conversion transaction. 2) A forward or futures contract to acquire aHow to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and
financial asset.Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-To figure this amount, use an interest rate
dles, to report conversion transactions. See theequal to 120% of the “applicable rate, ” de- 3) The holding of a call option and writing of a
instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.fined later. put option on a financial asset at substan-
tially the same strike price and maturity2) Subtract from (1) the amount treated as date.ordinary income from any earlier disposi- Commodity Futures
tion or other termination of a position held This provision does not apply if all the posi-
as part of the same conversion transac- A commodity futures contract is a standardized, tions are marked to market. Marked to market
tion. exchange-traded contract for the sale or rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed in
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to The corporation must have been largely an
1) The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theMarket, earlier. operating company for ordinary loss treatment
property, immediately before the trade,to apply.Financial asset. A financial asset, for this was more than its fair market value, andIf the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through
the stock must be common stock. If issued after 2) The basis of the stock is determined by theentity. Pass-through entities include partner-
July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common basis of the property.ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-
or preferred. For more information about thement companies, and real estate investment Reduce the basis of the stock by the differencerequirements of a small business corporation ortrusts. between the adjusted basis of the property andthe qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec- its fair market value at the time of the trade. Yoution 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and itsAmount of ordinary income. Long-term cap- reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.regulations.ital gain is treated as ordinary income to the Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any
extent it is more than the net underlying other purpose.The stock must be issued to the person tak-long-term capital gain. The net underlying
ing the loss. You must be the original ownerlong-term capital gain is the amount of net capi- Example. You transfer property with an ad-of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat-tal gain you would have realized if you acquired justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value ofment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issuedthe asset for its fair market value on the date the $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.to your partnership, you must have been a part-constructive ownership transaction was opened, The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure
ner when the stock was issued and have re-and sold the asset for its fair market value on the the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of
mained so until the time of the loss. You adddate the transaction was closed. If you do not your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If you
your distributive share of the partnership loss toestablish the amount of net underlying long-term later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your
any individual section 1244 stock loss you maycapital gain by clear and convincing evidence, it $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital
have before applying the ordinary loss limit.is treated as zero. loss of $750.
Stock distributed by partnership. If your Contributions to capital. If the basis of yourMore information. For more information, see partnership distributes the stock to you, you can- section 1244 stock has increased, through con-section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code. not treat any later loss on that stock as an tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treatordinary loss. this increase as applying to stock that is not
Stock sold through underwriter. Stock section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinaryLosses on Section 1244
sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 loss on its sale.(Small Business) Stock
stock unless the underwriter only acted as a
selling agent for the corporation.You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than Example. You buy 100 shares of section
as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, or 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original
worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution toStock dividends and reorganizations. Stock
loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, capital that increases the total basis of the 100you receive as a stock dividend qualifies as
line 10. shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 sharessection 1244 stock if:
for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You canAny gain on section 1244 stock is a capital
1) You receive it from a small business cor- deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000)gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.
poration in which you own stock, and as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-Do not offset gains against losses that are within
maining $500 is a capital loss.the ordinary loss limit, explained later in this 2) The stock you own meets the require-discussion, even if the transactions are in stock ments when the stock dividend is distrib- Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-of the same company. Report the gain on uted. ords sufficient to show your stock quali-Schedule D of Form 1040. fies as section 1244 stock. YourRECORDS
If you trade your section 1244 stock for newIf you must figure a net operating loss, any records must also distinguish your section 1244stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stock stock from any other stock you own in the corpo-tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isis a business loss. ration.only a change in identity, form, or place of organ-
ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if theOrdinary loss limit. The amount that you can stock you trade meets the requirements whendeduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 Losses on Small Businessthe trade occurs.each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, Investment Company StockIf you hold section 1244 stock and othereven if only one spouse has this type of loss. If
stock in the same corporation, not all of the stockyour loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no A small business investment company (SBIC) isyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary one that is licensed and operated under thezation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Onlyloss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a Small Business Investment Act of 1958.that part based on the section 1244 stock youcapital loss. If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canhold will qualify. deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital
Section 1244 (small business) stock. This is loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-Example. Your basis for 100 shares of Xstock that was issued for money or property ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradecommon stock is $1,000. These shares qualify(other than stock and securities) in a domestic of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset youras section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stocksmall business corporation. During its 5 most gains and losses, even if they are on stock of thedividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-recent tax years before the loss, this corporation same company.mon stock, the basis of which is determined frommust have derived more than 50% of its gross
the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsoreceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- How to report. You report this type of ordinarysection 1244 stock.dends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales loss on line 10, Part II, of Form 4797. In addition
If you also own stock in the corporation thatand trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- to the information required by the form, you must
is not section 1244 stock when you receive thetion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less include the name and address of the company
stock dividend, you must divide the shares youthan 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax that issued the stock. Report a capital gain from
receive as a dividend between the section 1244years ending before the loss. If the corporation the sale of SBIC stock on Schedule D of Form
stock and the other stock. Only the shares fromwas in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test 1040.
the former can be section 1244 stock.applies to the entire period the corporation was
in existence before the day of the loss. However, Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBIC
Contributed property. To determine ordinaryif the corporation ’s deductions (other than the stock with other SBIC stock that you bought only
loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a tradenet operating loss and dividends received de- for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is
for property, you have to reduce the basis of theductions) were more than its gross income dur- a capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this
stock if:ing this period, this 50% test does not apply. chapter, for more information.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and your basis for the new property is deter- wash sale includes the period you held the oldHolding Period
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the stock or securities.
old property, your holding period for the newIf you sold or traded investment property, you Qualified small business stock. Your hold-property begins on the day following the datemust determine your holding period for the prop- ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeyou acquired the old property.erty. Your holding period determines whether rollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallany capital gain or loss was a short-term or a business stock, described later, includes the pe-Property received as a gift. If you receive along-term capital gain or loss. riod you held the old stock.gift of property and your basis is determined by
the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodLong-term or short-term. If you hold invest- Commodity or securities futures. Futuresis considered to have started on the same dayment property more than 1 year, any capital transactions in any commodity subject to thethe donor’s holding period started.gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If rules of a board of trade or commodity exchangeIf your basis is determined by the fair marketyou hold the property 1 year or less, any capital are long term if the contract was held for morevalue of the property, your holding period startsgain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss. than 6 months.on the day after the date of the gift.To determine how long you held the invest- Your holding period for a commodity re-ment property, begin counting on the date after ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresInherited property. If you inherit investmentthe day you acquired the property. The day you contract or securities futures contract, other thanproperty, your capital gain or loss on any laterdisposed of the property is part of your holding a regulated futures contract subject to Internaldisposition of that property is treated as aperiod. Revenue Code section 1256, includes yourlong-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-
holding period for the futures contract if you heldgardless of how long you actually held the prop-Example. If you bought investment property the contract as a capital asset.erty.on February 5, 2000, and sold it on February 5,
2001, your holding period is not more than 1 Securities futures contract. Your holding pe-Real property bought. To figure how longyear and you have a short-term capital gain or riod for a security received in satisfaction of ayou have held real property bought under anloss. If you sold it on February 6, 2001, your securities futures contract, other than one that isunconditional contract, begin counting on theholding period is more than 1 year and you have a section 1256 contract, includes your holdingday after you received title to it or on the daya long-term capital gain or loss. period for the futures contract if you held theafter you took possession of it and assumed the
contract as a capital asset.burdens and privileges of ownership, whicheverSecurities traded on an established market.
happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-For securities traded on an established securi- Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6session of real property under an option agree-ties market, your holding period begins the day months or less. If you hold stock in a regu-ment is not enough to start the holding period.after the trade date you bought the securities, lated investment company (commonly calledThe holding period cannot start until there is anand ends on the trade date you sold them. a mutual fund) or real estate investment trustactual contract of sale. The holding period of the (REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at aDo not confuse the trade date with the seller cannot end before that time. loss (other than under a periodic liquidationsettlement date, which is the date by
plan), special rules may apply.Real property repossessed. If you sell realwhich the stock must be delivered andCAUTION
!
property but keep a security interest in it, andpayment must be made. Capital gain distributions received. The
then later repossess the property under the loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-
terms of the sales contract, your holding period dends you received, as explained next) isExample. You are a cash method, calendar for a later sale includes the period you held the treated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- property before the original sale and the period of any capital gain distributions you receivedcember 28, 2001. According to the rules of the after the repossession. Your holding period and your share of any undistributed capitalstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery does not include the time between the original gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalof the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on sale and the repossession. That is, it does not loss.January 3, 2002. You received payment of the include the period during which the first buyersale price on that same day. Report your gain on Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundheld the property.your 2001 return, even though you received the stock. If you received exempt-interest divi-
payment in 2002. The gain is long term or short Stock dividends. The holding period for stock dends on the stock, at least part of your loss is
term depending on whether you held the stock you received as a taxable stock dividend begins disallowed. You can deduct only the amount of
more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on on the date of distribution. loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-
December 28. If you had sold the stock at a loss, The holding period for new stock you re- dends.
you would also report it on your 2001 return. ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on
the same day as the holding period of the old Nonbusiness Bad DebtsU.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inperiod of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or If someone owes you money that you cannotauction on the basis of yield starts the day after securities in a controlled corporation. collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tothe Secretary of the Treasury, through news
deduct the amount owed to you when you figurereleases, gives notification of acceptance to Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-successful bidders. The holding period of U.S. for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same less.Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- day as the holding period of the underlying There are two kinds of bad debts —  busi-ing on a subscription basis at a specified yield stock. The holding period for stock acquired ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,starts the day after the subscription is submitted. through the exercise of stock rights begins on generally, is one that comes from operating yourthe date the right was exercised.Automatic investment service. In determin- trade or business and is deductible as a busi-
ing your holding period for shares bought by the ness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusinessSection 1256 contracts. Gains or losses on
bank or other agent, full shares are considered bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-section 1256 contracts open at the end of the
bought first and any fractional shares are con- tal losses.year, or terminated during the year, are treated
sidered bought last. Your holding period starts as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-
on the day after the bank ’s purchase date. If a Example. An architect made personal loansless of how long the contracts were held. See
share was bought over more than one purchase to several friends who were not clients. SheSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-
date, your holding period for that share is a split could not collect on some of these loans. Theylier.
holding period. A part of the share is considered are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts
Option exercised. Your holding period forto have been bought on each date that stock because the architect was not in the business of
property you acquire when you exercise an op-was bought by the bank with the proceeds of lending money and the loans do not have any
tion begins the day after you exercise the option.available funds. relationship to her business.
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment Wash sales. Your holding period for substan- Business bad debts. For information on busi-
property in a trade for other investment property tially identical stock or securities you acquire in a ness bad debts of an empl oyee, see Publication
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
529. For information on other business bad debt deduction for your payments on the debt mortgage, you may have to make up the dif fer-
debts, see chapter 11 of Publication 535. unless you can show either that your reason for ence. You can take a bad debt deduction  for the
making the guarantee was to protect your in- amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be vestment or that you entered the guarantee cannot collect it from the buyer.
deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- transaction with a profit motive. If you make the
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly Worthless securities. If you own securitiesguarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-
worthless nonbusiness debt. that become totally worthless, you can take aceive any consideration in return, your pay-
deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seements are considered a gift and you cannot takeGenuine debt required. A debt must be Worthless Securities under What Is a Sale ora deduction.genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is Trade, earlier in this chapter.genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-
Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted acipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of bad debt and in a later tax year you recoverguaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora-money. (collect) all or part of it, you may have to includetion received. The corporation defaulted on the the amount you recover in your gross income.Loan or gift. For a bad debt, you must show loan and Henry made full payment. Because he However, you can exclude from gross incomethat there was an intention at the time of the guaranteed the loan to protect his investment in the amount recovered up to the amount of thetransaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness deduction that did not reduce your tax in the yearlend money to a relative or friend with the under- bad debt deduction. deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-
ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a bad Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers. How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at ness bad debts as short-term capital losses ondebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela- their local credit union. John does not pay the Schedule D (Form 1040).tionship between you and the person or organi- note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter thezation that owes you the money. note. However, since he did not enter into the name of the debtor and “statement attached” inWhen minor children borrow from their par- guarantee agreement to protect an investment column (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt inents to pay for their basic needs, there is no or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt parentheses in column (f). Use a separate linegenuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted deduction. for each bad debt.for such a loan. For each bad debt, attach a statement toDeductible in year paid. Unless you have
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a your return that contains:rights against the borrower, discussed next, a
bad debt, you must have a basis in it —  that is, payment you make on a loan you guaranteed is 1) A description of the debt, including theyou must have already included the amount in deductible in the year you make the payment. amount, and the date it became due,your income or loaned out your cash. For exam-
Rights against the borrower. When youple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for 2) The name of the debtor, and any businessmake payment on a loan that you guaranteed,court-ordered child support not paid to you by or family relationship between you and theyou may have the right to take the place of theyour former spouse. If you are a cash method debtor,lender (the right of subrogation). The debt istaxpayer (most individuals are), you generally
then owed to you. If you have this right, or some 3) The efforts you made to collect the debt,cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid
other right to demand payment from the bor- andsalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,
rower, you cannot take a bad debt deductionand similar items. 4) Why you decided the debt was worthless.until these rights become totally worthless. For example, you could show that the bor-When deductible. You can take a bad debt rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-Debts owed by political parties. You cannotdeduction only in the year the debt becomes gal action to collect would probably nottake a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for anyworthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is result in payment of any part of the debt.worthless debt owed to you by:due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt
becomes worthless when there is no longer any 1) A political party, S corporation shareholder. If you are achance that the amount owed will be paid. shareholder in an S corporation, your share of2) A national, state, or local committee of aIt is not necessary to go to court if you can any nonbusiness bad debt will be shown on apolitical party, orshow that a judgment from the court would be schedule attached to your Schedule K– 1 (Formuncollectible. You must only show that you have 3) A committee, association, or organization 1120S) that you receive from the corporation.taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. that either accepts contributions or spendsBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- money to influence elections. Short Salesdence of the worthlessness of at least a part of
an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
Mechanics’ and suppliers ’ liens. Workers A short sale occurs when you agree to sellIf your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a
and material suppliers may file liens against property you do not own (or own but do not wishfinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or
property because of debts owed by a builder or to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier.
contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-
1) You sell short. You borrow property andFiling a claim for refund. If you do not sure and loss of your property, you are entitled
deliver it to a buyer.deduct a bad debt on your original return for the to repayment from the builder or contractor. If
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debt 2) You close the sale. At a later date, youfor a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do deduction. either buy substantially identical propertythis, use Form 1040X to amend your return for and deliver it to the lender or make deliv-Insolvency of contractor. You can take athe year the debt became worthless. You must ery out of property that you held at thebad debt deduction for the amount you depositfile it within 7 years from the date your original time of the sale.with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years
vent and you are unable to recover your deposit. You do not realize gain or loss until delivery offrom the date you paid the tax, whichever is
If the deposit is for work unrelated to your trade property to close the short sale. You will have alater. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless
or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc- capital gain or loss if the property used to closesecurities generally must be filed within 3 years
tion. the short sale is a capital asset.from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the
date the tax is paid.) For more information about
Secondary liability on home mortgage. If Exception if property becomes worthless.filing a claim, see Publication 556, Examination
the buyer of your home assumes your mort- A different rule applies if the property sold shortof Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re-
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re- becomes substantially worthless. In that case,fund.
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer you must recognize gain as if the short sale were
Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt defaults on the loan and the house is then sold closed when the property became substantially
that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad for less than the amount outstanding on the worthless.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for constructive sales. Entering securities are also subject to wash sale treat- Exception. If you close the short sale within
ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later. 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay ininto a short sale may cause you to be treated as
lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to thehaving made a constructive sale of property. In Mixed straddles. Under certain elections, extent the payments are more than the amountthat case, you will have to recognize gain on the you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short that you receive as ordinary income from thedate of the constructive sale. For details, see sale as long term under the special rule. These lender of the stock for the use of collateral withConstructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- elections are for positions that are part of a the short sale. This exception does not apply tositions, earlier. mixed straddle. See Other elections under payments in place of extraordinary dividends.Mixed Straddles, later, for more informationExample. On May 1, 2001, you bought 100 about these elections. Extraordinary dividends. If the amount ofshares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.
any dividend you receive on a share of preferredOn September 3, 2001, you sold short 100
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofshares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You Reporting Substitute Payments other stock) of the amount realized on the shortmade no other transactions involving Baker
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-stock for the rest of 2001 and the first 30 days of If any broker transferred your securities for use
nary dividend.2002. Your short sale is treated as a construc- in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-
ceived certain substitute dividend payments ontive sale of an appreciated financial position
Wash Salesyour behalf while the short sale was open, thatbecause a sale of your Baker stock on the date
broker must give you a Form 1099 –MISC or aof the short sale would have resulted in a gain.
You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradessimilar statement, reporting the amount of theseYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gain
of stock or securities in a wash sale.payments. Form 1099 – MISC must be used forfrom the constructive sale and your new holding
A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradethose substitute payments totaling $10 or moreperiod in the Baker stock begins on September stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysthat are known on the payment’s record date to3. before or after the sale you:be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-
tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution, 1) Buy substantially identical stock or securi-or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orShort-Term or Long-Term ties,that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do notCapital Gain or Loss
treat these substitute payments as dividends or 2) Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
As a general rule, you determine whether you interest. Instead, report the substitute payments curities in a fully taxable trade, or
have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss shown on Form 1099– MISC as “Other income” 3) Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-on a short sale by the amount of time you actu- on line 21 of Form 1040. stantially identical stock or securities.ally hold the property eventually delivered to the
Substitute payment. A substitute paymentlender to close the short sale. If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-
means a payment in lieu of: tion you control buys substantially identical
Example. Even though you do not own any stock, you also have a wash sale.
1) Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thatstock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell If your loss was disallowed because of thehas accrued while the short sale was100 shares of it, which you borrow from your wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theopen, andbroker. After 13 months, when the price of the cost of the new stock or securities. The result is
stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace your basis in the new stock or securities. This2) A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after
Corporation stock and immediately deliver them adjustment postpones the loss deduction untilthe transfer of stock for use in a short sale
the disposition of the new stock or securities.to your broker to close out the short sale. Your and before the closing of the short sale.
Your holding period for the new stock or securi-loss is a short-term capital loss because your
ties begins on the same day as the holdingholding period for the delivered property is less
period of the stock or securities sold.than one day. Short Sale Expenses
Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stockSpecial rules. Special rules may apply to If you borrow stock to make a short sale, you for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 andgains and losses from short sales of stocks, may have to remit to the lender payments in lieu within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 sharessecurities, and commodity futures (other than of the dividends distributed while you maintain of the same stock for $800. Because you boughtcertain straddles) if you held or acquired prop- your short position. You can deduct these pay- substantially identical stock, you cannot deducterty substantially identical property to that sold ments only if you hold the short sale open at your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you addshort. But if the amount of property you sold least 46 days (more than 1 year in the case of an the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of theshort is more than the amount of that substan- extraordinary dividend as defined below) and new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newtially identical property, the special rules do not you itemize your deductions. stock, which is $1,050.apply to the gain or loss on the excess. You deduct these expenses as investment
interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-Gains and holding period. If you held the Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.substantially identical property for 1 year or less poration that has an incentive pay plan. Under
If you close the short sale by the 45th dayon the date of the short sale, or if you acquired this plan, you are given 10 shares of the
after the date of the short sale (1 year or less inthe substantially identical property after the corporation’s stock as a bonus award. You in-
the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-short sale and by the date of closing the short clude the fair market value of the stock in your
not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividendsale, then: gross income as additional pay. You later sell
that you make to the lender. Instead, you must these shares at a loss. If you receive another
increase the basis of the stock used to close theRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close the bonus award of substantially identical stock
short sale by that amount.short sale is a short-term capital gain, and within 30 days of the sale, you cannot deduct
To determine how long a short sale is kept your loss on the sale.Rule 2. The holding period of the substantially open, do not include any period during whichidentical property begins on the date of the you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a Options and futures contracts. The washclosing of the short sale or on the date of the contractual obligation to buy substantially identi- sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades ofsale of this property, whichever comes first. cal stock or securities. contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or
If your payment is made for a liquidating securities. They do not apply to losses from
Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, you distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if sales or trades of commodity futures contracts
held substantially identical property for more you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu- and foreign currencies. See Coordination of
than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short tion issued on the borrowed stock during your Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under
sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held short position, you have a capital expense. You Straddles, later, for information about the tax
the property used to close the sale for 1 year or must add the payment to the cost of the stock treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-
less. Certain losses on short sales of stock or sold short. tions in a straddle.
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125 beginning 6 months before the sale of the inte r-
sell common stock at a loss and, at the same + $250). est and ending 6 months after that sale, you
time, buy warrants for common stock of the acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or
Example 2. You bought 100 shares of Msame corporation. But if you sell warrants at a any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is
stock on September 24, 2000. On February 1,loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are
2001, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply discussed in chapter 1.
On each of the 4 days from February 13, 2001,only if the warrants and stock are considered
How to report. Report a wash sale or trade onto February 16, 2001, you bought 50 shares ofsubstantially identical, as discussed next.
line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),substantially identical stock. You cannot deduct
whichever is appropriate. Show the full amountSubstantially identical. In determining your $1,000 loss. You must add half the disal-
of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On thewhether stock or securities are substantially lowed loss ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares
next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) andidentical, you must consider all the facts and bought on February 13. Add the other half
the amount of the loss not allowed as a positivecircumstances in your particular case. Ordina- ($500) to the basis of the shares bought on
amount in column (f).rily, stocks or securities of one corporation are February 14.
not considered substantially identical to stocks Loss and gain on same day. Loss from aor securities of another corporation. However, wash sale of one block of stock or securities
Securities Futures Contractsthey may be substantially identical in some cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalcases. For example, in a reorganization, the A securities futures contract is a contract of saleblocks sold the same day.stocks and securities of the predecessor and for future delivery of a single security or of asuccessor corporations may be substantially narrow-based security index.Example. During 1996, you bought 100identical. Gain or loss from the contract generally willshares of X stock on each of three occasions.Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor- be treated in a manner similar to gain or lossYou paid $158 a share for the first block of 100poration are not ordinarily considered substan- from transactions in the underlying security. Thisshares, $100 a share for the second block, andtially identical to the common stock of the same means gain or loss from the sale or exchange of$95 a share for the third block. On December 23,corporation. However, where the bonds or pre- the contract will generally have the same char-2001, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 aferred stock are convertible into common stock acter as gain or loss from transactions in theshare. On January 6, 2002, you bought 250of the same corporation, the relative values, property to which the contract relates. Any capi-shares of identical X stock. You cannot deductprice changes, and other circumstances may tal gain or loss on a sale or exchange of athe loss of $33 a share on the first block becausemake these bonds or preferred stock and the contract to sell property will be consideredwithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughtcommon stock substantially identical. For exam- short-term, regardless of how long you hold the250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youple, preferred stock is substantially identical to contract. These contracts are not section 1256cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofthe common stock if the preferred stock: contracts (unless they are dealer securities fu-the second and third blocks of stock by this loss.
tures contracts).1) Is convertible into common stock, Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a
dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a2) Has the same voting rights as the common Optionstransaction made in the ordinary course of busi-stock,
ness. Options are generally subject to the rules de-3) Is subject to the same dividend restric-
scribed in this section. If the option is part of ations, Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to a
straddle, the loss deferral rules covered laterloss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter4) Trades at prices that do not vary signifi- under Straddles may also apply. For specialinto another short sale of, substantially identicalcantly from the conversion ratio, and rules that apply to nonequity options and dealerstock or securities within a period beginning 30
equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts5) Is unrestricted as to convertibility. days before the date the short sale is complete
Marked to Market, earlier.and ending 30 days after that date.
Gain or loss from the sale or trade of anFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a shortMore or less stock bought than sold. If the option to buy or sell property that is a capitalsale is considered complete on the date thenumber of shares of substantially identical stock asset in your hands, or would be if you acquiredshort sale is entered into, if: or securities you buy within 30 days before or it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, orafter the sale is either more or less than the 1) On that date, you own stock or securities would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss isnumber of shares you sold, you must determine identical to those sold short (or by that ordinary gain or loss.the particular shares to which the wash sale date you enter into a contract or option torules apply. You do this by matching the shares acquire that stock or those securities), and Example 1. You purchased an option to buybought with an equal number of the shares sold. 100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stock2) You later deliver the stock or securities toMatch the shares bought in the same order that increases in value and you sell the option forclose the short sale.you bought them, beginning with the first shares more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalbought. The shares or securities so matched are Otherwise, a short sale is not considered gain because the stock underlying the optionsubject to the wash sale rules. complete until the property is delivered to close would have been a capital asset in your hands.
the sale.Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M Example 2. The facts are the same as instock on September 24, 2000, for $5,000. On Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of Example 1, except that the stock decreases inDecember 21, 2000, you bought 50 shares of stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of value and you sell the option for less than yousubstantially identical stock for $2,750. On De- the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7, paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.cember 28, 2000, you bought 25 shares of sub- you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January Option not exercised. If you have a loss be-You close the short sale on November 17 by4, 2001, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you cause you did not exercise an option to buy ordelivering the shares bought on June 2. Youbought in September. You have a $1,000 loss sell, you are considered to have sold or tradedcannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)on the sale. However, because you bought 75 the option on the date that it expired.because the date of entering into the short saleshares of substantially identical stock within 30 (October 6) is considered the date the sale isdays of the sale, you cannot deduct the loss Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,complete for wash sale purposes and you($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss how you report your gain or loss depends onbought substantially identical stock within 30($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the whether it was exercised.days from that date.50 shares bought on December 21, 2000, is If you are not in the business of writing op-
increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750 Residual Interests in a REMIC. The wash tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-
disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your ties, commodities, or commodit y futures is not
is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25 residual interest in a real estate mortgage in- exercised, the amount you receive is a
shares bought on December 28, 2000, is in- vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period short-term capital gain.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop- ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. If The writer adds the amount received from
erty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts, you have held the underlying stock for 1 year or writing the options to the amount realized
later. less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the from selling the stock.
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a 4) Section 1256 contracts. The facts are theSection 1256 contract options. Gain or loss short-term capital gain. The same is true if you same as in (1), except the options wereis recognized on the exercise of an option on a buy the underlying stock after you buy the put nonequity options, subject to the rules forsection 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your section 1256 contracts. If you were aare defined under Section 1256 Contracts holding period for the underlying stock begins on buyer of the options, you would recognizeMarked to Market, earlier. the earliest of: a short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a
Cash settlement option. A cash settlement long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you1) The date you dispose of the stock,
option is treated as an option to buy or sell were a writer of the options, you would
2) The date you exercise the put,property. A cash settlement option is any option recognize a short-term capital gain of
that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled $1,600, and a long-term capital gain of3) The date you sell the put, or
in, cash or property other than the underlying $2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts
4) The date the put expires.property. Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor-
mation.How to report. Gain or loss from the closing or Writers of calls and puts. If you write (grant)
expiration of an option that is not a section 1256 a call or a put, do not include the amount you
contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands, Straddlesreceive for writing it in your income at the time of
is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040). receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until: This section discusses the loss deferral rulesIf an option you purchased expired, enter the
that apply to the sale or other disposition ofexpiration date in column (c) and write “Expired” 1) Your obligation expires,
positions in a straddle. These rules do not applyin column (d). 2) You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in the to the straddles described under Exceptions,If an option that you wrote expired, enter the case of a put, the underlying stock when later.expiration date in column (b) and write “Expired” the option is exercised, or A straddle is any set of offsetting positions onin column (e).
personal property. For example, a straddle may3) You engage in a closing transaction.
consist of a security and a written option to buyIf your obligation expires, the amount you and a purchased option to sell on the sameCalls and Puts received for writing the call or put is short-term number of shares of the security, with the samecapital gain.Calls and puts are options on securities and are exercise price and period.If a call you write is exercised and you sellcovered by the rules just discussed for options.
Personal property. This is any property of athe underlying stock, increase your amount real-The following are specific applications of these
type that is actively traded. It includes stockized on the sale of the stock by the amount yourules to holders and writers of options that are
options and contracts to buy stock, but generallyreceived for the call when figuring your gain orbought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
does not include stock.loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termnational securities exchange, such as the Chi-
depending on your holding period of the stock.cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section Straddle rules for stock. Although stock isIf a put you write is exercised and you buy1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, for generally excluded from the definition of per-the underlying stock, decrease your basis in thespecial rules that may apply to nonequity op- sonal property when applying the straddle rules,stock by the amount you received for the put.tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are it is included in the following two situations. Your holding period for the stock begins on thealso presented in Table 4– 1.
date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the 1) The stock is part of a straddle in which atCalls and puts are issued by writers (grant-
put. least one of the offsetting positions is ei-ors) to holders for cash premiums. They are
If you enter into a closing transaction by ther:ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.
paying an amount equal to the value of the callA call option is the right to buy from the
a) An option to buy or sell the stock oror put at the time of the payment, the differencewriter of the option, at any time before a speci-
substantially identical stock or securi-between the amount you pay and the amountfied future date, a stated number of shares of
ties,you receive for the call or put is a short-termstock at a specified price. Conversely, a put
capital gain or loss.option is the right to sell to the writer, at any time b) A securities futures contract on the
before a specified future date, a stated number stock or substantially identical stock orExamples of non-dealer transactions.of shares at a specified price. securities, or
1) Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- c) A position on substantially similar or re-Holders of calls and puts. If you buy a call or sued on April 8, 2001, for $4,000. These lated property (other than stock).a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital equity options expired in December 2001,expenditure. without being exercised. If you were a 2) The stock is in a corporation formed orIf you sell the call or the put before you holder (buyer) of the options, you would availed of to take positions in personalexercise it, the difference between its cost and recognize a short-term capital loss of property that offset positions taken by anythe amount you receive for it is either a $4,000. If you were a writer of the options, shareholder.long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de- you would recognize a short-term capitalpending on how long you held it. gain of $4,000. Position. A position is an interest in personalIf the option expires, its cost is either a
property. A position can be a forward or futureslong-term or short-term capital loss, depending 2) Closing transaction. The facts are the
contract, or an option.on your holding period, which ends on the expi- same as in (1), except that on May 10,
An interest in a loan that is denominated in aration date. 2001, the options were sold for $6,000. If
foreign currency is treated as a position in thatIf you exercise a call, add its cost to the basis you were the holder of the options who
currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put, sold them, you would recognize a
rency for which there is an active interbank mar-reduce your amount realized on the sale of the short-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
ket is considered to be actively-traded personalunderlying stock by the cost of the put when were the writer of the options and you
property. See also Foreign currency contractfiguring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on the bought them back, you would recognize a
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-sale of the underlying stock is long term or short short-term capital loss of $2,000.
ket, earlier.term depending on your holding period for the 3) Exercise. The facts are the same as inunderlying stock. (1), except that the options were exercised Offsetting position. This is a position that
Put option as short sale. Buying a put op- on May 27, 2001. The buyer adds the cost substantially reduces any risk of loss you may
tion is generally treated as a short sale, and the of the options to the basis of the stock have from holding another position. H owever, if
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos- bought through the exercise of the options. a position is part of a straddle that is not an
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The amount of gain realized on a position
if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has
been realized, but not recognized.
Example. On July 1, 2001, you entered into
a straddle. On December 16, 2001, you closed
one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.
On December 31, 2001, the end of your tax
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750
in the offsetting open position. On your 2001
return, your deductible loss on the position you
closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).
You must carry forward to 2002 the unused loss
of $12,750.
Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-
ply to:
1) A straddle that is an identified straddle at
the end of the tax year,
2) Certain straddles consisting of qualified
covered call options and the stock to be
purchased under the options,
3) Hedging transactions, described earlier
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market, and
4) Straddles consisting entirely of section
1256 contracts, as described earlier
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market (but see Identified straddle, next).
Identified straddle. Losses from positions
in an identified straddle are deferred until you
dispose of all the positions in the straddle.
Any straddle (other than a straddle described
in (2) or (3) above) is an identified straddle if all
of the following conditions exist.
1) You clearly identified the straddle on your
records before the close of the day on
which you acquired it.
2) All of the original positions that you identify
were acquired on the same day.
Table 4–1. Puts and Calls
Puts
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised
Expires
Is sold by the holder
Reduce your amount realized
from sale of the underlying
stock by the cost of the put.
Report the cost of the put as
a capital loss.*
Report the difference between
the cost of the put and the
amount you receive for it as a
capital gain or loss.*
Reduce your basis in the
stock you buy by the amount
you received for the put.
Report the amount you
received for the put as a
short-term capital gain.
This does not affect you. (But
if you buy back the put,
report the difference between
the amount you pay and the
amount you received for the
put as a short-term capital
gain or loss.)
Calls
When a call:
Add the cost of the call to
your basis in the stock
purchased.
Report the cost of the call as
a capital loss on the date it
expires.*
Report the difference between
the cost of the call and the
amount you receive for it as a
capital gain or loss.*
Increase your amount realized
on sale of the stock by the
amount you received for the
call.
Report the amount you
received for the call as a
short-term capital gain.
This does not affect you. (But
if you buy back the call,
report the difference between
the amount you pay and the
amount you received for the
call as a short-term capital
gain or loss.)
If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised
Expires
Is sold by the holder
* See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your
gain or loss is short term or long term.
3) All of the positions included in item (2)identified straddle (described later), do not treat 5) The aggregate margin requirement for the
were disposed of on the same day duringpositions is lower than the sum of the mar-it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
the tax year, or none of the positions weregin requirements for each position if heldidentified straddle.
disposed of by the end of the tax year.separately.Presumed offsetting positions. If you es-
4) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-tablish two or more positions, an offsetting posi- Related persons. To determine if two or dle.tion will be presumed under any of the following more positions are offsetting, you will be treated
conditions, unless otherwise rebutted. as holding any position that your spouse holds Qualified covered call options and op-
during the same period. If you take into account tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the1) The positions are established in the same part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by loss deferral rules for straddles if both of thepersonal property (or in a contract for this a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or following are true.property), and the value of one or more trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-
positions varies inversely with the value of tion. 1) All of the offsetting positions consist of one
one or more of the other positions. or more qualified covered call options and
the stock to be purchased from you under2) The positions are in the same personal Loss Deferral Rules the options.property, even if this property is in a sub-
stantially changed form, and the positions’ 2) The straddle is not part of a larger strad-Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-
values vary inversely as described in the dle.tion of one or more positions only to the extent
first condition. that the loss is more than any unrecognized gain But see Special year-end rule, later, for an ex-
you have on offsetting positions. Unused losses ception.3) The positions are in debt instruments with are treated as sustained in the next tax year. A qualified covered call option is any optiona similar maturity, and the positions’ val-
you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stockues vary inversely as described in the first
you acquire in connection with granting the op-Unrecognized gain. This is:condition.
tion), but only if all of the following are true.4) The positions are sold or marketed as off- 1) The amount of gain you would have had
setting positions, whether or not the posi- on an open position if you had sold it on 1) The option is traded on a national securi-
tions are called a straddle, spread, the last business day of the tax year at its ties exchange or other market approved by
butterfly, or any similar name. fair market value, and the Secretary of the Treasury.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The option is granted more than 30 days Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-
1) The qualified covered call options arebefore its expiration date. sition of less than all of the positions of a strad-
closed or the stock is disposed of at a loss dle (your loss position) to the extent that any3) The option is not a deep-in-the-money op- during any tax year. unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year intion. one or more of the following positions is more2) Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on
4) You are not an options dealer who granted than the amount of any loss disallowed underthe options is includible in gross income in
the option in connection with your activity Rule 1:a later tax year.
of dealing in options.
3) The stock or options were held less than 1) Successor positions,5) Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or 30 days after the closing of the options or
2) Offsetting positions to the loss position, orloss. the disposition of the stock.
3) Offsetting positions to any successor posi-A deep-in-the-money option is an option
tion.with a strike price lower than the lowest qualified
benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at How To Report Gains
Successor position. A successor positionwhich the option is to be exercised. The LQB is and Losses (Form 6781)
is a position that is or was at any time offsettingthe highest available strike price that is less than
to a second position, if both of the followingReport each position (whether or not it is part ofthe applicable stock price. However, the LQB for
a straddle) on which you have unrecognized conditions are met.an option with a term of more than 90 days and a
gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofstrike price of more than $50 is the second
1) The second position was offsetting to thethis unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.highest available strike price that is less than the
loss position that was sold.Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andapplicable stock price. Strike prices are listed in
losses on straddles before entering thesethe financial section of many newspapers. 2) The successor position is entered into dur-amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aThe availability of strike prices for equity op- ing a period beginning 30 days before, andcopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.tions with flexible terms does not affect the de- ending 30 days after, the sale of the loss
termination of the LQB for an option that is not position.
an equity option with flexible terms. Coordination of Loss DeferralThe applicable stock price for any stock for Example 1. On November 1, 2001, you en-Rules and Wash Sale Ruleswhich an option has been granted is: tered into offsetting long and short positions in
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any non-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,1) The closing price of the stock on the most disposition of a position or positions of a strad- 2001, you disposed of the long position at a $10recent day on which that stock was traded dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then loss. On November 14, 2001, you entered into abefore the date on which the option was apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if new long position (successor position) that isgranted, or stocks or securities make up a position that is offsetting to the retained short position, but that
part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle2) The opening price of the stock on the day is not substantially identical to the long position
does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.on which the option was granted, but only disposed of on November 12, 2001. You held
if that price is greater than 110% of the both positions through year end, at which timeRule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-price determined in (1). there was $10 of unrecognized gain in the suc-sition of shares of stock or securities that make cessor long position and no unrecognized gainIf the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the up the positions of a straddle if, within a period in the offsetting short position. Under these cir-LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo- cumstances, the entire $10 loss will be disal-applicable stock price. If the applicable stock sition and ending 30 days after that date, you lowed for 2001 because there is $10 ofprice is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated as acquired substantially identical stock or securi- unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-not less than an amount that is $10 below the ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the tion.applicable stock price. following tax year, subject to any further applica-
tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also Example 2. The facts are the same as inExample. On May 13, 2001, you held XYZ apply if you entered into a contract or option to Example 1, except that at year end you have $4stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call acquire the stock or securities within the time of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-option with a strike price of $120. The closing period described above. See Loss carryover, tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingprice of one share of XYZ stock on May 12, later, for more information about how to treat the short position. Under these circumstances, the2001, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/ loss in the following tax year. entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2001 be-September call options offered on May 13,
cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized2001, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125, Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se-
gain in the successor long position and offset-$130, and $135. Because the option has a term curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any
ting short position.of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the losses you sustained in the ordinary course of
second highest strike price that is less than your business.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in$130.25, the applicable stock price. The call
Example 1, except that at year end you have $8Example. You are not a dealer in stock oroption is a deep-in-the-money option because
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-securities. On December 2, 2001, you boughtits strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,
tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingstock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-the option is not a qualified covered call option,
short position. Under these circumstances, $8 ofsetting put option. On December 13, 2001, thereand the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out
the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed forwas $20 of unrealized gain in the put option andthe option or the stock at a loss during the year.
2001 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainyou sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-Capital loss on qualified covered call op- in the successor long position.ber 16, 2001, the value of the put option hadtions. If you hold stock and you write a quali- declined, eliminating all unrealized gain in thefied covered call option on that stock with a Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed lossposition. On December 16, 2001, you bought astrike price less than the applicable stock price, that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,second XX stock position that is substantiallytreat any loss from the option as long-term capi- you must carry it over to the next tax year andidentical to the XX stock you sold on Decembertal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.13, 2001. At the end of the year there is noon the sale or exchange of the stock would be For example, a loss disallowed in 2000 underunrecognized gain in the put option or in the XXtreated as long-term capital gain. The holding Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2001, unless thestock. Under these circumstances, the $20 lossperiod of the stock does not include any period substantially identical stock or securities (whichwill be disallowed for 2001 under Rule 1 be-during which you are the writer of the option. caused the loss to be disallowed in 2000) werecause, within a period beginning 30 days before
Special year-end rule. The loss deferral disposed of during 2001. In addition, the carry-December 13, 2001, and ending 30 days after
rules for straddles apply if all of the following are over loss will not be allowed in 2001 if Rule 1 orthat date, you bought stock substantially identi-
true. Rule 2 disallows it.cal to the XX stock you sold.
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. The facts are the same as in the following discussions, report your gain or loss as
1) You held (directly or indirectly) one orexample under Rule 1 above, except that on indicated in those discussions. If you do not
more offsetting positions to the loss posi-December 31, 2002, you sell the XX stock at a make any of the elections, report your gain or
tion on the date you entered into the loss$20 loss and there is $40 of unrecognized gain loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of
position.in the put option. Under these circumstances, the section 1256 component of the straddle,
you cannot deduct in 2002 either the $20 loss enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or2) You would have treated all gain or loss on
disallowed in 2001 or the $20 loss you incurred your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Formone or more of the straddle positions as
for the December 31, 2002, sale of XX stock. 6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13long-term capital gain or loss if you had
Rule 1 does not apply because the substantially (Part II).sold these positions on the day you en-
identical XX stock was sold during the year and tered into the loss position. Mixed straddle election (Election A). Youno substantially identical stock or securities
can elect out of the marked to market rules,were bought within the 61 – day period. How- Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to a discussed under Section 1256 Contractsever, Rule 2 does apply because there is $40 of loss position that is part of a mixed straddle and Marked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256unrecognized gain in the put option, an offset- that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixed contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In-ting position to the loss positions. straddle is a straddle: stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will
Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss apply to these contracts. However, if you make1) That is not part of a larger straddle,position would have resulted in a capital loss, this election for an option on a section 1256
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on 2) In which all positions are held as capital contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed
the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the assets, earlier under Options will apply, subject to the
gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi- gain and loss rules for straddles.3) In which at least one (but not all) of thenary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a You can make this election if:positions is a section 1256 contract, andloss position (in the case of section 1256 con-
1) At least one (but not all) of the positions istracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term 4) For which the mixed straddle election
a section 1256 contract, andcapital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss, (Election A, discussed later) has not been
you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule, made. 2) Each position forming part of the straddleeven if you would treat any gain or loss on any is clearly identified as being part of thatTreat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andsuccessor positions as 100% long-term or straddle on the day the first section 125640% short-term capital loss, if all of the followingshort-term capital gain or loss. contract forming part of the straddle is ac-conditions apply.
quired.Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad- 1) Gain or loss from the sale of one or moredle losses and wash sales do not apply to the If you make this election, it will apply for allof the straddle positions that are sectionfollowing loss situations. later years as well. It cannot be revoked without1256 contracts would be considered gain
the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,or loss from the sale or exchange of a1) Loss on the sale of one or more positions check box A of Form 6781. Do not report thecapital asset.in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans- section 1256 component in Part I.actions are described under Section 1256 2) The sale of no position in the straddle,
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.) Other elections. You can avoid the 60%other than a section 1256 contract, would
long-term capital loss treatment required for aresult in a long-term capital gain or loss.2) Loss on the sale of a loss position in a non-section 1256 loss position that is part of amixed straddle account. (See the discus- 3) You have not made a straddle-by-straddle mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choosesion later on the mixed straddle account identification election (Election B) or mixed either of the two following elections to offsetelection.) straddle account election (Election C), gains and losses for these positions. both discussed later.3) Loss on the sale of a position that is part of
1) Election B. Make a separate identificationa straddle consisting only of section 1256
of the positions of each mixed straddle forcontracts. Example. On March 1, 2001, you entered
which you are electing this treatment (theinto a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
straddle-by-straddle identification method).2001, you entered into an offsetting short gold
regulated futures contract. You did not make an 2) Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-Holding Period and
election to offset gains and losses from positions count for a class of activities for whichLoss Treatment Rules in a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2001, you gains and losses will be recognized and
disposed of the long forward contract at a loss.The holding period of a position in a straddle offset on a periodic basis.
Because the gold forward contract was part of agenerally begins no earlier than the date on These two elections are alternatives to themixed straddle and the disposition of thiswhich the straddle ends (the date you no longer mixed straddle election. You can choose onlynon-section 1256 position would not result inhold an offsetting position). This rule does not one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 tolong-term capital loss, the loss recognized onapply to any position you held more than 1 year indicate your election choice by checking box A,the termination of the gold forward contract willbefore you established the straddle. But see B, or C, whichever applies.be treated as a 60% long-term and 40%Exceptions, later.
short-term capital loss. Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-
Example. On March 6, 2000, you acquired tion (Election B). Under this election, you
Exceptions. The special holding period andgold. On January 4, 2001, you entered into an must clearly identify each position that is part of
loss treatment for straddle positions does notoffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu- the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:
apply to positions that:lated futures contract). On April 1, 2001, you
1) The close of the day the identified mixeddisposed of the short gold forward contract at no 1) Constitute part of a hedging transaction, straddle is established, orgain or loss. On April 8, 2001, you sold the gold
at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1 2) Are included in a straddle consisting only 2) The time the position is disposed of.
year or less before the offsetting short position of section 1256 contracts, or
If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddlewas entered into, the holding period for the gold 3) Are included in a mixed straddle account before the end of the day on which the straddlebegins on April 1, 2001, the date the straddle (Election C), discussed later. is established, this identification must be madeended. Gain recognized on the sale of the gold
by the time you dispose of the position. You arewill be treated as short-term capital gain.
presumed to have properly identified a mixed
Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale of straddle if independent verification is used.Mixed Straddles
one or more positions (the loss position) of a The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under
straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of the If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle this election depends on wh ich side of the strad-
following are true. and make one of the elections described in the dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the net
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain or loss from the straddle is due to the How to report and postpone gain. Report
1) The due date of your return for the imme- the entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated as
diately preceding tax year (without exten- To make the choice to postpone gain, enter60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40% sions), or “Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the lineshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain
directly below the line on which you reported theor loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the 2) 60 days after you entered into the first
gain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gainelection by checking box B. mixed straddle in the new class of activi-
you are postponing or expecting to postpone.ties.If the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec-
Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actualtion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-term You make the election on Form 6781 by postponed gain is different from the amount youcapital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss on checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in- report, file an amended return.Part I of Schedule D and identify the election. come tax return for the immediately preceding Also attach the following statements.For the specific application of the rules of this tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.
election, see regulations section 1.1092(b)– 3T. Report the annual account net gain or loss from 1) A “statement of election” that indicates youa mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781. are making an election under sectionExample. On April 1, you entered into a In addition, you must attach a statement to Form 1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code andnon-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec- 6781 specifically designating the class of activi- that includes the following information.tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec- ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-
lished.tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed a) A description of the securities sold, the
straddle. On April 8, you disposed of the For the specific application of the rules of this date of the sale, the amount realized on
non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the election, see regulations section 1.1092(b)– 4T. the sale, and the adjusted basis of the
section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under securities.Interest expense and carrying charges re-these circumstances, the $600 loss on the lating to mixed straddle account positions. b) The name of the ESOP or cooperativenon-section 1256 position will be offset against You cannot deduct interest and carrying to which the qualified securities werethe $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The charges that are allocable to any positions held sold.net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treated in a mixed straddle account. Treat these
c) For a sale that was part of a single,as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% charges as an adjustment to the annual account
interrelated trasaction under a prear-short-term capital gain because it is due to the net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-
ranged agreement between taxpayerssection 1256 contract. ately between the net short-term and the net
involving other sales of qualified securi-long-term capital gains or losses.Mixed straddle account (Election C). You ties, the names and identifying num-To find the amount of interest and carryingmay elect to establish one or more accounts for bers of the other taxpayers under thecharges that is not deductible and that must bedetermining gains and losses from all positions agreement and the number of sharesadded to the annual account net gain or loss,in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- sold by the other taxpayers.apply the rules described in chapter 3 underrate mixed straddle account for each separate Interest expense and carrying charges on strad-designated class of activities. 2) A notarized “statement of purchase”dles to the positions held in the mixed straddle describing the qualified replacement prop-Generally, you must determine gain or loss account. erty, date of purchase, and the cost of thefor each position in a mixed straddle account as
property and declaring the property to beof the close of each business day of the tax year. Sales of Stock to ESOPs qualified replacement property for theYou offset the net section 1256 contracts
or Certain Cooperatives qualified stock you sold. The statementagainst the net non-section 1256 positions to
must have been notarized no later than 30determine the “daily account net gain or loss.” If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3 days after the purchase. If you have notIf the daily account amount is due to years to an employee stock ownership plan yet purchased the qualified replacementnon-section 1256 positions, the amount is (ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative, property, you must attach the notarizedtreated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the you may be able to elect to postpone all or part “statement of purchase” to your income taxdaily account amount is due to section 1256 of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified return for the year following the electioncontracts, the amount is treated as 60% replacement property (certain securities) within year (or the election will not be valid).long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or the period that began 3 months before the sale
3) A verified written statement of the domes-loss. and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make
tic corporation whose employees are cov-the election, you must recognize gain on theOn the last business day of the tax year, you
ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,sale only to the extent the proceeds from thedetermine the “annual account net gain or loss”
or of any authorized officer of the coopera-sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-for each account by netting the daily account
tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-ment property.amounts for that account for the tax year. The
tions 4978 and 4979A of the InternalYou must reduce the basis of the replace-“total annual account net gain or loss ” is deter- Revenue Code on certain dispositions,ment property by any postponed gain. If youmined by netting the annual account amounts and prohibited allocations of the stock pur-dispose of any replacement property, you mayfor all mixed straddle accounts that you had chased by the ESOP or cooperative.have to recognize all of the postponed gain.established.
Generally, to qualify for the election theThe net amounts keep their long-term or
ESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of More information. For details, see sectionshort-term classification. However, no more
the outstanding stock of the corporation that 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Tempo-than 50% of the total annual account net gain for
issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali- rary Regulations section 1.1042– 1T.the tax year can be treated as long-term capital fied replacement property must have been is-gain. Any remaining gain is treated as sued by a domestic operating corporation.short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40% Rollover of Gain
of the total annual account net loss can be From PubliclyHow to make the election. You must maketreated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining Traded Securitiesthe election no later than the due date (includingloss is treated as long-term capital loss. extensions) for filing your tax return for the year
The election to establish one or more mixed You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainin which you sold the stock. If your original return
straddle accounts for each tax year must be gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.was filed on time, you may make the election on
made by the due date (without extensions) of This means that if you buy certain replacementan amended return filed no later than 6 months
property and make the choice described in thisyour income tax return for the immediately pre- after the due date of your return (excluding ex-
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new tensions). Print “Filed pursuant to section
class of activities during a tax year, you must You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis301.9100– 2” at the top of the amended return,
make the election for the new class of activities of the replacement property as described in Ba-and file it at the same address you used for your
by the later of either: sis of replacement property, later. Thisoriginal return.
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
postpones your gain until the year you dispose tensions). Print “Filed pursuant to section 2) It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets
of the replacement property. 301.9100 – 2” at the top of the amended return, in the active conduct of at least one quali-
You qualify to make this choice if you meet and file it at the same address you used for your fied trade or business, defined below.
all the following tests. original return.
Exception for SSBIC. Any specializedYour choice is revocable with the consent of
1) You sell publicly traded securities at a small business investment company (SSBIC) isthe IRS.
gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- treated as meeting the active business test. An
ties traded on an established securities SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensedGains on Qualifiedmarket. to operate under section 301(d) of the SmallSmall Business Stock Business Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
May 13, 1993.This section discusses two provisions of the law3) During the 60-day period beginning on the that may apply to gain from the sale or trade of Eligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor-date of the sale, you buy replacement qualified small business stock. You may qualify poration other than:property. This replacement property must for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.be either common stock or a partnership You may be able to exclude part of the gain 1) A Domestic International Sales Corpora-interest in a specialized small business from your income. tion (DISC) or a former DISC,investment company (SSBIC). This is
any partnership or corporation licensed by 2) A corporation that has made, or whoseQualified small business stock. This isthe Small Business Administration under subsidiary has made, an election understock that meets all the following tests.section 301(d) of the Small Business In- section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,
vestment Act of 1958, as in effect on May concerning the Puerto Rico and posses-1) It must be stock in a C corporation.
13, 1993. sion tax credit,2) It must have been originally issued after
3) A regulated investment company,August 10, 1993.Amount of gain recognized  If you make the
choice described in this section, you must rec- 4) A real estate investment trust (REIT),3) The corporation must have total gross as-
ognize gain only up to the following amount: sets of $50 million or less at all times after 5) A real estate mortgage investment conduitAugust 9, 1993, and before it was issued (REMIC),1) The amount realized on the sale, minus the stock. Its total gross assets immediately
6) A financial asset securitization investmentafter it issued the stock must also be $502) The cost of any common stock or partner-
trust (FASIT), ormillion or less.ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought
When figuring the corporation ’s totalduring the 60-day period beginning on the 7) A cooperative.gross assets, you must also count the as-date of sale (and did not previously take
sets of any predecessor of the corporation.into account on an earlier sale of publicly Qualified trade or business. This is anyIn addition, you must treat all corporationstraded securities). trade or business other than:that are members of the same parent-sub-If this amount is less than the amount of your sidiary controlled group as one corporation. 1) One involving services performed in thegain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, fields of health, law, engineering, architec-4) You must have acquired the stock at itssubject to the limit described next. If this amount ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-original issue, directly or through an under-is equal to or more than the amount of your gain, forming arts, consulting, athletics, financialwriter, in exchange for money or otheryou must recognize the full amount of your gain. services, or brokerage services,property (not including stock), or as pay forLimit on gain postponed. The amount of services provided to the corporation (other 2) One whose principal asset is the reputa-gain you can postpone each year is limited to the than services performed as an underwriter tion or skill of one or more employees,smaller of: of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
3) Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing,may also meet this test if you acquired it1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and investing, or similar business,from another person who met this test, orfile a separate return), or through a conversion or trade of qualified 4) Any farming business (including the busi-2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married and small business stock that you held. ness of raising or harvesting trees),file a separate return), minus the amount 5) The corporation must have met the active 5) Any business involving the production orof gain you postponed for all earlier years. business test, defined next, and must extraction of products for which percent-
have been a C corporation during substan- age depletion can be claimed, orBasis of replacement property. You must tially all the time you held the stock.subtract the amount of postponed gain from the 6) Any business of operating a hotel, motel,
basis of your replacement property. 6) Within the period beginning 2 years before restaurant, or similar business.
and ending 2 years after the stock wasHow to report and postpone gain. Report issued, the corporation cannot havethe entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or bought more than a de minimis amount ofline 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is Rollover of Gainits stock from you or a related party.appropriate. To make the choice to postpone
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capital7) Within the period beginning 1 year beforegain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of the
gain from the sale of qualified small businessand ending 1 year after the stock was is-line directly below the line on which you reported
stock held more than 6 months. This means that,sued, the corporation cannot have boughtthe gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed in
if you buy certain replacement stock and makemore than a de minimis amount of its stockcolumn (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).
the choice described in this section, you post-from anyone, unless the total value of theAlso, attach a schedule showing how you
pone part or all of your gain.stock it bought is 5% or less of the totalfigured the postponed gain, the name of the
value of all its stock. You postpone the gain by adjusting the basisSSBIC in which you purchased common stock
of the replacement stock as described in Basisor a partnership interest, the date of that For more information about tests 6 and 7, see of replacement stock, below. This postponespurchase, and your new basis in that SSBIC the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- your gain until the year you dispose of the re-stock or partnership interest. nal Revenue Code. placement stock.You must make the choice to postpone gain
no later than the due date (including extensions) You can make this choice if you meet all theActive business test. A corporation meets
for filing your tax return for the year in which you following tests.this test for any period of time if, during that
sold the securities. If your original return was period, both the following are true.
filed on time, you may make the choice on an 1) You buy replacement stock during the
amended return filed no later than 6 months 1) It was an eligible corporation, defined 60-day period beginning on the date of the
after the due date of your return (excluding ex- below. sale.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The replacement stock is qualified small Amount of gain recognized. If you make theSection 1202 Exclusion
choice described in this section, you must rec-business stock.
You generally can exclude from your income ognize gain only up to the following amount:3) The replacement stock continues to meet one-half of your gain from the sale or trade of
the active business requirement for small qualified small business stock held by you for 1) The amount realized on the sale, minusbusiness stock for at least the first 6 more than 5 years. The taxable part of your gain 2) The cost of any qualified empowermentmonths after you buy it. equal to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% zone asset that you bought during therate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates, later. 60-day period beginning on the date of
Amount of gain recognized. If you make the SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small sale (and did not previously take into ac-
choice described in this section, you must rec- business investment company (SSBIC) stock count in rolling over gain on an earlier sale
ognize the capital gain only up to the following that you bought as replacement property for of qualified empowerment zone assets).
amount: publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, you If this amount is equal to or more than themust reduce the basis of the stock by the amount of your gain, you must recognize the full1) The amount realized on the sale, minus amount of any postponed gain on that earlier amount of your gain. If this amount is less thansale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gain2) The cost of any qualified small business the amount of your gain, you can postpone theFrom Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re-stock you bought during the 60-day period rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of yourduce your basis by that amount when figuringbeginning on the date of sale (and did not replacement property as described next.your section 1202 exclusion.previously take into account on an earlier
Basis of replacement property. You mustsale of qualified small business stock). Limit on eligible gain. The amount of your
subtract the amount of postponed gain from thegain from the stock of any one issuer that isIf this amount is less than the amount of your basis of the qualified empowerment zone assetseligible for the exclusion in 2001 is limited to thecapital gain, you can postpone the rest of that you bought as replacement property.greater of:gain. If this amount equals or is more than the
amount of your capital gain, you must recognize 1) Ten times your basis in all qualified stock How to report and postpone gain. Report
the full amount of your gain. of the issuer that you sold or exchanged the entire gain realized from the sale on line 8 of
during the year, or Schedule D (Form 1040). To make the choice to
Basis of replacement stock. You must sub- postpone gain, enter “Section 1397B Rollover ”2) $10 million ($5 million for married individu-tract the amount of postponed gain from the in column (a) of the line directly below the line onals filing separately) minus the amount ofbasis of your replacement stock. which you reported the gain. Enter the amount ofgain from the stock of the same issuer that gain postponed in column (f). Enter it as a lossyou used to figure your exclusion in earlierHolding period of replacement stock. Your (in parentheses).years.holding period for the replacement stock in- Also attach a statement describing:
cludes your holding period for the stock sold, How to report gain. Report the entire gainexcept for the purpose of applying the 6-month 1) How you figured the postponed gain,realized from the sale in column (f) of line 8 ofholding period requirement for choosing to roll Schedule D (Form 1040). Report an amount 2) The name of the empowerment zone(s) inover the gain on its sale. equal to the excluded gain in column (g). Directly which the property sold and purchased is
below the line on which you report the gain, located,Pass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a enter “Section 1202 exclusion” in column (a) and 3) The qualified empowerment zone asset(s)partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or enter the amount of the exclusion in column (f). purchased, including the date of purchase,other regulated investment company) also may Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). andmake the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of
More information. For information about ad-the postponed gain applies to your share of the 4) Your adjusted basis in the asset(s).ditional requirements that may apply, see sec-entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest in
tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.the entity for the entire period the entity held the More information. For more informationstock. about empowerment zones, see PublicationRollover of GainIf a pass-through entity sold qualified small 954, Tax Incentives for Empowerment ZonesFrom Sale ofbusiness stock held for more than 6 months and and Other Distressed Communities.  For moreyou held an interest in the entity for the entire Empowerment Zone Assets information about this rollover of gain, see sec-period the entity held the stock, you also may tion 1397B of the Internal Revenue Code.choose to postpone gain if you, rather than the You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain
gains from the sale of qualified empowermentpass-through entity, buy the replacement stock
zone assets. This means that if you buy certainwithin the 60-day period.
replacement property and make the choice de-
Reporting Capitalscribed in this section, you postpone part or all ofHow to report gain. Report the entire gain
the recognition of your gain.realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of Gains and LossesYou qualify to make this choice if you meetSchedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-
all the following tests.ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain, This section discusses how to report your capitalenter “Section 1045 Rollover ” in column (a) of gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).1) You hold a qualified empowerment zonethe line directly below the line on which you Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds,asset for more than 1 year and sell it at areported the gain. Enter the amount of gain etc., and real estate (if not required to be re-gain.postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in ported on another form) on line 1 of Part I or line2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.parentheses). 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include all these
You must make the choice to postpone gain transactions even if you did not receive a Form3) During the 60-day period beginning on the
no later than the due date (including extensions) 1099– B or 1099 – S (or substitute statement).date of the sale, you buy a replacement
for filing your tax return for the year in which the You can use Schedule D – 1 as a continuationqualified empowerment zone asset in the
stock was sold. If your original return was filed schedule to report more transactions.same zone as the asset sold.
on time, you may make the choice on an Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-
amended return filed no later than 6 months Qualified empowerment zone asset. This umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on
after the due date of your return (excluding ex- means certain stock or partnership interests in line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column
tensions). Print “Filed pursuant to section an enterprise zone business. It also includes (d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.
301.9100– 2” at the top of the amended return, certain tangible property used in an enterprise Then add the following amounts reported to you
and file it at the same address you used for your zone business. You must have acquired the for 2001 on Forms 1099 – B and Forms 1099– S
original return. asset after December 21, 2000. (or on substitute statements):
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
person a Form 1099 – S, Proceeds From Real 2) Your share of long-term capital gains or
1) Proceeds from transactions involving Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro- losses from partnerships, S corporations,
stocks, bonds, and other securities, and ceeds. and fiduciaries,
“Reportable real estate ” is defined as any2) Gross proceeds from real estate transac- 3) All capital gain distributions from mutualpresent or future ownership interest in any of thetions (other than the sale of your main funds and REITs not reported directly onfollowing:home if you had no taxable gain) not re- line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
ported on another form or schedule. 1040, and1) Improved or unimproved land, including air
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and space, 4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.
10, attach a statement to your return explaining 2) Inherently permanent structures, including The result after combining these items withthe difference. any residential, commercial, or industrial your other long-term capital gains and losses is
Installment sales. You cannot use the install- building, your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 16 of
ment method to report a gain from the sale of Schedule D).3) A condominium unit and its accessory fix-stock or securities traded on an established se- tures and common elements, including 28% rate gain or loss. Enter in column (g)curities market. You must report the entire gain land, and the amount, if any, from column (f) that is a 28%in the year of sale (the year in which the trade
rate gain or loss. Enter any loss in parentheses.date occurs). 4) Stock in a cooperative housing corporation
A 28% rate gain or loss is:(as defined in section 216 of the InternalAt-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to Revenue Code). • Any collectibles gain or loss, ormost income-producing activities. These rules
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the A “real estate reporting person” could include • The part of your gain on qualified smallamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title or business stock that is equal to the sectionrules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- 1202 exclusion.an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiring
For more information, see Capital Gain Taxrules apply. For more information, see Publica- the biggest interest in the property.
Rates, later.tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules . Your Form 1099 – S will show the gross pro-
Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations , to figure ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- Capital gain distributions only. You dothe amount of loss you can deduct. low the instructions for Schedule D to report not have to file Schedule D if all of the following
these transactions, and include them on line 1 or are true.Passive activity gains and losses. If you 8 as appropriate.have gains or losses from a passive activity, you It is unlawful for any real estate reporting 1) The only amounts you would have to re-may also have to report them on Form 8582. In person to separately charge you for complying port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-some cases, the loss may be limited under the with the requirement to file Form 1099– S. butions from box 2a of Form 1099– DIV (orpassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its substitute statement).separate instructions for more information about Sale of property bought at various times. If
reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- 2) You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,you sell a block of stock or other property that
sive activity. 2d, or 2e of any Form 1099– DIV (or sub-you bought at various times, report the
stitute statement).short-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineForm 1099–B transactions. If you sold prop-
in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi- 3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do, theloss on one line in Part II. Print “Various” inties, through a broker, you should receive Form amount on line 4e of that form is not morecolumn (b) for the “Date acquired. ” See the1099– B or an equivalent statement from the than zero.Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.broker. Use the Form 1099 – B or equivalent If all the above statements are true, report yourstatement to complete Schedule D. Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba- capital gain distributions directly on line 13 ofReport the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of sis any expense of sale such as broker ’s fees, Form 1040 and check the box on that line. Also,Form 1099 – B as the gross sales price in col- commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and use the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Formumn (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in 1040 instructions to figure your tax.whichever applies. However, if the broker ad- column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule You can report your capital gain distributionsvises you, in box 2 of Form 1099 – B, that gross D, whichever applies, unless you reported the on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Formproceeds (gross sales price) less commissions net sales price amount in column (d). 1040, if both of the following are true.and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or 1) None of the Forms 1099 – DIV (or substi-line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. loss on the sale or trade of investment property tute statements) you received have anIf the net amount is entered in column (d), do held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or amount in box 2b, 2c, 2d, or 2e.not include the commissions and option premi- loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the
2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for anyums in column (e). amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
other reason. (For example, you must notin parentheses.Section 1256 contracts and straddles. have any other capital gains or any capitalYou combine your share of short-term capitalUse Form 6781 to report gains and losses from losses.)gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,section 1256 contracts and straddles before en- and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital losstering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a carryover, with your other short-term capital Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netcopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return. gains and losses to figure your net short-term gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalMarket discount bonds. Report the sale or capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D. gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termtrade of a market discount bond on Schedule D capital gain or loss (line 16). Enter the result onLong-term gains and losses. A capital gain(Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade line 17, Part III of Schedule D. If your losses areor loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-results in a gain and you did not choose to more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalinclude market discount in income currently, If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and line 39 ofgain or loss. You report it in Part II of Scheduleenter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next line Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital GainD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,in column (a) and the amount of the accrued Tax Rates, later.show it in parentheses.market discount as a loss in column (f). Also
You also report the following in Part II ofreport the amount of accrued market discount as Capital LossesSchedule D:interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), line
1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.” 1) Undistributed long-term capital gains from If your capital losses are more than your capital
Form 1099 –S transactions. If you sold or a regulated investment company (mutual gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.
traded reportable real estate, you generally fund) or real estate investment trust Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,
should receive from the real estate reporting (REIT), enclosed in parentheses.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4–2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Tax Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from. . .
Collectibles gain
1
“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
THEN your capital gain rate is . . .
28%
Gain on qualified small business stock equal to the section 1202 exclusion 28%
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain
Other gain
1
, and the regular tax rate that would apply is 27.5% or higher
25%
20%
8% or 10%Other gain
1
, and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower than 27.5%
2
The rate is 8% only for qualified 5-year gain.
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital Use short-term losses first. When you fig- to reduce the amount of your net capital gain
ure your capital loss carryover, use your that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
short-term capital losses first, even if you in- Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gainlesser of: 
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you you choose to include in investment income
1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file have not reached the limit on the capital loss when figuring the limit on your investment inter-
a separate return), or deduction after using the short-term capital loss, est deduction. This is done on lines 21 – 23 of
use the long-term capital losses until you reach Schedule D. For more information about the limit2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17 of the limit. on investment interest, see Interest Expenses inSchedule D. chapter 3.Decedent’s capital loss. A capital lossYou can use your total net loss to reduce your sustained by a decedent during his or her lastincome dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. tax year (or carried over to that year from an Using the Capital Gain Ratesearlier year) can be deducted only on the finalCapital loss carryover. If you have a total net return filed for the decedent. The capital loss The part of a net capital gain that is subject toloss on line 17 of Schedule D that is more than limits discussed earlier still apply in this situa- each rate is determined under the followingthe yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you tion. The decedent ’s estate cannot deduct any rules.can carry over the unused part to the next year of the loss or carry it over to following years.and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next 1) In each of the following groups, long-termJoint and separate returns. If you and youryear. If part of the loss is still unused, you can capital gains are netted with long-termspouse once filed separate returns and are nowcarry it over to later years until it is completely capital losses.filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-used up.
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your a) A 28% group, consisting of collectiblesWhen you figure the amount of any capital
spouse once filed a joint return and are now gains and losses, gain on qualifiedloss carryover to the next year, you must take
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover small business stock equal to the sec-the current year ’s allowable deduction into ac-
from the joint return can be deducted only on the tion 1202 exclusion, and long-term cap-count, whether or not you claimed it.
return of the spouse who actually had the loss. ital loss carryovers.When you carry over a loss, it remains long
term or short term. A long-term capital loss you b) A 25% group, consisting of unrecap-Capital Gain Tax Ratescarry over to the next tax year will reduce that tured section 1250 gain.
year’s long-term capital gains before it reduces The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are c) A 20% group, consisting of gains andthat year’s short-term capital gains. generally lower than the tax rates that apply to losses that are not in the 28% or 25%
Figuring your carryover. The amount of other income. These lower rates are called the group. (This includes gains that may be
your capital loss carryover is the amount of your maximum capital gain rates. taxed at a rate of 10% or 8%.)
total net loss that is more than the lesser of: The term “net capital gain ” means the
amount by which your net long-term capital gain 2) A net short-term capital loss reduces any
1) Your allowable capital loss deduction for for the year is more than your net short-term net gain from the 28% group, then any
the year, or capital loss. gain from the 25% group, and finally any
The maximum capital gain rate can be 8%, net gain from the 20% group.2) Your taxable income increased by your al-
10%, 20%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 4 – 2 forlowable capital loss deduction for the year 3) A net loss from the 28% group reducesdetails. and your deduction for personal exemp- any gain from the 25% group, and thenThe maximum capital gain rate does not ap-tions. any net gain from the 20% group.ply if it is higher than your regular tax rate.
If your deductions are more than your gross 4) A net loss from the 20% group reduces
income for the tax year, use your negative taxa- 8% rate. Beginning in 2001, the 10% capital any net gain from the 28% group, and then
ble income in computing the amount in item (2). gain rate is lowered to 8% for “qualified 5-year any gain from the 25% group.
gain.”Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-
sheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instruc- Qualified 5-year gain. This is long-term Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or losstions to determine the part of your capital loss for capital gain from the sale of property that you from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,2001 that you can carry over to 2002. held for more than 5 years and that would other- antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
wise be subject to the 10% capital gain rate. num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in erage held more than 1 year.2001. The sales resulted in a capital loss of Example. You have a net capital gain from Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, orTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their joint be 28%. Because you are single and your taxa- trust attributable to unrealized appreciation of2001 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- ble income is $25,000, your regular tax rate is collectibles.used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), 15%. All your taxable income will be taxed at thecan be carried over to 2002. Gain on qualified small business stock. If15% rate. The 28% rate does not apply.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their you realized a gain from qualified small business
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. Investment interest deducted. If you claim a stock that you held more than 5 years, you
They would have no carryover. deduction for investment interest, you may have generally can exclude one-half of your gain from
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your income. The taxable part of your gain equal and did not sell before January 2, 2001. If If your trading activities are not a  business,
to your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate you are considered an investor, and not a trader.you make the election, you treat this stock
gain. See Gains on Qualified Small Business It does not matter whether you call yourself aas sold on January 2, 2001, at its closing
Stock, earlier in this chapter. trader or a “day trader.”market price on that date. You then treat it
as reacquired on that date for the sameUnrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally, Note. You may be a trader in some securi-amount. For this purpose, readily tradablethis is any part of your capital gain from selling ties and have other securities you hold for in-stock includes shares issued by ansection 1250 property (real property) that is due vestment. The special rules discussed here doopen-end mutual fund.to depreciation (but not more than your net sec- not apply to the securities held for investment.
• Any other capital asset or propertytion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the You must keep detailed records to distinguish
used in a trade or business that you28% group. Use the worksheet in the Schedule the securities. The securities held for investment
D instructions to figure your unrecaptured sec- held on January 1, 2001. If you make the must be identified as such in your records on the
tion 1250 gain. For more information about sec- election, you treat this type of asset as day you got them (for example, by holding them
tion 1250 property and section 1231 gain, see sold on January 1, 2001, for its fair market in a separate brokerage account).
chapter 3 of Publication 544. value on that date. You then treat it as
reacquired on that date for the same How To ReportUsing Schedule D. You apply these rules by amount.using Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040) to Transactions from trading activities result in cap-figure your tax. Any gain on a deemed sale resulting from this ital gains and losses and must be reported onUse Part IV if both of the following are true. election must be recognized. However, any loss Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these
is not allowed. transactions are subject to the limit on capital1) You have a net capital gain. You have a
For the election to apply, you cannot dispose losses explained earlier in this chapter.net capital gain if both lines 16 and 17 of
of the asset (in a transaction in which gain orSchedule D are gains. (Line 16 is your net Mark-to-market election made. If you madeloss is recognized in whole or in part) within thelong-term capital gain or loss. Line 17 is the mark-to-market election, you should report1-year period beginning on the date the assetyour net long-term capital gain or loss all gains and losses from trading as ordinarywould have been treated as sold under the elec-combined with any net short-term capital gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, insteadgain or loss.) tion. of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. In
2) Your taxable income on Form 1040, line How to make the election. Report the that case, securities held at the end of the year
39, is more than zero. deemed sale on your tax return for the tax year in your business as a trader are marked to
that includes the date of the deemed sale. If you market by treating them as if they were soldIf you have any collectibles gain, gain on are a calendar year taxpayer, this is your 2001 (and reacquired) for fair market value on the lastqualified small business stock, or unrecaptured tax return. Attach a statement to the return stat- business day of the year. But do not mark tosection 1250 gain, you may also have to use the ing that you are making an election under sec- market any securities you held for investment.Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D tion 311 of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and Report sales from those securities on Scheduleinstructions to figure your tax. See the directions specifying the assets for which you are making D, not Form 4797.below line 19 of Schedule D. the election. Once made, the election is irrevo-See the Comprehensive Example, later, for Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-cable.an example of how to figure your tax on Sched- ment expenses that an investor would deduct onIf the deemed sale results in a loss, enterule D using the capital gain rates. Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by azero instead of the amount of the loss. trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orUsing Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. If you
Loss From Business, if the expenses are fromhave capital gain distributions but do not have to
the trading business. Commissions and otherfile Schedule D (Form 1040), figure your tax
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities areusing the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Special Rules for not deductible but must be used to figure gain orinstructions for Form 1040A or Form 1040,
loss. The limit on investment interest expense,whichever you file. For more information, see Traders in Securities which applies to investors, does not apply toCapital gain distributions only, earlier.
interest paid or incurred in a trading business.
Special rules apply if you are a trader in securi-Alternative minimum tax. These capital gain
Self-employment tax. Gains and losses fromties in the business of buying and selling securi-rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-
selling securities as part of a trading businessties for your own account. To be engaged inmum tax.
are not subject to self-employment tax. This isbusiness as a trader in securities, you must
true whether the election is made or not.meet all the following conditions.
New 18% Rate Beginning in 2006 • You must seek to profit from daily market
movements in the prices of securities andBeginning in 2006, the 20% capital gain rate will How To Make the
not from dividends, interest, or capital ap-be lowered to 18% for qualified 5-year gain from Mark-to-Market Election
preciation.property with a holding period that begins after
To make the mark-to-market election for 2002,2000. • Your activity must be substantial. you must file a statement by April 15, 2002. This
Election to recognize gain on assets held on • You must carry on the activity with con- statement should be attached to either your
January 1, 2001. Taxpayers who own certain 2001 individual income tax return or a requesttinuity and regularity.
assets on January 1, 2001, can choose to treat for an extension of time to file that return. The
those assets as sold and repurchased on the The following facts and circumstances should statement must include the following informa-
same date, if they pay tax for 2001 on any tion.be considered in determining if your activity is a
resulting gain. securities trading business.
The purpose of the election is to make any 1) That you are making an election under
• Typical holding periods for securitiesfuture gain on the asset eligible for the 18% rate section 475(f) of the Internal Revenue
bought and sold.by giving the asset a new holding period. The Code.
holding period of any asset for which you make • The frequency and dollar amount of your 2) The first tax year for which the election isthis election begins on the date of the deemed trades during the year. effective.sale and repurchase.
• The extent to which you pursue the activityYou can make this election for either of the 3) The trade or business for which you are
to produce income for a livelihood.following types of assets: making the election.
• The amount of time you devote to the ac-• Readily tradable stock that is a capital If you are not required to file a 2001 income
tivity.asset that you held on January 1, 2001, tax return, you make the election by placing the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
above statement in your books and records no Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked to
later than March 15, 2002. Attach a copy of the market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at theshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited
statement to your 2002 return. end of 2001. She had reported an unrealizedthe Car stock from her father. Its fair market
After making the election to change to the marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2000 taxvalue at the time of his death was $2,500, which
mark-to-market method of accounting, you must return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herbecame her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.
change your method of accounting for securities 2001 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxesBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss is
under Revenue Procedure 99 – 49. Revenue 6, 7, and 8 of the Form 1099 – B she receiveda long-term loss, regardless of how long she and
Procedure 99 – 49 requires you to file Form from her broker. Box 9 shows her combinedher father actually held the stock. She enters the
3115, Application for Change in Accounting profit of $15,000 ($27,000 − $1,000 − $11,000).loss in column (f) of line 8.Method. Follow its instructions. Label the Form She reports this gain in Part I of Form 6781 (notIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.3115 as filed under “Section 10A of the shown). She shows 40% as short-term gain onstock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of thoseAPPENDIX of Rev. Proc. 99– 49.” line 4 of Schedule D and 60% as long-term gainshares in 1990, for $1,000. She had bought 100Once you make the election, it will apply to on line 11 of Schedule D.more shares in 1992 for $2,200, and an addi-2002 and all later tax years, unless you get The Form 1099 – B that Emily received fromtional 300 shares in 1995 for $1,500. Her totalpermission from IRS to revoke it. The effect of her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300making the election is described under
($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which sheMark-to-market election made, earlier. Capital loss carryover from 2000. Emily
enters in column (f) of line 8. Because she heldFor more information on this election, see has a capital loss carryover to 2001 of $800, of
all 500 shares for more than 5 years, the entireRevenue Procedure 99– 17, 1999– 1 CB 503. which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500
gain is qualified 5-year gain. is long-term capital loss. She enters these
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D.In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-
Comprehensive over Worksheet in her 2000 Schedule D instruc-ness stock that she had bought in September
tions (not shown), so she could properly report1997. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000Example her loss carryover for the 2001 tax year withoutgain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.
refiguring it.Because she held the stock more than 5 years,Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. Shefrom her job, she has income from stocks and Tax computation. Because Emily has gainsenters that amount in column (g) as a 28% rateother securities. For the 2001 tax year, she had on both lines 16 and 17 of Schedule D and hasgain and claims the exclusion on the line belowthe following capital gains and losses, which she taxable income, she goes to Part IV of Scheduleby entering $1,500 as a loss in column (f).reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D D to figure her tax. But because line 15 of sched-is shown at the end of this example. She received a Form 1099 – B (not shown)
ule D is more than zero (due to her section 1202from her broker for each of these transactions.Capital gains and losses — Schedule D. gain from selling qualified small business stock),The entries shown in box 2 total $14,100.Emily sold stock in two different companies that she must also use the Schedule D Tax Work-she held for less than a year. In June, she sold Reconciliation of Forms 1099 –B. Emily sheet to figure her tax. She must also complete100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had makes sure that the total of the amounts re- the Qualified 5-Year Gain Worksheet (notbought in February. She had an adjusted basis ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- shown) in her Schedule D instructions.of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a ule D is not less than the total of the amounts After entering the gain from line 17 on line 13loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of shown on the Forms 1099– B she received from of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofComputer Co. stock that she bought in June. her broker. For 2001, the total of lines 3 and 10 Form 1040 through line 39. She enters theShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theand sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She amount reported by the broker on Forms Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thereports these short-term transactions on line 1 in 1099– B. rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax isPart I of Schedule D.
$4,348. This is less than the tax she would haveForm 6781. During 2001, Emily had a real-Emily had three other stock sales that she
figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,876.ized loss from a regulated futures contract ofreports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-01
6-29-01
6-12-01
7-30-01
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-20-96
2-3-01
6-29-01
12-15-01
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
1,500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
500
9,900
1,000
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses” (as defined on page D-6 of the instructions) and up to 50% of
the eligible gain on qualified small business stock (see page D-4 of the instructions).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 1 and 2 in column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
2000 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f).
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 8 and 9 in column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 2000 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (g)
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f)
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
16
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)
()
2001
*
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
300
-0-
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001
Taxable Gain or Deductible Loss
Combine lines 7 and 16 and enter the result. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on
Form 1040, line 13, and complete Form 1040 through line 39
17
17
()18
Part III
Page 2
18
Next:
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of (a) that loss or
(b) ($3,000) (or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)). Then complete Form 1040 through line 37
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain,
if any, from line 17 of the worksheet on
page D-7 of the instructions
22
23
24
25
Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
30
31
34
35
36 Subtract line 35 from line 34
23
24
25
26
27
28
31
30
21
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39 20
● If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and Form 1040, line 39, is more than zero, complete
Part IV below.
Subtract line 23 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the amount from line 24
Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- and go to line 34
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Multiply line 30 by 8% (.08)
Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 23
Enter the amount from line 28 (if line 28 is blank, enter -0-)
19
33
34
35
36
37
● The amount on line 20 or
● $45,200 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$27,050 if single;
$36,250 if head of household; or
$22,600 if married filing separately
37 Multiply line 36 by 20% (.20)
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001
● Otherwise, skip the rest of Schedule D and complete Form 1040.
Next: ● If the loss on line 17 is more than the loss on line 18 or if Form 1040, line 37, is less
than zero, skip Part IV below and complete the Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
on page D-6 of the instructions before completing the rest of Form 1040.
● Otherwise, skip Part IV below and complete the rest of Form 1040.
19
If line 15 or line 19 is more than zero, complete the worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions to figure the amount to enter on lines
22, 29, and 40 below, and skip all other lines below. Otherwise,
go to line 20.
22
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D
If you are deducting investment interest
expense on Form 4952, enter the amount
from Form 4952, line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-
21
Figure the tax on the amount on line 24. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
/H20854
If line 26 is greater than line 24, go to line 27. Otherwise, skip lines
27 through 33 and go to line 34.
29
29
Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any, from
line 7 of the worksheet on page D-8
32 Subtract line 30 from line 28 32
33 Multiply line 32 by 10% (.10)
38
39
40
Add lines 25, 31, 33, and 37
Figure the tax on the amount on line 20. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 38 or line 39 here
and on Form 1040, line 40
38
39
40
If the amounts on lines 23 and 28 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
4,348
-0-
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30,000
9,900
-0-
9,900
6,450
1,000
-0-
1,000
8,900
21,100
27,050
21,100
20,100
21,100
3,169
5,950
300
300
24
5,650
565
8,900
5,950
2,950
590
30,000
-0-
-0-
4,348
4,876
4,348
Schedule D Tax Worksheet— Line 40 Keep for Y our Records
Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4.
1.
11.
4.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39
● The amount on line 1 or
● $45,200 if married filing jointly or
qualifying widow(er);
$27,050 if single;
$36,250 if head of household; or
$22,600 if married filing separately
/H20854
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D2. 2.
3. If you are filing Form 4952, enter the amount from Form 4952,
line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-. Also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 22 3.
Combine lines 7 and 15 of Schedule D. If zero or less, enter -0-5. 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 5 above or Schedule D, line 15, but not
less than zero 6.
Add lines 6 and 78. 8.
7. Enter the amount from Schedule D, line 19 7.
9.9. Subtract line 8 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-
10.10. Subtract line 9 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
12. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 12.
11.
13. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- 13.
Enter the larger of line 12 or line 13 /H1707514. 14.
19.19. Multiply line 18 by 8% (.08)
If lines 11 and 12 are the same, skip lines 16 through 21 and go to line 22. Otherwise, go to line 16.
Subtract line 12 from line 11 /H1707516. 16.
17. Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any , from line 7 of the
worksheet on page D-8. Also enter this amount on Schedule
D, line 29 17.
Enter the smaller of line 16 above or line 17 above18. 18.
21.21. Multiply line 20 by 10% (.10)
Subtract line 18 from line 1620. 20.
Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 922. 22.
23. Enter the amount from line 16 (if line 16 is blank, enter -0-) 23.
Subtract line 23 from line 22 /H1707524. 24.
25.25. Multiply line 24 by 20% (.20)
If line 7 is zero or blank, skip lines 26 through 31 and go to line 32. Otherwise, go to line 26.
26. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 7 26.
27. Add lines 4 and 14 27.
28. Enter the amount from line 1 above 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0- 29.
Subtract line 29 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- /H1707530. 30.
31.31. Multiply line 30 by 25% (.25)
If line 6 is zero, skip lines 32 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 32.
Add lines 14, 16, 24, and 3032. 32.
Subtract line 32 from line 133. 33.
34.34. Multiply line 33 by 28% (.28)
35.35. Add lines 15, 19, 21, 25, 31, and 34
36.36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
37.
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36. Also enter
this amount on Schedule D, line 40, and Form 1040, line 40
15. Figure the tax on the amount on line 14. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies /H1707515.
Complete this worksheet only if line 15 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete Part IV of Schedule
D to figure your tax. Exception: Do not use Schedule D, Part IV , or this worksheet to figure your tax if line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D or Form 1040, line 39, is zero or less; instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 40.
If lines 1 and 11 are the same, skip lines 22 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 22.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
Transactions
CUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$ Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT ’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name Description5
Regulated Futures Contracts
Street address (including apt. no.) Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts— 12/31/2000
7Profit or (loss) realized in
2001
6
City, state, and ZIP code $$
Aggregate profit or (loss)9Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts— 12/31/2001
8
Account number (optional)
$$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B (Keep for your records.)
/H20854
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
CORRECTED (if checked)
OMB No. 1545-0715
Form 1099-B
2001XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, P A 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published Walk-in. You can walk in to many post
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pickin the last few years.
up certain forms, instructions, and pub-• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-5. lications. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerynue Code. stores, copy centers, city and county govern-
ments, credit unions, and office supply stores• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot
have an extensive collection of products avail-tax issues and news.How To able to print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from• Get information on starting and operating reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS offices anda small business.Get Tax Help libraries have the Internal Revenue Code, regu-
lations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-You can also reach us with your computer lative Bulletins available for research purposes.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
Mail. You can send your order fortions, and get more information from the IRS in TaxFax Service. Using the phone at- forms, instructions, and publications toseveral ways. By selecting the method that is tached to your fax machine, you can the Distribution Center nearest to youbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac- receive forms and instructions by call- and receive a response within 10 workdays aftercess to tax help. ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions from your request is received. Find the address that
the prompts. When you order forms, enter theContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you applies to your part of the country.
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem catalog number for the form you need. The items
• Western part of U.S.:unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- you request will be faxed to you.
Western Area Distribution Centerpayer Advocate. For help with transmission problems, call the Rancho Cordova, CA 95743– 0001The Taxpayer Advocate represents your in- FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608.
terests and concerns within the IRS by protect- • Central part of U.S.:
ing your rights and resolving problems that have Central Area Distribution CenterPhone. Many services are available by
not been fixed through normal channels. While P.O. Box 8903phone.
Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law Bloomington, IL 61702– 8903
or make a technical tax decision, they can clear
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-up problems that resulted from previous con-
addresses:tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-tacts and ensure that your case is given a com-
Eastern Area Distribution Centerrent and prior year forms, instructions, andplete and impartial review.
P.O. Box 85074publications.To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
Richmond, VA 23261– 5074• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.1–877–777–4778.
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publica-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access• Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040. tion 1796, Federal Tax Products on
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829– CD-ROM, and obtain:• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate 4059 to ask tax questions or to orderoffice in your area. • Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-forms and publications.
cations.• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 toTTY/TDD user. • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics. • Popular tax forms that may be filled inFor more information, see Publication 1546,
electronically, printed out for submission,The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
and saved for recordkeeping.Evaluating the quality of our telephone ser-Free tax services. To find out what services
vices. To ensure that IRS representatives give • Internal Revenue Bulletins.are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-
The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-we evaluate the quality of our telephone ser-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-
tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) byvices in several ways.scribes other free tax information services,
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet atincluding tax education and assistance pro- • A second IRS representative sometimes www.irs.gov. The first release is available ingrams and a list of TeleTax topics. monitors live telephone calls. That person mid-December and the final release is available
Personal computer. With your per- only evaluates the IRS assistor and does in late January.
sonal computer and modem, you can not keep a record of any taxpayer’s name IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Re-
access the IRS on the Internet at or tax identification number. source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you contains information important to small busi-• We sometimes record telephone calls tocan: nesses. It is available in mid-February. You canevaluate IRS assistors objectively. We get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676• Find answers to questions you may have. hold these recordings no longer than one or visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov.week and use them only to measure the• Download forms and publications or
quality of assistance.search for forms and publications by topic
or keyword. • We value our customers’ opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be surveying• View forms that may be filled in electroni-
our customers for their opinions on ourcally, print the completed form, and then
save the form for recordkeeping. service.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 69

Page 70 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2) The transaction is one of the Investment interest: The inter- Passive activity: An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a) A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnership both of the following are true.b) Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property 1) More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liablity for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option: Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of, 2) You perform more than 750At-risk rules: Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c) Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a businesses in which you ma-treatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in terially participate.contract ( defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
your investment in property for tax Portfolio income: Gross incomeif it were sold for its fair marketpurposes. The basis of property from interest, dividends, annuities,value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable inyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is or royalties that is not derived in thefull at any time upon demand by the the year.used to figure gain or loss on the ordinary course of a trade or busi-lender.sale or disposition of investment ness. It includes gains from theMarket discount: The stated re-
property. sale or trade of property (other thanDividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-
an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by a ity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders out immediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-applicable federal rate, or a term Premium: The amount by whichEquity option: Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is
1) To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any
the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. bond having market discount ex-2) That is valued directly or indi- the bond after you get it (other thancept:rectly by reference to anyCall: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).1) Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1 Private activity bond: A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue, that is part of a state or local gov-Fair market value: The price atof shares of stock at a specified
ernment bond issue of which:which property would change 2) Tax-exempt obligations thatprice.
hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,
1) More than 10% of the pro-Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason- 1993, ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant 3) U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in which facts.
you actually or constructively re- 4) Certain installment obliga- 2) More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at the Nominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a) Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in trading payable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis- minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedmarket by the Commodities Fu- Forward contract: A contract to option that is not an equity option, b) Derived from payments fortures Trading Commission. deliver a substantially fixed amount such as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for a futures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.calling for the sale or purchase of a Futures contract: An
fixed amount of a commodity at a exchange-traded contract to buy or Options dealer: Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thefuture date for a fixed price. sell a specified commodity or finan- istered with an appropriate national purchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified price securities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See alsotransaction that you entered into maker or specialist in listed op- property such as a stated numberCommodity future.after April 30, 1993 that meets both tions. of shares of stock at a specified
of these tests. Gift loan: Any below-market loan price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the
The amount by which the stated1) Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest: Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
sue price.of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 70

Page 71 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop- by the Secretary of the Trea- Short sale: The sale of property a) Is limited and preferred as
that you generally do not own. You to dividends,erty, with multiple classes of inter- sury.
borrow the property to deliver to aests held by investors. These b) Does not participate in cor-buyer and, at a later date, you buyinterests may be either regular or Restricted stock: Stock you get porate growth to any sig-substantially identical property andresidual. for services you perform that is nificant extent, anddeliver it to the lender.nontransferable and is subject to a c) Has a fixed redemptionRegulated futures contract: A substantial risk of forfeiture. Straddle: Generally, a set of off- price.section 1256 contract that: setting positions on personal prop-Section 1256 contract: Any: erty. A straddle may consist of a1) Provides that amounts that Term loan: Any loan that is not asecurity and a written option to buymust be deposited to, or may 1) Regulated futures contract, demand loan.and a purchased option to sell onbe withdrawn from, your mar- the same number of shares of the2) Foreign currency contract as Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-gin account depend on daily security, with the same exercisedefined in chapter 4 under curities at a loss within 30 daysmarket conditions (a system price and period.Section 1256 Contracts before or after you buy or acquire inof marking to market), and Marked to Market, a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock: Stock2) Is traded on, or subject to the contract or option to buy, substan-that meets the following tests.3) Nonequity option, orrules of, a qualified board of tially identical stock or securities.
4) Dealer equity option. 1) There has been a separationexchange, such as a domes-
in ownership between thetic board of trade designated
stock and any dividend on theSecurities futures contract: Aas a contract market by the
stock that has not becomecontract of sale for future deliveryCommodity Futures Trading payable.of a single security or of aCommission or any board of
trade or exchange approved narrow-based security index. 2) The stock: I
Page 71

Page 72 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Stripped ........... 11, 14 Stripped bonds and 4684 ............... 4 7A
Traded flat ............. 6 coupons ............ 1 4 4797 ............... 4 3Accounting fees .......... 3 2
U.S. savings .........7 ,  1 7 4952 ............. 31, 34DividendAccrual method ...... 7 ,  16, 34
U.S. Treasury .... 11, 44, 50 6198 ............... 6 1reinvestment plan . . 19, 32, 41Accuracy-related penalty . . . 4, 27 6781 ............. 38, 56Brokerage fees .......... 3 3 Dividends: ( See also CorporateAcquisition discount . . 15, 42, 46 8271 ............... 2 7distributions)Acquisition premium ....... 1 3 8275 ............... 2 8Dividends:CAdjusted basis .......... 4 0 8275– R ............. 2 8Exempt-interest ........ 2 1Calls and puts ........... 5 4Alaska Permanent Fund 8582 ............. 25, 61Extraordinary .......... 5 2dividends .......... 21, 31 Capital assets ........... 4 6 8615 ................ 3Form 1099– D I V........ 1 9Amortization of bond Capital gain 8814 ..............3 ,  3 1How to report .......... 2 1premium ............. 3 1 distributions ...... 19, 22, 31 8815 ..............9 ,  1 8Incorrect Form 1099 ..... 1 9
Annuities: Capital gain tax rate ....... 6 2 8818 ............... 1 0Insurance policies ....... 2 1
Borrowing on .......... 3 3 8824 ............... 4 3Capital gains and losses: Nominees ............ 2 2
Bought with life insurance 8832 ............... 2 4Constructive ownership On restricted stock ...... 2 2
proceeds ........... 1 1 SS– 4............... 2 4transactions ......... 4 8 On stock sold .......... 1 9
Interest on ...........6 ,  4 8 W– 8BEN ............. 4Investment property ..... 4 6 Ordinary ............. 1 9
Nontaxable trades ...... 4 4 W– 9 ................ 3Long term .......... 50, 61 Patronage ............ 2 1
Sale of .............. 4 8 Losses, limit on ........ 6 1 Fractional shares ....... 20, 41Received in January ..... 1 9
Single-premium ........ 3 3 Reporting ............ 6 0 Free tax services ......... 6 9Reinvestment
Trade for ............. 3 6 Short term .......... 50, 61 plans ......... 19, 32, 41 Frozen deposits .........6 ,  1 8
Appreciated financial Capital loss carryover ...... 6 2 Scrip ............... 2 1 Futures contract, regulated . . 37
position .............. 3 7 Cash method ....... 7 ,  16, 34 Stock ............. 41, 50
Assistance ( See Tax help) Vs. sale or trade ........ 3 6Certificate of deposit ...... 1 3
GAt-risk rules .......... 29, 61 Divorce ............... 4 4Children:
Gains and losses:Attorney fees ........... 3 2 Gifts to ............... 4
Deposits ............. 4 7Automatic Investment income of ..... 3 E Gains on sales or trades . . 42, 44investment service ........ Owner of U.S. savings Education Savings Bond Gains on sales or trades:.............. 32, 41, 50 bond ............... 8 Program .............. 9Related parties ......... 4 5 Gifts ............ 40, 50-51Employee stock ownershipClerical help ............ 3 3 Glossary .............. 7 0plan, Stock sold to ...... 5 8B Collateralized debt Empowerment zone ....... 6 0Backup withholding ........ 3 obligations (CDOs) .... 23-24 HEndowment contract .... 13, 33Bad debts .............. 5 0 Comments .............. 2 Hedging transactions .... 39, 48Estate income received byBargain purchases ........ 3 9 Commissions, trustee’s..... 3 3 beneficiary ............ 3 Help ( See Tax help)Basis: Commodity futures ...... 48, 50 Expenses of producing Holding period:Adjusted ............. 4 0 Community property ........ 8 income .............. 3 2 Investment property ..... 5 0Cost ................ 3 9 Constructive ownership Straddles ............ 5 7Discounted debt transactions ........... 4 8 How to report:instruments ......... 4 2 FConstructive receipt ....... 1 6 Bond premiumInvestment property ..... 3 9 Face-amount certificates .... 1 3Constructive sales ........ 3 7 amortization ......... 3 2Other than cost ........ 3 9 Fair market value ....... 39, 42Conversion transactions .... 4 8 Capital gains and losses . . 60Real estate investment
Federal guarantee on bonds . . .Convertible stocks and Dividend income ........ 2 1trust (REIT) ......... 1 9
................... 1 1bonds ............... 4 3 Interest income ........ 1 6REMIC, residual interest . . 23
Fees to buy or sell ........ 3 3 Investment expenses .... 3 4Stocks and bonds ..... 20, 40 Corporate distributions: ( See also
Financial asset Nonbusiness bad debts . . . 51Dividends)Bearer obligations ...... 13, 47
securitization investment Positions ............. 5 6Corporate distributions:Bonds:
trust (FASIT) .......... 2 4 Rollover of gain ...... 59-60Capital gain ........... 1 9Accrued interest on ...... 1 8
S corporation income, etc. . . .Foreign currencyLiquidating ......... 20, 42Amortization of premium . . 31
................. 2 4transactions ......... 37, 54Nontaxable ........... 1 9Arbitrage ............. 1 2
Sales of SBIC stock ..... 4 9Return of capital ........ 1 9 Foreign income ........... 2Basis ............... 4 0
Section 1256 contractsStock rights ......... 20, 41Capital asset .......... 4 6 Form:
and straddles ........ 3 8Undistributed capitalConvertible ........... 4 3 1041 ............... 2 5
Wash sales ........... 5 3gains .............. 1 9Coupon .............. 1 6 1065 ............... 2 4
Coupons, stripped ...... 1 4 Cost basis ............. 3 9 1066 (Schedule Q) .... 23, 33
Federally guaranteed .... 1 1 1096 ............. 18, 22 IMarket discount . . . 12, 14, 42, 1099 – B ........... 36, 61D Income from sources outside47, 61 1099 – D I V.......... 19, 21Day traders ............ 6 3 the U.S. .............. 2Mortgage revenue ...... 1 2 1099– I N T........ 5 ,  9 ,  1 6 ,
Decedents ......... 8 ,  36, 62 Indian tribal government .... 1 1Premiums on .......... 4 2 23-24
Demutualization ......... 4 4 Inherited property:Private activity ......... 1 2 1099– MISC ........ 19, 52
Basis of ............. 4 0Deposits, loss on ......... 4 7Redemption or retirement 1099 – O I D......... 13, 17,
Holding period ......... 5 0o f ................ 3 6 Discount on debt instruments: 23-24
Installment sales ........5 ,  6 1Registered ......... 11, 47 Market discount . . . 12, 14, 42, 1099 – S ............. 6 1
Sold between interest 47, 61 1116 ............... 1 7 Insurance:
dates .............. 1 1 Original issue discount 1120 ............... 2 5 Borrowing on .......... 3 3
State and local ......... 4 6 (OID) ............ 11-12 1120-A .............. 2 5 Dividends on .......... 2 1
State or local government . . . Sales or redemptions .... 4 6 2439 ............... 1 9 Dividends, interest on ..... 5
................. 1 1 Short-term obligations .... 1 5 3115 ................ 7 Interest option on ....... 1 1
Page 72

Page 73 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Life, interest on loan to Small business Penalty: Self-employment ....... 25, 39
b u y............... 3 3 investment company Accuracy-related ......4 ,  2 7 Seller-financed mortgage . . . 18
Life, paid to beneficiary . . . 11 stock .............. 4 9 Backup withholding ....... 4 Short sales:
Prepaid premiums ....... 5 Small business stock ..... 4 9 Failure to pay tax ....... 2 8 Adjusted basis ......... 4 2
Single-premium life ...... 3 3 Wash sales ........... 5 2 Failure to supply SSN ..... 3 Defined .............. 5 1Trades .............. 4 4 O n  early withdrawals ....5 ,  1 8 Expenses of ........ 33, 52SubstantialInterest expenses: Extraordinary dividends . . . 52M understatement ....... 2 8Allocation ............ 2 9 Puts ................ 5 4Mark-to-market election .... 6 3 Valuation misstatement . . . 28Carry forward .......... 3 0 SBIC stock ........... 4 9Marked to market ...... 37-38Investment ........... 2 9 Portfolio income ......... 2 9 Substitute payments ..... 5 2Market discountLimit on investment Position: Wash sales ........... 5 3bonds .......... 12, 14, 42,interest ............ 3 0 Appreciated financial ..... 3 7 Short-term capital gains and47, 61Margin accounts ........ 3 0 Defined .............. 5 4 losses ............... 6 1Maximum tax rate, netMixed straddle account Holding period ......... 5 7
Short-term obligations ..... 1 5capital gain ........... 6 2positions ........... 5 8 Offsetting ............ 5 4
Sixty/forty rule ........... 3 8Paid in advance ........ 3 0 Meetings, expenses of Successor ............ 5 6
Passive activity losses .... 3 1 Small businessattending ............. 3 3 Preferred stock:
Straddles ............ 3 4 investment companyMoney market certificates .... 5 Nonqualified .......... 4 3
Unstated ............. 3 9 stock ............. 49, 59Redemption premium .... 2 0Money market funds ....... 1 9
Interest income: Small business stock .... 50, 59Stripped ............. 2 2More information ( See Tax help)
Frozen deposits .......6 ,  1 8 Social security:Premiums on bonds ..... 31, 42Mortgage:How to report .......... 1 6 Investment club earnings . . 25Public utility stockRevenue bonds ........ 1 2In general ............. 4 Number .............. 3reinvestment .......... 4 1Secondary liability onOn condemnation award . . . 5 home .............. 5 1 Specialized small businessPublications ( See Tax help)On insurance dividends .... 5 Seller-financed ......... 1 8 investment company ..... 5 9Puts and calls ........... 5 4On seller-financed Municipal bonds ......... 1 1 Spouses:mortgage ........... 1 8 Related parties ......... 4 5Mutual funds ....... 19, 33, 41,On tax refund ........... 5 Q50 Transfers between .... 40, 44Tax-exempt ........... 1 1 Qualified 5-year gain ...... 6 2 State or local governmentTaxable .............. 5 Qualified small business obligations ............ 1 1Usurious .............. 6 N stock ............... 5 9 Stock:When to report ......... 1 5 Nominee distributions: Basis ............. 19, 40Investment clubs ......... 2 4 Dividends .......... 19, 22 Capital asset .......... 4 6Investment expenses: RInterest .............5 ,  1 8
Constructive ownership . . . 45Deductible ............ 3 2 Original issue discount . . . 13 Real estate
Convertible ........... 4 3From pass-through investment trustNonbusiness bad debts .... 5 0
Dividends .......... 20, 41entities ............ 3 3 (REIT) ......... 19, 41, 50Noncapital assets ........ 4 6 Fractional shares ..... 20, 41How to report .......... 3 4 Real estate mortgage investmentNondeductible investmentInterest .............. 2 9 Identification .......... 4 1conduits (REMICs):expenses ............ 3 3Limits on deductions ..... 2 9 Installment sale ........ 6 1Regular interest ........ 2 3Nonqualified preferred stock . . .Nondeductible ......... 3 3 Nonqualified preferred .... 4 3Residual interest ..... 23, 53................... 4 3Investment income ......... 3 Public utility, reinvestment . . .Recordkeeping ......3 ,  10, 40,Nontaxable corporateInvestment income, children . . 3 ................. 4 149distributions ......... 19, 22 Qualified small business . . 59Investment property: Registration of bonds .... 11, 47Nontaxable trades ...... 43, 50Basis ............... 3 9 Redemption of ......... 3 6Regulated futures contract . . 37Notes:Defined .............. 2 9 Rights .......... 20, 41, 46,Related parties ..... 34, 44, 55Of individuals, bought atGain or loss treatment .... 4 6 50Repossession of realdiscount ............ 4 7Sales and trades ....... 3 6 Rollover of gain from sale . . .property ............. 5 0Redemption or retirementIRAs .................. 5 ................. 5 8o f ................ 3 6 Rollover of gain from sale of S corporation .......... 4 2U.S. Treasury .... 11, 44, 50 securities ............ 5 8
Section 1202 .......... 6 0J Small business (sectionJoint accounts ............ 4 O S 1244) ............. 4 9
Office expenses ......... 3 3 Small BusinessS corporations ........... 2 4
InvestmentOptions: Safe deposit box ......... 3 3L
Company ......... 49, 59Calls and puts ......... 5 4 Sales and trades ofLife insurance companies,
Cash settlement ........ 5 4 Sold or traded ......... 4 0investment property ..... 3 6demutualization ........ 4 4
Dealer equity .......... 3 8 Splits ............... 4 1Savings bonds .........7 ,  1 7Like-kind exchanges .... 43-44 Deep-in-the-money ...... 5 6 Straddle rules ......... 5 4Scrip dividends .......... 2 1Liquidating Gain or loss ........... 5 3 Stripped preferred ....... 2 2distributions ...... 20, 22, 42 Section 1202 gain ........ 6 2Holding period ......... 5 0 Surrender of .......... 3 6Loans: Section 1244 stock ....... 4 9Nonequity ............ 3 7 Trades .............. 4 3Below-market ........... 6 Section 1256Qualified covered call .... 5 5 Straddles:Gift and demand ......... 6 contracts ........ 37, 50, 54,Section 1256 contracts . . . 54 Deferral of loss from ..... 5 4Guarantees ........... 5 1 61Wash sales ........... 5 2 Identified ............. 5 5Nonbusiness bad debt .... 5 1 Securities futures contracts . . 53Ordinary gains and losses . . . 45 Interest expense andTerm ................ 6 Securities:Original issue carrying charges ...... 3 4Long-term capital gains and Holding period ......... 5 0discount (OID) .... 11-12, 18, Mixed ............. 52, 57losses ............... 6 1 Installment sale ........ 6 142 Reporting ............ 6 1Loss on deposits ......... 4 7 Lost, stolen, etc., cost of
Stripped bonds andLosses on sales or trades: replacing ........... 3 3
coupons ........... 11, 14PHow to figure .......... 4 2 Rollover of gain from sale . . .
Stripped preferred stock .... 2 2Passive activities . . 26, 29, 31 Passive activity ..... 24-26, 29, ................. 5 8
Related parties ......... 4 5 31, 61 Worthless ....... 36, 49, 51 Suggestions ............. 2
Page 73

Page 74 of 74 of Publication 550 7:29 -  9-NOV-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State income .......... 3 4 Treasury bills, notes, andT W
bonds ............... 1 0Taxpayer Advocate ....... 6 9Tax help ............... 6 9 Wash sales:
Trust income received by Holding period ......... 5 0Traders in securities ....... 6 3Tax refund, interest on ...... 5
beneficiary ............ 3 Loss deferral rules,Trades:Tax shelters ............ 2 6
straddles ........... 5 6Trustee’s commission,Insurance ............ 4 4Tax-exempt income,
Loss disallowed ........ 5 2revocable trust ......... 3 3Investment property forexpenses of ........... 3 3
When to report interestannuity ............ 3 6Tax-exempt interest:
income .............. 1 5Like-kind ........... 43-44Reporting ........ 5 ,  16, 21 U
Nontaxable ...... 39, 43, 50 Worthless securities . . 36, 49, 51State or local government U.S. savings bonds ......7 ,  1 7Stock ............... 4 3obligations .......... 1 1 U.S. Treasury bills, ITaxable ............. 3 9Stripped bonds and notes, and bonds . . 10, 44, 50U.S. Treasury notes orcoupons .......... 11, 14 Usurious interest .......... 6bonds ............. 4 4Taxes:
State and local transfer . . . 33
Page 74