Userid: CPM Schema: instrx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 9  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 7  10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions for the
Requester of Form W-9
(Rev. March 2024)
Request for Taxpayer Identification Number
and Certification
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service
Section references are to the Internal Revenue Code unless 
otherwise noted.
Future Developments
For the latest developments related to Form W-9 and its 
instructions, such as legislation enacted after they were 
published, go to IRS.gov/FormW9.
What’s New
Line 3a. We clarified that a Limited Liability Company (LLC) that 
is a disregarded entity should fill out line 3a by checking the 
appropriate box for the tax classification of its owner in the first 
row on line 3a. We also added guidance that provides clarity for 
disregarded entities completing lines 1 and 2. For proper 
processing, information for disregarded entities is reported as 
the owner’s name on line 1, and the disregarded entity’s name is 
entered on line 2.
For an LLC that is not disregarded, line 3a has a single box to 
check and available entry space for the LLC to notate the proper 
tax classification as corporation, S corporation, or partnership 
(C, S, or P).
We updated the Note in line 3a to emphasize this distinction 
for LLCs.
Line 3b. A new line has been added for partnerships (including 
limited liability companies (LLCs) classified as partnerships for 
U.S. federal tax purposes), trusts, or estates to indicate if they 
have foreign partners, owners, or beneficiaries when providing 
this form to a flow-through entity in which it owns an interest. This 
change provides the flow-through entity with information 
regarding the status of its indirect foreign partners, owners, or 
beneficiaries, so that it can satisfy any applicable reporting 
requirements.
Y ou are only required to verify that the box on line 3b has 
been properly checked if you are a flow-through entity that is 
otherwise required to obtain a new Form W-9 from your partner, 
owner, or beneficiary. Y ou may rely on the information provided 
on line 3b unless you know that it is incorrect. If line 3b is 
completed (or if it has not been completed and you know that 
this is incorrect), you may be required to report on Schedules 
K-2 and K-3 (Form 1065) or otherwise provide the relevant 
information to your partner, owner, or beneficiary. See 
Partnership Instructions for Schedules K-2 and K-3 (Form 1065).
Withholding and reporting under sections 1446(a) and (f) 
starting in 2023. Section 1446(f), added by P .L. 115-97, 
section 13501, enacted new rules for withholding on the transfer 
of a partnership interest.
In general, section 1446(f) applies to transfers of partnership 
interests occurring on or after January 1, 2018. However, certain 
withholding provisions of section 1446(f) apply to transfers after 
2022, including:
• T ransfers of interests in publicly traded partnerships (PTPs) 
under section 1446(f);
• Distributions made by PTPs (PTP distributions); and
• Partnership withholding under section 1446(f)(4) on 
distributions to transferees of non-PTP interests that failed to 
properly withhold under section 1446(f).
The portion of the section 1446(a) regulations relating to 
withholding and reporting on distributions made by PTPs was 
expanded to allow certain additional entities to act as nominees 
for PTP distributions.
For applicability dates for certain regulations under sections 
1446(a) and (f), see Notice 2021-51, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2021-36_IRB#NOT -2021-51.
Updated qualified intermediary (QI) agreement. The QI 
withholding agreement, entered into by the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) and certain foreign persons under Regulations 
section 1.1441-1(e), and outlined in Rev. Proc. 2017-15, expired 
December 31, 2022. New QI guidance effective January 1, 
2023, was published in Rev. Proc. 2022-43 and allows certain 
persons to enter into an agreement to simplify their obligations 
as withholding agents under chapters 3 and 4 of the Code and 
as payors under chapter 61 and section 3406 for amounts paid 
to their account holders. See Rev. Proc. 2022-43, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2022-52_IRB#REV-PROC-2022-43.
Reminders
Backup withholding rate. The backup withholding rate is 24% 
for reportable payments.
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and backup 
withholding exemptions. FATCA requires a participating 
foreign financial institution (FFI) to report all U.S. account holders 
that are specified U.S. persons (generally individuals, 
partnerships, S corporations, LLCs and certain estates and 
trusts). Form W-9 has space to enter an Exempt payee code (if 
any) and Exemption from FATCA Reporting Code (if any). The 
references for the appropriate codes are in the Exemptions 
section of Form W-9, and in the Payees and Account Holders 
Exempt From FATCA Reporting section of these instructions.
The Certification section in Part II of Form W-9 includes 
certification relating to FATCA reporting.
Differences in chapter 3 and chapter 4. Withholding on 
certain U.S. source reportable payments under chapter 3 is 
different than withholding on certain withholdable payments to 
foreign entities that fail to report U.S. owners and account 
holders under chapter 4. These instructions cover the basics. A 
review of Pub. 515, Withholding of T ax on Nonresident Aliens 
and Foreign Entities, is essential to learn details associated with 
backup withholding not covered here.
Purpose
Chapter 3 provides that non-U.S. persons, whether individuals or 
entities, are subject to tax on their income that is effectively 
connected to a U.S. trade or business. A properly completed and 
signed Form W-9 can be relied upon to avoid backup 
withholding to a payee. However, a payor of certain information 
return reportable payments is subject to the withholding 
requirements under section 3406 (backup withholding), if:
Mar 11, 2024 Cat. No. 20479P

Page 2 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. A payee fails to furnish a taxpayer identification number 
(TIN);
2. IRS provides notification that a payee's TIN is incorrect;
3. There has been a notified payee underreporting of 
payments of interest or dividends; or
4. There has been a payee failure to certify that the payee is 
not subject to backup withholding.
A payor must deduct, withhold, and deposit with IRS 24% of 
reportable payments made to that payee until the cause of the 
backup withholding is remedied.
Backup withholding liability. If you don’t collect backup 
withholding from affected payees as required, you may become 
liable for any uncollected amount.
Chapter 4. For chapter 4 purposes, Form W-9 is used to 
withhold on payments to foreign financial institutions (FFI) and 
non-financial foreign entities (NFFE) if they don't report all 
specified U.S. account holders. If an account holder fails to 
provide its TIN, then the withholding rate is 30%.
TIN matching e-services. The IRS website offers TIN 
matching e-services for certain payors to validate name and TIN 
combinations. See T axpayer Identification Number (TIN) 
Matching, later.
Background. Chapter 3
Section 1446(f) generally requires that if a portion of a gain on 
any disposition of an interest in a partnership would be treated 
under section 864(c)(8) as effectively connected income (ECI), 
the transferee purchasing an interest from a non-U.S. transferor 
must withhold a tax equal to 10% of the amount realized, unless 
an exception applies. The amount of gain or loss treated as ECI 
is equal to the distributive share of ECI that would be allocated to 
the transferring partner if the partnership sold all of its assets as 
of the date of the transfer. (The partner is deemed to have sold 
its proportionate share of the assets the partnership uses in its 
U. S. trade or business.) If a partnership also holds one or more 
U. S. real property interests, at the time of the disposition of the 
interest, the gain or loss treated as ECI is figured under 
Regulations section 1.864(c)(8)-1(c).
Generally, a presumption of foreign status is required if a 
properly completed and signed Form W-9 is not received. A 
payee may rebut any presumption by providing reliable 
documentation to the withholding agent or, if applicable, to the 
IRS.
If the transferor furnishes an affidavit stating, under penalty of 
perjury, the transferor's U.S. TIN and that the transferor is not a 
foreign person, then no withholding is required for a disposition. 
Withholding is required if the transferee has actual knowledge 
that the affidavit is false, or the transferee receives a notice from 
an agent that the statement is false, or the IRS requires the 
transferee to furnish a copy of the affidavit/statement and the 
transferee fails to furnish a copy.
If the transferee fails to withhold, the partnership is required to 
withhold from distributions to the transferee a tax (equal to the 
amount the transferee failed to withhold, plus interest). See 
generally T .D. 9926.
Background. Chapter 4
U.S. persons are subject to tax on worldwide income from all 
sources including income generated outside of the United 
States. It is not illegal or improper for U.S. taxpayers to own 
offshore structures, accounts, or assets. However, taxpayers 
must comply with income tax and information reporting 
requirements associated with these offshore activities.
The Foreign Account T ax Compliance Act (FATCA) of 2010 
aims at getting information regarding account holders of foreign 
financial institutions (FFIs), and the substantial U.S. owners of 
certain foreign entities (more than a 10% ownership interest). A 
withholding agent must withhold 30% of any withholdable 
payment (with certain exceptions) to an FFI or non-financial 
foreign entity (NFFE) that fails to provide documentation that the 
withholding agent may rely upon to treat the payment as exempt 
or that fails to provide a certification that it does not have any 
substantial U.S. owners. See sections 1471 through 1474.
With a model 1 or 2 intergovernmental agreement (IGA), 
reporting FFIs must identify U.S. accounts and report information 
about U.S. account holders.
If a withholding agent makes a payment to a person that is not 
the payee, the withholding agent will be required to determine 
the chapter 4 status of each intermediary or flow-through entity 
in the payment chain until the withholding agent is able to identify 
the payee. Standards for determining when a withholding agent 
will be considered to have reason to know that a claim of 
exemption from withholding is unreliable or incorrect are outlined 
in Regulations section 1.1471-3(e)(4).
See Regulations section 1.1471-3 for details regarding 
presumptions, valid documentation to determine payee status, 
and consequences for an agent that fails to withhold in 
accordance with the presumptions or that has actual knowledge 
or reason to know facts contrary to the presumptions. For 
information on exempt payees, see Payees and Account Holders 
Exempt From FATCA Reporting, later.
Individual Taxpayer Identification 
Number (ITIN)
Form W-9 (or an acceptable substitute) is used by persons 
required to file information returns with the IRS to get the payee's 
(or other person's) correct name and TIN. For individuals, the 
TIN is generally a social security number (SSN).
However, in some cases, individuals who become U.S. 
resident aliens for federal tax purposes are not eligible to obtain 
an SSN. This includes certain resident aliens who must receive 
information returns but who cannot obtain an SSN.
These individuals must apply for an ITIN on Form W-7, 
Application for IRS Individual T axpayer Identification Number, 
unless they have an application pending for an SSN. Individuals 
who have an ITIN must provide it on Form W-9.
Note. ITINs that haven’t been included on a U.S. federal tax 
return at least once in the last 3 consecutive tax years will expire. 
Expired ITINs must be renewed in order to avoid delays in 
processing the ITIN holder’s tax return. If the IRS deactivates the 
ITIN because it has expired, the ITIN may still be used on Form 
W-9. However, the ITIN holder will have to apply to renew the 
deactivated ITIN if there is a need to file a tax return. For more 
information, see the Instructions for Form W-7.
Substitute Form W-9
Y ou may develop and use your own Form W-9 (a substitute Form 
W-9) if its content is substantially similar to the official IRS Form 
W-9 and it satisfies certain certification requirements.
A valid Form W-9, or a substitute form, must contain the 
payee's name and TIN and be signed and dated under penalties 
of perjury by the payee or a person authorized to sign for the 
payee. A foreign person, including a U.S. branch of a foreign 
person that is treated as a U.S. person under Regulations 
section 1.1441-1(b)(2)(iv) or a foreign branch of a U.S. financial 
institution that is a QI, may not provide a Form W-9.
Y ou may incorporate a substitute Form W-9 into other 
business forms you customarily use, such as account signature 
cards. However, the certifications on the substitute Form W-9 
2 Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024)

Page 3 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must clearly state (as shown on the official Form W-9) that under 
penalties of perjury:
1. The payee's TIN is correct,
2. The payee is not subject to backup withholding due to 
failure to report interest and dividend income,
3. The payee is a U.S. person, and
4. The FATCA code entered on this form (if any) indicating 
that the payee is exempt from FATCA reporting is correct.
Y ou may provide certification instructions on a substitute 
Form W-9 in a manner similar to the official form. If you are not 
collecting a FATCA exemption code by omitting that field from 
the substitute Form W-9, see Payees and Account Holders 
Exempt From FATCA Reporting, later. Notify the payee that item 
4 does not apply.
Y ou may not:
1. Use a substitute Form W-9 that requires the payee, by 
signing, to agree to provisions unrelated to the required 
certifications, or
2. Imply that a payee may be subject to backup withholding 
unless the payee agrees to provisions on the substitute form that 
are unrelated to the required certifications.
A substitute Form W-9 that contains a separate signature line 
just for the certifications satisfies the requirement that the 
certifications be clearly stated.
If a single signature line is used for the required certifications 
and other provisions, the certifications must be highlighted, 
boxed, printed in bold-face type, or presented in some other 
manner that causes the language to stand out from all other 
information contained on the substitute form. Additionally, the 
following statement must be presented to stand out in the same 
manner as described above and must appear immediately 
above the single signature line:
“The IRS does not require your consent to any provision of 
this document other than the certifications required to avoid 
backup withholding.”
If you use a substitute form, you are required to provide the 
Form W-9 instructions to the payee only if he or she requests 
them. However, if the IRS has notified the payee that backup 
withholding applies, then you must instruct the payee to strike 
out the language in the certification that relates to 
underreporting. This instruction can be given orally or in writing. 
See item 2 of the Certification on Form W-9. Y ou can replace 
“defined below” with “defined in the instructions” in item 3 of the 
Certification on Form W-9 when the instructions will not be 
provided to the payee except upon request. For more 
information, see Rev. Proc. 83-89,1983-2 C.B. 613, amplified by 
Rev. Proc. 96-26, which is on page 22 of Internal Revenue 
Bulletin 1996-8, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb96-08.pdf.
TIN Applied For
For interest and dividend payments and certain payments with 
respect to readily tradable instruments, the payee may return a 
properly completed, signed Form W-9 to you with “Applied For” 
written in Part I. This is an “awaiting-TIN” certificate. The payee 
has 60 calendar days, from the date you receive this certificate, 
to provide a TIN. If you do not receive the payee's TIN at that 
time, you must begin backup withholding on payments.
Reserve rule. Y ou must backup withhold on any reportable 
payments made during the 60-day period if a payee withdraws 
more than $500 at one time, unless the payee reserves an 
amount equal to the current year's backup withholding rate on all 
reportable payments made to the account.
Alternative rule. Y ou may also elect to backup withhold during 
this 60-day period, after a 7-day grace period, under one of the 
two alternative rules discussed below.
Option 1. Backup withhold on any reportable payments if the 
payee makes a withdrawal from the account after the close of 7 
business days after you receive the awaiting-TIN certificate. 
T reat as reportable payments all cash withdrawals in an amount 
up to the reportable payments made from the day after you 
receive the awaiting-TIN certificate to the day of withdrawal.
Option 2. Backup withhold on any reportable payments made 
to the payee's account, regardless of whether the payee makes 
any withdrawals, beginning no later than 7 business days after 
you receive the awaiting-TIN certificate.
The 60-day exemption from backup withholding does 
not apply to any payment other than interest, dividends, 
and certain payments relating to readily tradable 
instruments. Any other reportable payment, such as 
nonemployee compensation, is subject to backup withholding 
immediately, even if the payee has applied for and is awaiting a 
TIN.
Even if the payee gives you an awaiting-TIN certificate, you must 
backup withhold on reportable interest and dividend payments if 
the payee does not certify, under penalties of perjury, that the 
payee is not subject to backup withholding.
If you do not collect backup withholding from affected payees as 
required, you may become liable for any uncollected amount.
For payees exempt from backup withholding, see Payees 
Exempt From Backup Withholding. For payments exempt from 
backup withholding, see Payments Exempt From Backup 
Withholding.
How Do I Know When To Use
Form W-9?
Use Form W-9 to request the taxpayer identification number 
(TIN) of a U.S. person (including a resident alien) and to request 
certain certifications and claims for exemption. (See Purpose of 
Form on Form W-9.) Withholding agents, defined later, may 
require signed Forms W-9 from U.S. exempt recipients to 
overcome a presumption of foreign status. For federal tax 
purposes, a U.S. person includes, but is not limited to:
• An individual who is a U.S. citizen or U.S. resident alien;
• A partnership, corporation, company, or association created 
or organized in the United States or under the laws of the United 
States;
• Any estate (other than a foreign estate); or
• A domestic trust (as defined in Regulations section 
301.7701-7).
Submission of a signed Form W-9 or other certification of 
non-foreign status may be required from a U.S. person to avoid 
withholding applicable to foreign persons when:
• A withholding agent makes a reportable payment of an 
amount subject to withholding under sections 1441–1443 or a 
withholdable payment under sections 1471–1474.
• A transferor disposes of a U.S. real property interest and the 
amount realized is subject to withholding under section 1445(a).
• A U.S. real property holding corporation, certain real estate 
investment trusts (REIT s), regulated investment companies 
(RICs), or certain partnerships makes a distribution subject to 
withholding under section 1445(e).
• A partnership is required to withhold under section 1446(a) on 
a partner's allocable share of the partnership's effectively 
connected taxable income.
• A transferor transfers an interest in a partnership engaged in a 
trade or business within the United States and the amount 
realized is subject to withholding under section 1446(f)(1).
CAUTION
!
Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024) 3

Page 4 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, if a Form W-9 or other certification of non-foreign 
status has not been received, the rules under chapters 3 and 4 
require the withholding agent, transferee, or partnership (payor) 
to presume that the recipient, owner, transferor, or partner 
(payee) is subject to withholding and payment of the applicable 
withholding tax.
See Pub. 515 for more information.
A participating foreign financial institution (PFFI) should 
request Form W-9 from an account holder that is a U.S. person. 
If an account is jointly held, the PFFI should request a Form W-9 
from each holder that is a U.S. person. A recalcitrant account 
holder is an account holder that is not an FFI and that fails to 
comply with documentation or information requests from an FFI 
in which it holds an account. In the case of such clients, PFFIs 
must withhold 30% on all U.S. withholdable payments as defined 
by the IRS FATCA regulations.
A partnership that receives a signed Form W-9 that has 
box 3b checked from any of its partners, indicating that the 
partner has (direct or indirect) foreign partners, owners, or 
beneficiaries, may be required to complete Schedules K-2 and 
K-3 (Form 1065).
Advise foreign persons to use the appropriate Form W-8 or 
Form 8233, Exemption From Withholding on Compensation for 
Independent (and Certain Dependent) Personal Services of a 
Nonresident Alien Individual. See Pub. 515 for a list of the W-8 
forms.
Establishing U.S. Status for Purposes 
of Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 
Withholding
Under chapters 3 and 4 of the Internal Revenue Code:
• A withholding agent that makes a payment of an amount 
subject to withholding or a withholdable payment to a foreign 
person generally must withhold and pay a withholding tax under 
sections 1441–1443 or 1471–1474.
• A transferee of a U.S. real property interest from a foreign 
transferor generally must withhold and pay a withholding tax 
under section 1445(a).
• A U.S. real property holding corporation, certain REIT s or 
RICs, and certain partnerships must withhold and pay a 
withholding tax under section 1445(e) on certain distributions to 
a foreign person.
• A partnership that conducts a trade or business in the United 
States generally must withhold and pay a withholding tax under 
section 1446(a) on any foreign partner's allocable share of 
effectively connected taxable income from such business.
• A transferee of an interest in a partnership engaged in a trade 
or business within the United States from a foreign transferor 
generally must withhold and pay a withholding tax under section 
1446(f)(1).
In the cases below, the following person must be the one that 
provides the Form W-9 to the payor for purposes of establishing 
its non-foreign status.
• In the case of a disregarded entity with a U.S. owner, the U.S. 
owner of the disregarded entity and not the disregarded entity.
• In the case of a grantor trust with a U.S. grantor or other U.S. 
owner, generally, the U.S. grantor or other U.S. owner of the 
grantor trust and not the grantor trust.
• In the case of a U.S. trust (other than a grantor trust), the U.S. 
trust and not the beneficiaries of the trust.
See Pub. 515 for more information.
Electronic Submission of Forms W-9
Requesters may establish a system for payees and payees' 
agents to submit Forms W-9 electronically, including by fax. A 
requester is anyone required to file an information return. A 
payee is anyone required to provide a taxpayer identification 
number (TIN) to the requester. A payee is the holder of the 
account except if there is a QI, or a foreign person acting as 
agent or intermediary for a payment.
Electronic system. Generally, the electronic system must:
• Ensure the information received is the information sent, and 
document all occasions of user access that result in the 
submission;
• Make reasonably certain that the person accessing the 
system and submitting the form is the person identified on Form 
W-9, the investment advisor, or the introducing broker;
• Provide the same information as the paper Form W-9;
• Be able to supply a hard copy of the electronic Form W-9 if 
the IRS requests it; and
• Require as the final entry in the submission an electronic 
signature by the payee whose name is on Form W-9 that 
authenticates and verifies the submission. The electronic 
signature must be under penalties of perjury, and the perjury 
statement must contain the language of the paper Form W-9.
For Forms W-9 that are not required to be signed, the 
electronic system need not provide for an electronic 
signature or a perjury statement.
For more details, see:
• Announcement 98-27, which is on page 30 of Internal 
Revenue Bulletin 1998-15, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
irb98-15.pdf.
• Announcement 2001-91, which is on page 221 of Internal 
Revenue Bulletin 2001-36 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-36.pdf.
Responsibility of a Withholding Agent/Qualified 
Intermediary (QI)/Nominee
Payee's agent. A payee's agent can be an investment advisor 
(corporation, partnership, or individual) or an introducing broker. 
An investment advisor must be registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) under the Investment Advisers Act 
of 1940. The introducing broker is a broker-dealer that is 
regulated by the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (FINRA), and that is not a payor. Except for a broker 
who acts as a payee's agent for “readily tradable instruments,” 
the advisor or broker must show in writing to the payor that the 
payee authorized the advisor or broker to transmit the Form W-9 
to the payor.
A withholding agent may be an individual, corporation, 
partnership, trust, association, or any other entity, including (but 
not limited to) any foreign intermediary, foreign partnership, or 
U.S. branch of certain foreign banks and insurance companies. If 
several persons qualify as withholding agents for a single 
payment, the tax must only be withheld once.
A withholding agent is any person, U.S. or foreign, in 
whatever capacity acting, that has the control, receipt, custody, 
disposal, or payment of a withholdable payment or foreign 
pass-through payment. Generally, a withholding agent can 
reliably associate a withholdable payment with valid 
documentation if, before the payment, it has obtained (either 
directly from the payee or through its agent) valid documentation 
appropriate to the payee's chapter 4 status, it can reliably 
determine how much of the payment relates to the valid 
documentation, and it does not know (or have reason to know) 
that any of the information, certifications, or statements in, or 
associated with, the documentation are unreliable or incorrect.
A withholding agent that is making a withholdable payment to 
a nonqualified intermediary, for which a withholding statement is 
required under chapters 3 or 4, may accept a withholding 
statement that meets the requirements described in Regulations 
section 1.1471-3(c)(3). A nonqualified intermediary (NQI) is an 
TIP
4 Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024)

Page 5 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
intermediary that has not entered into any agreement with the 
IRS, and NQIs generally do not have any obligations other than 
passing up information regarding the persons for whom they 
receive payments so that upstream withholding agents can 
withhold and report as required.
A certificate or other documentation becomes invalid on the 
date that the withholding agent knows (or has reason to know) 
that circumstances affecting the correctness of the certificate or 
documentation have changed. See Pub. 515 for examples. For 
due diligence requirements applicable to withholding agents 
under chapter 4, see Regulations section 1.1471-3.
The Qualified Intermediary (QI) system is designed to simplify 
withholding and reporting obligations under Regulations section 
1.1441-1(e)(5) and allows an FFI, or foreign branches of a U.S. 
financial institution, to receive favorable documentation, 
reporting, and withholding tax treatment. A QI must provide a 
withholding agent with the Forms W-9 or disclose the names, 
addresses, and taxpayer identifying numbers, if known, of those 
U.S. non-exempt recipients for whom the QI receives reportable 
amounts to the extent required in the QI's agreement with the 
IRS. See Regulations section 1.1441-1(e)(5). For additional 
withholding and reporting provisions applicable to QIs under 
chapters 3 and 4, see Rev. Proc. 2022-43, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2022-52_IRB#REV-PROC-2022-43.
For information for QIs, nominees, and brokers carrying out 
transfers of an interest in a PTP , see Regulations section 
1.1446(f)-4. See also Notice 2023-8, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2023-02_IRB#NOT -2023-8.
Section 1445. For a disposition of a U.S. real property interest, 
the transferee generally is required to withhold 15% of the 
amount realized. See Pub. 515. For definitions of a U.S. real 
property interest and a U.S. real property holding company, see 
section 897.
Payees Exempt From Backup 
Withholding
Certain payees are exempt from backup withholding with respect 
to the payments below, and should enter the corresponding 
exempt payee code on Form W-9. Y ou may rely on the payee’s 
claim of exemption unless you have actual knowledge that the 
exempt payee code and/or classification selected are not valid, 
or if they are inconsistent with each other. In that case, you may 
rely on the Form W-9 for purposes of obtaining the payee’s TIN, 
but you must treat the payee as non-exempt. If the payee failed 
to enter an exempt payee code, but the classification selected 
indicates that the payee is exempt, you may accept the 
classification and treat the payee as exempt unless you have 
actual knowledge that the classification is not valid.
If the payee is not exempt, you are required to backup 
withhold on reportable payments if the payee does not provide a 
TIN in the manner required or does not sign the certification, if 
required. Exempt payees include:
1. An organization exempt from tax under
section 501(a), any IRA, or a custodial account under section 
403(b)(7) if the account satisfies the requirements of section 
401(f)(2);
2. The United States or any of its agencies or 
instrumentalities;
3. A state, the District of Columbia, a U.S. commonwealth or 
territory, or any of their political subdivisions, agencies, or 
instrumentalities;
4. A foreign government or any of its political subdivisions, 
agencies, or instrumentalities;
5. A corporation;
6. A dealer in securities or commodities required to register 
in the United States, the District of Columbia, or a U.S. 
commonwealth or territory;
7. A futures commission merchant registered with the 
Commodity Futures T rading Commission;
8. A real estate investment trust;
9. An entity registered at all times during the tax year under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940;
10. A common trust fund operated by a bank under
section 584(a);
11. A financial institution as defined under section 581;
12. A middleman known in the investment community as a 
nominee or custodian; or
13. A trust exempt from tax under section 664 or described in 
section 4947.
The following types of payments are exempt from backup 
withholding as indicated for payees listed in 1 through 13 above.
Interest and dividend payments. All listed payees are exempt 
except the payee in item 7.
Broker transactions. All payees listed in items 1 through 4 and 
6 through 11 are exempt. Also, C corporations are exempt. A 
person registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 
who regularly acts as a broker is also exempt.
Barter exchange transactions and patronage dividends. 
Only payees listed in items 1 through 4 are exempt.
Payments reportable under sections 6041 and 6041A. 
Payees listed in items 1 through 5 generally are exempt.
However, the following payments made to a corporation and 
reportable on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Information, are 
not exempt from backup withholding.
• Medical and health care payments.
• Attorneys' fees (also gross proceeds paid to an attorney, 
reportable under section 6045(f)).
• Payments for services paid by a federal executive agency. 
(See Rev. Rul. 2003-66, which is on page 1115 of Internal 
Revenue Bulletin 2003-26, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
irb03-26.pdf.)
Payments made in settlement of payment card or third par-
ty network transactions. Only payees listed in items 1 through 
4 are exempt.
Payments Exempt From Backup 
Withholding
Payments that are not subject to information reporting also are 
not subject to backup withholding. For details, see sections 
6041, 6041A, 6042, 6044, 6049, and 6050N and their 
regulations. The following payments generally are exempt from 
backup withholding.
Dividends and patronage dividends. 
• Payments to nonresident aliens subject to withholding under 
section 1441.
• Payments to partnerships not engaged in a trade or business 
in the United States and that have at least one nonresident alien 
partner.
• Payments of patronage dividends not paid in money.
• Payments made by certain foreign organizations.
• Section 404(k) distributions made by an employee stock 
ownership plan (ESOP).
Interest payments. 
• Payments of interest on obligations issued by individuals. 
However, if you pay $600 or more of interest in the course of your 
trade or business to a payee, you must report the payment. 
Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024) 5

Page 6 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Backup withholding applies to the reportable payment if the 
payee has not provided a TIN or has provided an incorrect TIN.
• Payments described in section 6049(b)(5) to nonresident 
aliens.
• Payments on tax-free covenant bonds under
section 1451.
• Payments made by certain foreign organizations.
• Mortgage or student loan interest paid to you.
Other types of payment. 
• Wages.
• Distributions from a pension, annuity, profit-sharing or stock 
bonus plan, any IRA, an owner-employee plan, or other deferred 
compensation plan.
• Distributions from a medical or health savings account and 
long-term care benefits.
• Certain surrenders of life insurance contracts.
• Distribution from qualified tuition programs or
Coverdell Education Savings Accounts (ESAs).
• Gambling winnings if regular gambling winnings withholding is 
required under section 3402(q). However, if regular gambling 
winnings withholding is not required under section 3402(q), 
backup withholding applies if the payee fails to furnish a TIN.
• Real estate transactions reportable under
section 6045(e).
• Cancelled debts reportable under section 6050P .
• Fish purchases for cash reportable under
section 6050R.
Payees and Account Holders Exempt 
From FATCA Reporting
Reporting under chapter 4 (FATCA) with respect to U.S. persons 
generally applies only to non-financial foreign entities (NFFEs), 
and foreign financial institutions (FFIs) (including a branch of a 
U.S. financial institution that is treated as an FFI under an 
applicable intergovernmental agreement (IGA)). For information 
on IGAs, see the IRS website FATCA page, available at IRS.gov/
FATCA. See also Pub. 5118, FATCA Online Registration User 
Guide, for more information.
Thus, for example, a U.S. financial institution maintaining an 
account in the United States does not need to collect an 
exemption code for FATCA reporting. If you are providing a Form 
W-9, you may pre-populate the FATCA exemption code with "Not 
Applicable," "N/A," or a similar indication that an exemption from 
FATCA reporting does not apply. Any payee that provides such a 
form, however, cannot be treated as exempt from FATCA 
reporting. See Regulations section 1.1471-3(d)(2) for when an 
FFI may rely on documentary evidence to treat a U.S. person as 
other than a specified U.S. person, and see Regulations section 
1.1471-3(f)(3) for when an FFI may apply a presumption rule and 
treat a U.S. person as other than a specified U.S. person.
If you receive a Form W-9 with a FATCA exemption code and 
you know or have reason to know the person is a specified U.S. 
person, you may not rely on the Form W-9 to treat the person as 
exempt from FATCA reporting. However, you may still rely on an 
otherwise completed Form W-9 to treat a person as a specified 
U.S. person. An exemption from FATCA reporting (or lack 
thereof) does not affect backup withholding as described earlier 
in these instructions. The following are not specified U.S. 
persons under chapter 4 and are thus exempt from FATCA 
reporting.
A. An organization exempt from tax under section 501(a), or 
any individual retirement plan as defined in section 7701(a)(37);
B. The United States or any of its agencies or 
instrumentalities;
C. A state, the District of Columbia, a U.S. commonwealth or 
territory, or any of their political subdivisions, agencies, or 
instrumentalities;
D. A corporation the stock of which is regularly traded on one 
or more established securities markets, as described in 
Regulations section 1.1472-1(c)(1)(i);
E. A corporation that is a member of the same expanded 
affiliated group as a corporation described in Regulations 
section 1.1472-1(c)(1)(i);
F . A dealer in securities, commodities, or derivative financial 
instruments (including notional principal contracts, futures, 
forwards, and options) that is registered as such under the laws 
of the United States or any state;
G. A real estate investment trust;
H. A regulated investment company as defined in section 
851 or an entity registered at all times during the tax year under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940;
I.   A common trust fund as defined in section 584(a);
J.  A bank as defined in section 581;
K. A broker;
L.  A trust exempt from tax under section 664 or described in 
section 4947; or
M. A tax-exempt trust under a section 403(b) plan or section 
457(g) plan.
Joint Foreign Payees
Under chapter 4, if the first payee listed on an account gives you 
a form within the W-8 series, or a similar statement signed under 
penalties of perjury, backup withholding applies unless:
1. Every joint payee provides the statement regarding 
foreign status, or
2. Any one of the joint payees who has not established 
foreign status gives you a TIN.
If any one of the joint payees who hasn’t established foreign 
status gives you a TIN, use that number for purposes of backup 
withholding and information reporting.
Generally, if a withholding agent makes a payment to joint 
payees and cannot reliably associate the payment with valid 
documentation from each payee, but all of the joint payees 
appear to be individuals, then the payment is presumed made to 
an unidentified U.S. person, and backup withholding applies. 
However, if one of the joint payees provides a Form W-9 in 
accordance with the procedures described in Regulations 
section 31.3406(d)-1 through 31.3406(d)-5, the payment is 
treated as made to that payee, and no withholding is required. 
See Regulations sections 1.1441-1(b)(9), and 1.1471-3(f)(7).
For more information on foreign payees, see the Instructions 
for the Requester of Forms W-8BEN, W-8BEN-E, W-8ECI, 
W-8EXP , and W-8IMY .
Names and TINs To Use
for Information Reporting
Show the full name and address as provided on Form W-9 on 
the information return filed with the IRS and on the copy 
furnished to the payee. If the payee has marked their address 
“NEW,” you should update your records. If you made payments 
to more than one payee or the account is in more than one 
name, enter on the first name line of the information return only 
the name of the payee whose TIN is shown on Form W-9. Y ou 
may show the names of any other individual payees in the area 
below the first name line on the information return. Forms W-9 
showing an ITIN must have the name exactly as shown on 
line 1a of the Form W-7 application. If you are a PFFI reporting a 
U.S. account on Form 8966, FATCA Report, and the account is 
6 Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024)

Page 7 of 7  Fileid: … ons/iw-9/202403/a/xml/cycle07/source 10:58 - 11-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
jointly held by U.S. persons, file a separate Form 8966 for each 
holder.
For more information on the names and TINs to use for 
information reporting, see section J of the General 
Instructions for Certain Information Returns, available at 
IRS.gov/instructions/i1099gi.
Notices From the IRS
The IRS will send you a notice if the payee's name and TIN on 
the information return you filed don’t match the IRS's records. 
(See T axpayer Identification Number (TIN) Matching next.) If you 
receive a backup withholding notice, you may have to send a “B” 
notice to the payee to solicit another TIN. Pub. 1281, Backup 
Withholding for Missing and Incorrect Name/TIN(s), contains 
copies of the two types of “B” notices. If you receive a penalty 
notice, you may also have to send a solicitation to the payee. 
See Pub. 1586, Reasonable Cause Regulations & Requirements 
for Missing and Incorrect Name/TINs on Information Returns.
Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) 
Matching
TIN matching allows a payor or authorized agent who is required 
to file information returns to match TIN and name combinations 
with IRS records before submitting the forms to the IRS. TIN 
matching is one of the e-services products that is offered and is 
accessible through the IRS website. Go to the eServices 
Registration home page, located at IRS.gov/e-services. See also 
Pub. 2108A, On-Line T axpayer Identification Number (TIN) 
Matching Program, for guidance. It is anticipated that payors who 
validate the TIN and name combinations before filing information 
returns will receive fewer backup withholding (CP2100) notices 
and penalty notices. Program participants will generally be able 
to rely on a verified TIN/name match as reasonable cause under 
section 6724(a), which will provide significant incentive for 
payors to check and correct payee TINs before filing information 
returns and payee statements. See Rev. Proc. 2003-9, which is 
TIP
on page 516 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2003-8, available at 
IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-08.pdf. Any information received 
through the TIN matching program must be kept confidential in 
accordance with Regulations section 31.3406(f)-1.
Payment and Returns of Tax Withheld
Form 945. If you withhold or are required to withhold federal 
income tax (including backup withholding) from nonpayroll 
payments, you must file Form 945, Annual Return of Withheld 
Federal Income T ax. Report all federal income tax withholding 
from nonpayroll payments or distributions annually on one Form 
945. Form 945 is used to report income tax withholding on 
nonpayroll payments including backup withholding and 
withholding on pensions, annuities, IRAs, military retirement, and 
gambling winnings. A payor must remit to the IRS all monies 
withheld from reportable payments based on a certain deposit 
schedule. Form 945-A, Annual Record of Federal T ax Liability, is 
used to report tax liability by payors who deposit nonpayroll 
income tax withheld on a semiweekly schedule, or whose tax 
liability on any day is $100,000 or more. See T .D. 8672 for details 
of reporting nonpayroll withheld income taxes under section 
6011. See the Instructions for Form 945.
Form 1042. Don't report on Form 945 withholding that is 
required to be reported electronically on Form 1042, Annual 
Withholding T ax Return for U.S. Source Income of Foreign 
Persons. Use Form 1042 to report tax withheld under chapter 3 
on certain income of foreign persons, including nonresident 
aliens, foreign partnerships, foreign corporations, foreign 
estates, and foreign trusts. Also use Form 1042 to report tax 
withheld under chapter 4 on withholdable payments. See the 
Instructions for Form 1042 for details.
Additional Information
For more information on backup withholding, see Pubs. 1281 
and 515.
Instr. for Req. of Form W-9 (Rev. 3-2024) 7