Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -10% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P501.SGM ( 3-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: C:\Documents and Settings\S20FB\My Documents\epic files\05Pub501 (New).sgm
Page 1 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 ContentsCat. No. 15000U
What’s New for 2005............... 1Department
of the Reminders ...................... 2Exemptions,Treasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Standard Who Must File ................... 2Service
Who Should File ................. 4Deduction,
Filing Status.................... 5
and Filing Exemptions ..................... 9
Exemptions for Dependents......... 10
Information
Phaseout of Exemptions............ 19
Standard Deduction............... 19
2005 Standard Deduction Tables.... 22For use in preparing
How To Get Tax Help.............. 23
2005 Returns
Index.......................... 25
What’s New for 2005
Exemption for dependent. Beginning in
2005, you will use new rules to determine
whether you can claim an exemption for a de-
pendent. You can claim an exemption for a
“qualifying child” or a “qualifying relative.” See
Exemptions for Dependents.
Head of household filing status.Beginning
in 2005, you will use new rules to determine
whether someone is your qualifying person so
you can claim head of household filing status. To
be your qualifying person, a child generally must
be your “qualifying child.” See Head of House-
hold.
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a
return has increased.  Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$3,100 in 2004 to $3,200 in 2005.
Exemption for individual displaced by Hurri-
cane Katrina. You may be able to claim a
$500 exemption if you provided housing to a
person displaced by Hurricane Katrina. For de-
tails, see Exemption for Individual Displaced by
Hurricane Katrina.
Exemption phaseout. You lose all or part of
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted
gross income is above a certain amount. The
amount at which this phaseout begins depends
on your filing status. For 2005, the phaseout
begins at $109,475 for married persons filing
separately; $145,950 for single individuals;
Get forms and other information $182,450 for heads of household; and $218,950
for married persons filing jointly or qualifying
faster and easier by:
widow(er)s. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Internet • www.irs.gov Standard deduction.The standard deduction
for most taxpayers who do not itemize deduc-

Page 2 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is higher in claim; and the amount of the standard deduc-Nonresident aliens.If you were a nonresi-
tion. dent alien at any time during the year, the rules2005 than it was in 2004. The amount depends
and tax forms that apply to you may be differenton your filing status. The 2005 Standard Deduc- The first section of this publication explains
from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-who must file an income tax return. If you havetion Tables are shown near the end of this publi-
cation 519.little or no gross income, reading this section willcation as Tables 7, 8, and 9.
help you decide if you have to file a return.Comments and suggestions. We welcomeItemized deductions.Some of your itemized The second section is about who should fileyour comments about this publication and yourdeductions may be limited if your adjusted grossa return. Reading this section will help you de-suggestions for future editions.income is more than $145,950 ($72,975 if youcide if you should file a return, even if you are notYou can write to us at the following address:are married filing separately). See Who Should required to do so.
Itemize, later. The third section helps you determine whichInternal Revenue Servicefiling status to use. Filing status is important inIndividual Forms and Publications Branchdetermining whether you must file a return, yourSE:W:CAR:MP:T:Istandard deduction, and your tax rate. It also1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406helps determine what credits you may be enti-Reminders Washington, DC 20224tled to.
The fourth section discusses exemptions,Election to report child’s unearned income We respond to many letters by telephone.which reduce your taxable income.on parent’s return. You may be able to in- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-The fifth section is about exemptions for de-clude your child’s interest and dividend income clude your daytime phone number, including thependents. It explains the difference between aon your tax return by using Form 8814, Parents’ area code, in your correspondence.qualifying child and a qualifying relative. OtherElection To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thetopics include the social security number re-dends. If you choose to do this, your child will not asterisk must be included in the address.)quirement for dependents, the rules for multiplehave to file a return. Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-support agreements, and the rules for divorcedject line. Although we cannot respond individu-or separated parents.Photographs of missing children.The Inter- ally to each email, we do appreciate yourThe sixth section gives the rules and dollarnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the feedback and will consider your comments asamounts for the standard deduction — a benefitNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- we revise our tax products.for taxpayers who do not itemize their deduc-dren. Photographs of missing children selected
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,tions. This section also discusses the standardby the Center may appear in this publication on
visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Wededuction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65pages that would otherwise be blank. You can cannot answer tax questions at either of theor older, and special rules for dependents. Inhelp bring these children home by looking at the addresses listed above.addition, this section should help you decidephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
whether you would be better off taking the stan-(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Ordering forms and publications. Visitdard deduction or itemizing your deductions.www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
The last section explains how to get tax helppublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
from the IRS. National Distribution Center at the address
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-shown under How To Get Tax Help in the backIntroduction dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien forof this publication.
This publication discusses some tax rules thatthe entire year, you must follow the same tax
affect every person who may have to file a fed-rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules toUseful Itemseral income tax return. It answers some basicdetermine if you are a resident or nonresidentYou may want to see:questions: who must file; who should file; whatalien are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication
filing status to use; how many exemptions to519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. Publication
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andTable 1. 2005 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
Administrators
THEN file a return ❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and
if your gross Dependents
AND at the end of 2005 you income was at
Form (and Instructions)IF your filing status is... were...* least...**
❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual Incomeunder 65  $ 8,200single Tax Return
65 or older $ 9,450 ❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representativeunder 65 $10,500head of household
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for65 or older $11,750 Child of Divorced or Separated
Parentsunder 65 (both spouses) $16,400married, filing jointly***
❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s65 or older (one spouse) $17,400 Interest and Dividends
65 or older (both spouses) $18,400 ❏ 8914 Exemption Amount for Taxpayers
Housing Individuals Displaced bymarried, filing separately any age  $ 3,200
Hurricane Katrina
under 65 $13,200qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child 65 or older $14,200
*  If you were born before January 2, 1941, you are considered to be 65 or older at the end of 2005.Who Must File**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and
services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether youStates (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless
must file a federal income tax return dependsyou are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during
2005. upon your gross income, your filing status, your
*** If you didn’t live with your spouse at the end of 2005 (or on the date your spouse died) andage, and whether you are a dependent. Foryour gross income was at least $3,200, you must file a return regardless of your age. details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You also must
Page 2

Page 3 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gross income. Gross income is all incomeTable 2. 2005 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent. erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If
you are married and live with your spouse in a
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to seecommunity property state, half of any income
if you must file a return. defined by state law as community income may
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, andbe considered yours. For a list of community
capital gain distributions. Earned income includes wages, tips, and taxableproperty states, see Community property states
scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearned andunder Married Filing Separately, later.
earned income. Self-employed persons. If you are
Caution:If your gross income was $3,200 or more, you usually cannot be claimedself-employed in a business that provides serv-
as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. For details, see  Exemptions for ices (where products are not a factor), your
Dependents. gross income from that business is the gross
receipts. If you are self-employed in a business
involving manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? ing, your gross income from that business is the
❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. total sales minus the cost of goods sold. To this
figure, you add any income from investments1. Your unearned income was more than $800.
and from incidental or outside operations or2. Your earned income was more than $5,000. sources.3. Your gross income was more than the larger of —
You must file Form 1040 if you owe
a. $800, or any self-employment tax.
b. Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
TIP
Filing status.Your filing status generally de-❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. pends on whether you are single or married. In
1. Your unearned income was more than $2,050 ($3,300 if 65 or older and some cases, it depends on other factors as well.
blind). Whether you are single or married is determined
as of the last day of your tax year, which is2. Your earned income was more than $6,250 ($7,500 if 65 or older and
December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status isblind).
discussed in detail later in this publication.3. Your gross income was more than $1,250 ($2,500 if 65 or older and
blind) plus the larger of: Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the enda. $800, or
of your tax year. For 2005, you are 65 or older ifb. Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
you were born before January 2, 1941.
Filing RequirementsMarried dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? for Most Taxpayers❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
You must file a return if your gross income for1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate
the year was at least the amount shown on thereturn and itemizes deductions. appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should2. Your unearned income was more than $800. see Table 2 instead.
3. Your earned income was more than $5,000.
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of —
Deceased Personsa. $800, or
You must file an income tax return for a dece-b.  Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
dent (a person who died) if both of the following
are true.
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. You are the surviving spouse, executor,1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separateadministrator, or legal representative.return and itemizes deductions.
2. The decedent met the filing requirements2. Your unearned income was more than $1,800 ($2,800 if 65 or older and
described in this publication at the time ofblind).
his or her death.3. Your earned income was more than $6,000 ($7,000 if 65 or older and
For more information, see Final Return forblind).
Decedent in Publication 559.4. Your gross income was more than $1,000 ($2,000 if 65 or older and
blind) plus the larger of:
U.S. Citizens ora. $800 or
Residents Living Abroadb. Your earned income (up to $4,750) plus $250.
For purposes of determining whether you must
file a return, you must include in your gross
income all of the income you earned abroad,
including any income you can exclude under thefile if one of the situations described in Table 3 fail to file a return, you may be subject to criminal
foreign earned income exclusion. For more in-applies. The filing requirements apply even if prosecution.
formation on special tax rules that may apply toyou owe no tax. For information on what form to use — Form
you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. You may have to pay a penalty if you are 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the
Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.required to file a return but fail to. If you willfully instructions in your tax package.
Page 3

Page 4 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
parents have the right to the earnings and mayTable 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2005 Return
actually have received them. If the child does not
pay the tax due on this income, the parent isIf any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2005, you must file a
liable for the tax.return.
Unearned income. This is income such as
1. You owe any special taxes, such as: interest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis-
tributions of interest, dividends, capital gains,
and survivor annuities are considered unearned•
Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 45.)
income also.
• Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirementElection to report child’s unearned incomearrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590,on parent’s return. You may be able to in-
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Healthclude your child’s interest and dividend income
Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.) But if you are filing aon your tax return. If you choose to do this, your
return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself.child will not have to file a return. However, all of
the following conditions must be met.
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.1. Your child was under age 14 at the end of(See Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income.) 2005. (A child born on January 1, 1992, is
considered to be age 14 at the end of• Write-in taxes, including uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad2005; you cannot make the election for this
retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer or on group-term lifechild.)
insurance. (See Publication 531 and the Form 1040 instructions for line 63.)
2. Your child is required to file a return for
2005 unless you make this election.• Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you
3. Your child had gross income only from in-owe these taxes, you can file Schedule H by itself.
terest and dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund• Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 44 and 62.)
dividends).
4. The interest and dividend income was less2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your
than $8,000.employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (See
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit.) 5. No estimated tax payment was made for
2005 and no 2004 overpayment was ap-
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See  Schedule SEplied to 2005 under your child’s name and
(Form 1040) and its instructions.) social security number.
6. No federal income tax was withheld from
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlledyour child’s income under the backup with-
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.holding rules.
(See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.) 7. You are the parent whose return must be
used when making the election to report
your child’s unearned income.island government. See Publication 570 for
Residents of Puerto Rico
For more information, see Parent’s Electionmore information.
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a bona To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends in Pub-
fide resident of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. lication 929, and Form 8814.Dependentsincome tax return if you meet the income re-
quirements. This is in addition to any legal re-A person who is a dependent may still have toOther Situationsquirement you may have to file an income taxfile a return. This depends on the amount of the
return with Puerto Rico. You may have to file a tax return even if yourdependent’s earned income, unearned income,
gross income is less than the amount shown inand gross income. For details, see Table 2. AIf you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico
Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. Seedependent may also have to file if one of thefor the whole year, your U.S. gross income does
Table 3 for those other situations when you mustsituations described in Table 3 applies.not include income from sources within Puerto
file.Rico. However, include in your U.S. gross in-
Responsibility of parent.If a dependentcome any income you received for your services
child who must file an income tax return cannotas an employee of the United States or any U.S.
file it for any reason, such as age, a parent,agency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-
guardian, or other legally responsible personWho Should Filecan sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, you
must file it for the child. If the child cannot signmust reduce your standard deduction, which
the return, the parent or guardian must sign theEven if you do not have to file, you should file areduces the amount of income you can have
child’s name followed by the words “By (yourtax return if you can get money back. For exam-before you must file a U.S. income tax return.signature), parent for minor child.” ple, you should file if one of the following applies.For more information, see Publication 570,
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income FromEarned income. This is salaries, wages, pro-1. You had income tax withheld from yourU.S. Possessions. fessional fees, and other amounts received aspay.
pay for work you actually perform. Earned in-2. You made estimated tax payments for thecome (only for purposes of filing requirementsyear or had any of your overpayment forIndividuals With Income From U.S.and the standard deduction) also includes anylast year applied to this year’s estimatedPossessions part of a scholarship that you must include intax.your gross income. See chapter 1 of PublicationIf you had income from Guam, the Common- 970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor- 3. You qualify for the earned income credit.wealth of Northern Mariana Islands, Americanmation on taxable and nontaxable scholarships. See Publication 596, Earned IncomeSamoa, or the U. S. Virgin Islands, special rules Credit (EIC), for more information.may apply when determining whether you mustChild’s earnings.Amounts a child earns by
file a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,performing services are his or her gross income. 4. You qualify for the additional child tax
you may have to file a return with the individualThis is true even if under local law the child’s credit. See the instructions in your tax
Page 4

Page 5 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
forms package for more information on this household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form
credit. dependent child. See Head of Household and 1040, show your filing status as single by check-
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of5. You qualify for the health coverage taxsee if you qualify. the Tax Table, or Section A of the Tax Computa-credit. For information about this credit, tion Worksheet, to figure your tax.see Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax Married persons. If you are considered mar-Credit. ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canMarried Filing Jointlyfile a joint return, or you can file separate re-
turns. You can choose married filing jointly as your
filing status if you are married and both you andConsidered married. You are considered
your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a jointFiling Status married for the whole year if on the last day of
return, you report your combined income andyour tax year you and your spouse meet any one
deduct your combined allowable expenses. YouYou must determine your filing status before youof the following tests.
can file a joint return even if one of you had nocan determine your filing requirements, stan-
1. You are married and living together asincome or deductions.dard deduction (discussed later), and correct
husband and wife. If you and your spouse decide to file a jointtax. You figure your correct tax by using the Tax
return, your tax may be lower than your com-Computation Worksheet or the column in the2. You are living together in a common lawbined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourTax Table that applies to your filing status.marriage that is recognized in the statestandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-You also use your filing status in determiningwhere you now live or in the state wheretions) may be higher, and you may qualify for taxwhether you are eligible to claim certain otherthe common law marriage began. benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.deductions and credits.
3. You are married and living apart, but notThere are five filing statuses: If you and your spouse each havelegally separated under a decree of di- income, you may want to figure your• Single, vorce or separate maintenance. tax both on a joint return and on sepa-
TIP
• Married Filing Jointly, 4. You are separated under an interlocutoryrate returns (using the filing status of married
(not final) decree of divorce. For purposes• Married Filing Separately, filing separately). You can choose the method
of filing a joint return, you are not consid-that gives the two of you the lower combined tax.• Head of Household, and ered divorced. How to file.If you file as married filing jointly,• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youSpouse died during the year. If yourChild. have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,spouse died during the year, you are consideredIf more than one filing status applies to you, and meet other requirements, you can file Formmarried for the whole year for filing status pur-choose the one that will give you the lowest tax. 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,poses. show this filing status by checking the box onIf you did not remarry before the end of theline 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theMarital Status tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfTax Table, or Section B of the Tax Computationand your deceased spouse. For the next 2In general, your filing status depends on Worksheet, to figure your tax.years, you may be entitled to the special benefitswhether you are considered unmarried or mar-described later under Qualifying Widow(er) WithSpouse died during the year.If your spouseried. A marriage means only a legal union be-Dependent Child. died during the year, you are considered mar-tween a man and a woman as husband and If you remarried before the end of the taxried for the whole year and can choose marriedwife. year, you can file a joint return with your newfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse
spouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status isdied during the year, under Married persons,Unmarried persons. You are considered un-married filing separately for that year. earlier.married for the whole year if, on the last day of
your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-Married persons living apart.If you liveDivorced persons. If you are divorced under
rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa-apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,a final decree by the last day of the year, you are
rate maintenance decree. you may be considered unmarried. If this appliesconsidered unmarried for the whole year and
State law governs whether you are marriedto you, you can file as head of household evenyou cannot choose married filing jointly as your
or legally separated under a divorce or separatethough you are not divorced or legally sepa-filing status.
maintenance decree. rated. If you qualify to file as head of household
instead of as married filing separately, yourDivorced persons.  If you are divorced standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxFiling a Joint Returnunder a final decree by the last day of the year,may be lower, and you may be able to claim theyou are considered unmarried for the whole Both you and your spouse must include all ofearned income credit. See Head of Household,year. your income, exemptions, and deductions onlater.
your joint return.Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filingSingle Accounting period.Both of you must use thetax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the same accounting period, but you can use differ-time of divorce you intended to and did remarryYour filing status is single if, on the last day ofent accounting methods.each other in the next tax year, you and yourthe year, you are unmarried or legally separated
Joint responsibility.Both of you may be heldspouse must file as married individuals. from your spouse under a divorce or separate
responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxmaintenance decree, and you do not qualify forAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a court and any interest or penalty due on your jointanother filing status. To determine your maritaldecree of annulment, which holds that no valid return. One spouse may be held responsible forstatus on the last day of the year, see Maritalmarriage ever existed, you are considered un- all the tax due even if all the income was earnedStatus, earlier.married even if you filed joint returns for earlier by the other spouse.Your filing status may be single if you wereyears. You must file amended returns (Formwidowed before January 1, 2005, and did notDivorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly1040X) claiming single or head of householdremarry in 2005. However, you might be able toand individually responsible for any tax, interest,status for all tax years affected by the annulmentuse another filing status that will give you a lowerand penalties due on a joint return filed beforethat are not closed by the statute of limitationstax. See Head of Household and Qualifying your divorce. This responsibility may apply evenfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsWidow(er) With Dependent Child, later, to see ifif your divorce decree states that your formergenerally does not expire until 3 years after youryou qualify. spouse will be responsible for any amounts dueoriginal return was filed.
on previously filed joint returns.Head of household or qualifying widow(er)How to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
with dependent child.If you are considered have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,Relief from joint responsibility.In some
unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-
Page 5

Page 6 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlySpecial Rules
for items of the other spouse which were incor-if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legal
If you choose married filing separately as yourrectly reported on the joint return. You can askdocument giving you permission to act for your
filing status, the following special rules apply.for relief no matter how small the liability.spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyBecause of these special rules, you will usuallyThere are three types of relief available. of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848.pay more tax on a separate return than if you
1. Innocent spouse relief, which applies to all used another filing status that you qualify for.Nonresident alien or dual-status alien.Ajoint filers. joint return generally cannot be filed if either1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than2. Separation of liability, which applies to jointspouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringit would be on a joint return.filers who are divorced, widowed, legallythe tax year. However, if one spouse was a
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-separated, or who have not lived togethernonresident alien or dual-status alien who wasternative minimum tax will be half that al-for the 12 months ending on the date elec-married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end oflowed to a joint return filer.tion of this relief is filed. the year, the spouses can choose to file a joint
3. You cannot take the credit for child andreturn. If you do file a joint return, you and your3. Equitable relief, which applies to all joint
dependent care expenses in most cases,filers who do not qualify for innocentspouse are both treated as U.S. residents for the
and the amount that you can exclude fromspouse relief or separation of liability andentire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publication 519.
income under an employer’s dependentto married couples filing separate returns
care assistance program is limited toin community property states. Married Filing Separately $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno- return).You can choose married filing separately ascent Spouse Relief, to request any of these
your filing status if you are married. This filing4. You cannot take the earned income credit.kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-Relief, explains these kinds of relief and who 5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit forsible only for your own tax or if it results in lessmay qualify for them. adoption expenses in most cases.tax than filing a joint return.
Signing a joint return.For a return to be 6. You cannot take the education credits (theIf you and your spouse do not agree to file aconsidered a joint return, both husband and wife Hope credit and the lifetime learningjoint return, you have to use this filing statusgenerally must sign the return. credit), the deduction for student loan inter-unless you qualify for head of household status,
est, or the tuition and fees deduction.discussed next.Spouse died before signing. If your
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-You may be able to choose head of house-7. You cannot exclude any interest income
utor or administrator must sign the return forhold filing status if you live apart from yourfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds that you
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasspouse, meet certain tests, and are consideredused for higher education expenses.
yet been appointed as executor or administrator,unmarried (explained later, under Head of 8. If you lived with your spouse at any timeyou can sign the return for your spouse andHousehold). This can apply to you even if youduring the tax year:enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the areaare not divorced or legally separated. If youwhere you sign the return. qualify to file as head of household, instead of asa. You cannot claim the credit for the eld-
married filing separately, your tax may be lower,erly or the disabled.Spouse away from home. If your spouse is
you may be able to claim the earned incomeaway from home, you should prepare the return, b. You will have to include in income moresign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatcredit and certain other credits, and your stan-(up to 85%) of any social security orit can be filed on time. dard deduction will be higher. The head of equivalent railroad retirement benefitshousehold filing status allows you to choose theyou received, andInjury or disease prevents signing.If your standard deduction even if your spouse choosesspouse cannot sign because of injury or disease c. You cannot roll over amounts from ato itemize deductions. See Head of Household,and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’s traditional IRA into a Roth IRA.later, for more information.name in the proper space on the return followed
by the words “By (your name), Husband (or Unless you are required to file sepa-9. The following credits and deductions areWife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro- rately, you should figure your tax bothreduced at income levels that are half ofvided for your signature. Attach a dated state- ways (on a joint return and on sepa-
TIP
those for a joint return:ment, signed by you, to the return. The rate returns). This way you can make sure you
statement should include the form number of the a. The child tax credit,are using the filing status that results in the
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonlowest combined tax. However, you will gener-b. The retirement savings contributionsyour spouse cannot sign, and that your spouseally pay more combined tax on separate returns credit,has agreed to your signing for him or her.than you would on a joint return for the reasons
c. Itemized deductions, andlisted under Special Rules, later.Signing as guardian of spouse.If you are
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally d. The deduction for personal exemptions.
incompetent, you can sign the return for yourHow to file.If you file a separate return, you
spouse as guardian. generally report only your own income, exemp-10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500
tions, credits, and deductions on your individual (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse is turn).return. You can claim an exemption for yourunable to sign the return because he or she is
spouse if your spouse had no gross income andserving in a combat zone (such as the Persian 11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, youwas not the dependent of another person. How-Gulf area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a cannot claim the standard deduction. If you
ever, if your spouse had any gross income orqualified hazardous duty area (Bosnia and Her- can claim the standard deduction, your ba-
was the dependent of someone else, you cannotzegovina, Croatia, or Macedonia), and you do sic standard deduction is half the amount
claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-not have a power of attorney or other statement, allowed on a joint return.
rate return.you can sign for your spouse. Attach a signed
statement to your return that explains that yourIf you file as married filing separately, youIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).spouse is serving in a combat zone. For morecan use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisYou may not be able to deduct all or part of yourinformation on special tax rules for persons whofiling status by checking the box on line 3 ofcontributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourare serving in a combat zone, or who are ineither form. You also must enter your spouse’sspouse was covered by an employee retirementmissing status as a result of serving in a combatsocial security number and full name in theplan at work during the year. Your deduction iszone, get Publication 3, Armed Forces’ Taxspaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-reduced or eliminated if your income is moreGuide. rately column of the Tax Table or Section C ofthan a certain amount. This amount is much
the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure yourOther reasons spouse cannot sign. If lower for married individuals who file separately
tax.your spouse cannot sign the joint return for any and lived together at any time during the year.
Page 6

Page 7 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see How Much Can You If you qualify to file as head of house- poses of the earned income credit (unless you
Deduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ- hold, your tax rate usually will bemeet the five tests listed earlier under Consid-
ual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs). lower than the rates for single or mar- ered Unmarried). You are not entitled to the
TIP
ried filing separately. You will also receive acredit unless you file a joint return with your
higher standard deduction than if you file asspouse and meet other qualifications.Rental activity losses.If you actively partici-
single or married filing separately.  See Publication 596 for more information.pated in a passive rental real estate activity that
produced a loss, you generally can deduct theHow to file.If you file as head of household,Choice to treat spouse as resident.Youloss from your nonpassive income up to you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.are considered married if you choose to treat$25,000. This is called a special allowance.Indicate your choice of this filing status byyour spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1However, married persons filing separate re-checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theof Publication 519.turns who lived together at any time during theHead of a household column of the Tax Table oryear cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet toried persons filing separate returns who livedfigure your tax. Keeping Up a Homeapart at all times during the year are each al-
lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance To qualify for head of household status, you
for losses from passive real estate activities. must pay more than half of the cost of keepingConsidered UnmarriedSee Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passive up a home for the year. You can determine
Activity and At-Risk Rules. To qualify for head of household status, youwhether you paid more than half of the cost of
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-keeping up a home by using the following work-
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-Community property states.If you live in Ari- sheet.
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year ifzona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,
you meet all the following tests. New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin
and file separately, your income may be consid- Cost of Keeping Up a Home1. You file a separate return (defined, earlier,ered separate income or community income for
under Joint Return After Separate Re-income tax purposes. See Publication 555,
turns). AmountCommunity Property.
You Total2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- Paid Costing up your home for the tax year.
Joint Return After Property taxes $ $3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur-Separate Returns Mortgage interest expenseing the last 6 months of the tax year. YourRentspouse is considered to live in your homeYou can change your filing status by filing an Utility chargeseven if he or she is temporarily absent dueamended return using Form 1040X. Upkeep and repairsto special circumstances. See TemporaryIf you or your spouse (or both of you) file a Property insuranceabsences, later.separate return, you generally can change to a Food consumedjoint return any time within 3 years from the due4. Your home was the main home of your on the premisesdate of the separate return or returns. This doeschild, stepchild, or eligible foster child forOther household expensesnot include any extensions. A separate returnmore than half the year. (See Home of Totals $$includes a return filed by you or your spousequalifying person, later, for rules applying
claiming married filing separately, single, orto a child’s birth, death, or temporary ab-Minus total amount you ()head of household filing status. sence during the year.) paid
5. You must be able to claim an exemption
Amount others paid $for the child. However, you meet this test ifSeparate Returns
you cannot claim the exemption only be-After Joint Return
cause the noncustodial parent can claim
If the total amount you paid is more than the amountOnce you file a joint return, you cannot choosethe child using the rules described later inothers paid, you meet the requirement of paying moreto file separate returns for that year after the dueChildren of divorced or separated parentsthan half the cost of keeping up the home.
date of the return. under Qualifying Child or in Support Test
for Children of Divorced or Separated Par-
ents under Qualifying Relative. The gen-Exception. A personal representative for a Costs you include.Include in the cost of up-eral rules for claiming an exemption for adecedent can change from a joint return elected keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,dependent are explained later under Ex-by the surviving spouse to a separate return for real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-emptions for Dependents.the decedent. The personal representative has pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.
1 year from the due date of the return to make
If you were considered married forthe change. See Publication 559 for more infor- Costs you do not include.Do not include in
part of the year and lived in a commu-mation on filing income tax returns for a dece- the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
nity property state (listed earlier underdent.
CAUTION
!
education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
Married Filing Separately), special rules maysurance, or transportation. Also, do not include
apply in determining your income and expenses.the rental value of a home you own or the valueHead of Household See Publication 555 for more information.of your services or those of a member of your
You may be able to file as head of household if household.Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-you meet all the following requirements. Also do not include any government or chari-ered unmarried for head of household purposes
table assistance you received because of yourif your spouse was a nonresident alien at any1. You are unmarried or “considered unmar- temporary relocation due to Hurricane Katrina.time during the year and you do not choose toried” on the last day of the year. treat your nonresident spouse as a resident
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying
Qualifying Personing up a home for the year. person for head of household purposes. You
must have another qualifying person and meet3. A “qualifying person” lived with you in the See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofhome for more than half the year (except Any person not described in Table 4 is not ahousehold.for temporary absences, such as school). qualifying person.
However, if the “qualifying person” is yourEarned income credit.Even if you are con-
dependent parent, he or she does not sidered unmarried for head of household pur-Home of qualifying person.Generally, the
have to live with you. See Special rule forposes because you are married to a nonresident qualifying person must live with you for more
parent, later, under Qualifying Person. alien, you are still considered married for pur- than half of the year.
Page 7

Page 8 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Special rule for parent.If your qualifying ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an This treatment applies for all years until the
person is your father or mother, you may be child is returned. However, the last year thisexemption for her, you can file as a head of
eligible to file as head of household even if your treatment can apply is the earlier of:household.
father or mother does not live with you. How-Temporary absences. You and your quali- 1. The year there is a determination that theever, you must be able to claim an exemption forfying person are considered to live togetherchild is dead, oryour father or mother. Also, you must pay moreeven if one or both of you are temporarily absentthan half the cost of keeping up a home that was 2. The year the child would have reachedfrom your home due to special circumstancesthe main home for the entire year for your father age 18.such as illness, education, business, vacation,or mother. You are keeping up a main home for
or military service. It must be reasonable toyour father or mother if you pay more than half
assume that the absent person will return to theMarried child.Your child who is married at thethe cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
home after the temporary absence. You must end of the year generally cannot be your qualify-home for the elderly.
ing person unless you can claim the child as acontinue to keep up the home during the ab-Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as dependent. However, the child is a qualifyingsence.head of household if the individual who qualifies person if all three of the following requirementsKidnapped child.You may be eligible to fileyou for this filing status is born or dies during the are met.as head of household, even if the child who isyear. You must have provided more than half of
your qualifying person has been kidnapped. You• The child is your qualifying child (as de-the cost of keeping up a home that was the
can claim head of household filing status if allfined under Exemptions for Dependents),individual’s main home for more than half of the
the following statements are true. later.year, or, if less, the period during which the
individual lived. • The child does not file a joint return, un-1. The child must be presumed by law en- less the return is filed only as a claim forforcement authorities to have been kid-Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, refund and no tax liability would exist fornapped by someone who is not a memberfor whom you can claim an exemption, lived in either spouse if they had filed separateof your family or the child’s family.an apartment by herself. She died on Septem- returns.ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child• The child is a U.S. citizen or resident, or afor the year until her death was $6,000. You paidlived with you for more than half the part ofresident of Canada or Mexico. (This re-$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your the year before the kidnapping. quirement is met if you are a U.S. citizenbrother made no other payments towards your
3. You would have qualified for head of and the child is an adopted child who livedmother’s support. Your mother had no income.
with you all year as a member of yourhousehold filing status if the child had notBecause you paid more than half of the cost of
household.)keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu- been kidnapped.
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
Caution: See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not you canqualifying child (such as a son,
claim an exemption for the person.daughter, or grandchild who lived with
you more than half the year and he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.meets certain other tests)2
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim an not a qualifying person. 3
exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her a qualifying person.
5qualifying relative 4 who is your father
or mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative 4 other than your
year, and you can claim an exemption forfather or mother (such as a
him or her 7grandparent, brother, or sister who
meets certain tests)
6
he or she did not live with you more than half not a qualifying person.
the year
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term “qualifying child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child”
for head of household filing status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described
under Children of divorced or separated parents under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child
generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an
exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the requirements described under Married child are met.
4The term “qualifying relative” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later.
5See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
6A person who is your qualifying relative only because he or she lived with you all year as a member of your household is not a qualifying person.
7If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement.
Page 8

Page 9 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may qualify for any of the exemptions discussedQualifying Widow(er) 1. The child must be presumed by law en-here.With Dependent Child forcement authorities to have been kid-
napped by someone who is not a memberNonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are aIf your spouse died in 2005, you can use marriedof your family or the child’s family.nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-filing jointly as your filing status for 2005 if you ada or Mexico, or certain residents of India,2. In the year of the kidnapping, the childotherwise qualify to use that status. The year of Japan, or Korea), you can qualify for only onelived with you for more than half the part ofdeath is the last year for which you can file jointly personal exemption for yourself. You cannotthe year before the kidnapping.with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing claim exemptions for a spouse or dependents.Jointly, earlier. 3. You would have qualified for qualifyingThese restrictions do not apply if you are aYou may be eligible to use qualifying widow(er) with dependent child filing statusnonresident alien married to a citizen or residentwidow(er) with dependent child as your filingif the child had not been kidnapped. of the United States and have chosen to bestatus for 2 years following the year your spouse
treated as a resident of the United States.died. For example, if your spouse died in 2004 As mentioned earlier, this filing statusand you have not remarried, you may be able to Residents of Japan. Beginning in 2005,is available for only 2 years followinguse this filing status for 2005 and 2006. The nonresident aliens who are residents of Japanthe year your spouse died.CAUTION
!
rules for using this filing status are explained in generally cannot claim an exemption for a
detail here. spouse or dependent. However, if you choose to
This filing status entitles you to use joint have the old U.S.-Japan treaty apply in its en-
return tax rates and the highest standard deduc- tirety for 2005, you may be able to claim theseExemptionstion amount (if you do not itemize deductions). exemptions for 2005.
This status does not entitle you to file a jointExemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen-More information.For more information onreturn. erally, you can deduct $3,200 for each exemp-exemptions if you are a nonresident alien, see
How to file.If you file as a qualifying widow(er)tion you claim in 2005. If you are entitled to twochapter 5 in Publication 519.
with dependent child, you can use either Formexemptions for 2005, you would deduct $6,400
1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status Dual-status taxpayers.If you have been both($3,200 × 2). But you may lose the benefit of part
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Use a nonresident alien and a resident alien in theor all of your exemptions if your adjusted gross
the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Table same tax year, you should get Publication 519income is above a certain amount. See
or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet for information on determining your exemptions.Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
to figure your tax. You usually can claim exemptions for your-
self, your spouse, and each person you canPersonal ExemptionsEligibility rules.You are eligible to file your
claim as a dependent.2005 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-
You are generally allowed one exemption forpendent child if you meet all the following tests. Types of exemptions.There are two types ofyourself and, if you are married, one exemption
exemptions: personal exemptions and exemp-for your spouse. These are called personal ex-1. You were entitled to file a joint return withtions for dependents. While each is worth theemptions.your spouse for the year your spouse died.same amount ($3,200 for 2005), different rules,It does not matter whether you actuallydiscussed later, apply to each type.filed a joint return.
Your Own ExemptionWho cannot claim a personal exemption.If2. Your spouse died in 2003 or 2004 and you
you are entitled to claim an exemption for adid not remarry before the end of 2005. You can take one exemption for yourself unlessdependent (such as your child), that dependentyou can be claimed as a dependent by another3. You have a child or stepchild for whom youcannot claim a personal exemption on his or hertaxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claimcan claim an exemption. This does not in-own tax return. you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-clude a foster child.
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer doesExemption for individual displaced by Hurri-4. You paid more than half of the cost of not actually claim you as a dependent.cane Katrina. You may be able to claim akeeping up a home that was the main $500 exemption if you provided housing to ahome for you and that child for the entireperson displaced by Hurricane Katrina. For de-year, except for temporary absences. See Your Spouse’s Exemptiontails, see Exemption for Individual Displaced byTemporary absences and Keeping Up a Hurricane Katrina, later. Your spouse is never considered your depen-Home,  discussed earlier under Head of
dent.Household. How to claim exemptions.How you claim an
exemption on your tax return depends on whichJoint return.On a joint return, you can claimform you file.Example. John Reed’s wife died in 2003. one exemption for yourself and one for yourJohn has not remarried. He has continued dur-Form 1040EZ filers. If you file Form spouse.ing 2004 and 2005 to keep up a home for himself1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined
and his child for whom he can claim an exemp-with the standard deduction and entered on lineSeparate return.If you file a separate return,
tion. For 2003 he was entitled to file a joint return5. you can claim the exemption for your spouse
for himself and his deceased wife. For 2004 and only if your spouse had no gross income, is notForm 1040A filers.If you file Form 1040A,2005, he can file as a qualifying widower with a filing a return, and was not the dependent ofcomplete lines 6a through 6d. The total numberdependent child. After 2005, he can file as head another taxpayer. This is true even if the otherof exemptions you can claim is the total in theof household if he qualifies. taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse asbox on line 6d. Also complete line 26 by multiply-a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is aDeath or birth.You may be eligible to file as aing the number in the box on line 6d by $3,200. Ifnonresident alien.qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if theyour adjusted gross income is more than
child who qualifies you for this filing status is$109,475, see Phaseout of Exemptions, later. Head of household. If you qualify for head
born or dies during the year. You must have of household filing status because you are con-Form 1040 filers.If you file Form 1040,provided more than half of the cost of keeping up sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemptioncomplete lines 6a through 6d. On line 42, multi-a home that was the child’s main home during for your spouse if the conditions described in theply the total exemptions shown in the box on linethe entire part of the year he or she was alive. preceding paragraph are satisfied.6d by $3,200 and enter the result. If your ad-
Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to file To claim the exemption for your spouse,justed gross income is more than $109,475, see
as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or FormPhaseout of Exemptions, later.
even if the child who qualifies you for this filing 1040A and enter the name of your spouse in the
status has been kidnapped. You can claim quali-U.S. citizen or resident. If you are a U.S. space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN or
fying widow(er) with dependent child filing status citizen, U.S. resident, U.S. national (defined ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at the
if all the following statements are true. later) or a resident of Canada or Mexico, you top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Page 9

Page 10 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 5. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution: This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another
taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns.
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident, U.S. national, or a resident of
Canada or Mexico, for some part of the year.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
foster child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, qualifying child of anyone else.
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year, ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
(b) under age 24 at the end of the year and a full-timeyou, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of
student, or (c) any age if permanently and totally your household.
2
disabled.
3. The person’s gross income for the year must be less than
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of $3,200.3
the year.2
4. You must provide more than half of the person’s total
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or support for the year.4
her own support for the year.
5. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents, and
 kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There is an exception for multiple support agreements.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died during placed by Hurricane Katrina. You cannot claim exemption for a dependent even if your depen-
the year, you generally can claim your spouse’s dent files a return.this amount for housing your spouse or any of
exemption under the rules just explained in Joint Beginning in 2005, the term “dependent”your dependents.
return and Separate return. means:You can claim this exemption for up to four
If you remarried during the year, you cannotindividuals. You may be able to take this exemp-• A qualifying child, ortake an exemption for your deceased spouse.tion if all of the following are true.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross • A qualifying relative.
• You provided housing in your main homeincome and you remarry in the year your spouse The terms “qualifying child” and “qualifying rela-free of charge for at least 60 consecutivedied, you can be claimed as an exemption on tive” are defined later.days in 2005 to a person displaced byboth the final separate return of your deceased
spouse and the separate return of your new Hurricane Katrina. You can claim an exemption for a qualifying
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with child or qualifying relative only if these three• The person lived in the Hurricane Katrinayour new spouse, you can be claimed as an tests are met.disaster area on August 28, 2005.exemption only on that return.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.• You did not receive rent or any otherDivorced or separated spouse. If you ob- amount for providing the housing. 2. Joint return test.tained a final decree of divorce or separate
maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot 3. Citizen or resident test.To claim this amount, file Form 8914. Fortake your former spouse’s exemption. This rulemore information, see Publication 4492. These three tests are explained in detail later.applies even if you provided all of your former All the requirements for claiming an exemp-spouse’s support. tion for a dependent are summarized in Table 5.
Exemption for Individual Dependent not allowed a personalExemptions forDisplaced by Hurricane exemption. If you can claim an ex-
Dependents emption for your dependent, the de-Katrina CAUTION
!
pendent cannot claim his or her own exemption
You are allowed one exemption for each personYou may be able to take an exemption amount on his or her own tax return. This is true even if
you can claim as a dependent. You can claim anof $500 for providing housing to a person dis- you do not claim the dependent’s exemption on
Page 10

Page 11 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your return or if the exemption will be reduced orchild was born in a foreign country. If so, this test dent, he does not meet the age test because, at
eliminated under the phaseout rule describedis met. the end of the year, he was not under age 19.
under Phaseout of Exemptions, later. Full-time student.A full-time student is a stu-Foreign students’ place of residence.For-
dent who is enrolled for the number of hours orHousekeepers, maids, or servants.If these eign students brought to this country under a
courses the school considers to be full-time at-people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-qualified international education exchange pro-
tendance.tions for them. gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally are not U.S. residentsStudent defined.To qualify as a student,Child tax credit.You may be entitled to a childand do not meet this test. You cannot claim anyour child must be, during some part of each oftax credit for each qualifying child who wasexemption for them. However, if you provided aany 5 calendar months of the year:under age 17 at the end of the year. For morehome for a foreign student, you may be able toinformation, see the instructions in your taxtake a charitable contribution deduction. See 1. A full-time student at a school that has aforms package. Expenses Paid for Student Living With You in regular teaching staff, course of study, and
Publication 526, Charitable Contributions. a regularly enrolled student body at the
school, or
U.S. national.Dependent Taxpayer Test 2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-A U.S. national is an individual who, althoughing course given by a school described inIf you could be claimed as a dependent by an-not a U.S. citizen, owes his or her allegiance to(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-other person, you cannot claim anyone else as athe United States. U.S. nationals include Ameri-ment agency.dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child orcan Samoans and Northern Mariana Islanders
qualifying relative, you cannot claim that personwho chose to become U.S. nationals instead ofThe 5 calendar months do not have to be con-
as a dependent. U.S. citizens. secutive.
If you are filing a joint return and your spouse
Hurricane Katrina.If your child enrolled incould be claimed as a dependent by someoneQualifying Child school before August 25, 2005, the child iselse, you and your spouse cannot claim any
treated as a student for any month of the enroll-dependents on your joint return. There are five tests that must be met for a childment period he or she was unable to attendto be your qualifying child. The five tests are:classes because of Hurricane Katrina.
Joint Return Test 1. Relationship, School defined. A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior and senior high school,2. Age,You generally cannot claim a married person as college, university, or technical, trade, ora dependent if he or she files a joint return.3. Residency, mechanical school. However, an on-the-job
training course, correspondence school, or In-4. Support, andExample. You supported your 18-year-old ternet school does not count as a school.daughter, and she lived with you all year while5. Special test for qualifying child of moreher husband was in the Armed Forces. The Vocational high school students. Stu-than one person.couple files a joint return. Even though your dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-
These tests are explained next.daughter is your qualifying child, you cannot try as a part of a school’s regular course of
take an exemption for her. classroom and practical training are considered
full-time students.Exception. The joint return test does notRelationship Testapply if a joint return is filed by the dependent Permanently and totally disabled. Your
and his or her spouse merely as a claim forTo meet this test, a child must be: child is permanently and totally disabled if both
refund and no tax liability would exist for either of the following apply.• Your son, daughter, stepchild, eligible fos-spouse on separate returns. ter child, or a descendant (for example,• He or she cannot engage in any substan-
your grandchild) of any of them, or tial gainful activity because of a physical orExample. Your son and his wife each had
mental condition.less than $3,000 of wages and no unearned • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
income. Neither is required to file a tax return.ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-• A doctor determines the condition hasTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed adant (for example, your niece or nephew) lasted or can be expected to last continu-joint return to get a refund. You are not disquali-of any of them. ously for at least a year or can lead tofied from claiming their exemptions just because death.they filed a joint return. Adopted child. An adopted child is always
treated as your own child. The term “adoptedResidency Test
child” includes a child who was lawfully placedCitizen or Resident Test with you for legal adoption. To meet this test, your child must have lived with
you for more than half of the year. There areYou cannot claim a person as a dependent un-
Eligible foster child.An eligible foster child isexceptions for temporary absences, childrenless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident,
an individual who is placed with you by an au-who were born or died during the year, kid-U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or Mexico,
thorized placement agency or by judgment, de-napped children, and children of divorced orfor some part of the year. However, there is an
cree, or other order of any court of competentseparated parents.exception for certain adopted children, as ex-
jurisdiction.plained next. Temporary absences. Your child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods ofAdopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen who
time when one of you, or both, are temporarilyhas legally adopted a child who is not a U.S.Age Test
absent due to special circumstances such as:citizen, U.S. resident, or U.S. national, this test is
To meet this test, a child must be:met if the child lived with you as a member of • Illness,your household all year. This also applies if the• Under age 19 at the end of the year, • Education,child was lawfully placed with you for legal adop-
• A full-time student under age 24 at the endtion. • Business,of the year, or
Child’s place of residence.Children usually • Vacation, or• Permanently and totally disabled at anyare citizens or residents of the country of theirtime during the year, regardless of age.• Military service.parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even ifExample. Your son turned 19 on DecemberDeath or birth of child.A child who was born
the other parent was a nonresident alien and the 10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu- or died during the year is treated as having lived
Page 11

Page 12 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with you all year if your home was the child’s (containing the information required by the form)qualifying child is not a qualifying child for any-
home the entire time he or she was alive during to make the written declaration to release theone else except your spouse with whom you file
the year. The same is true if the child lived with exemption to the noncustodial parent.a joint return.
you all year except for any required hospital stay The exemption can be released for 1 year,If a child is treated as the qualifyingfollowing birth. for a number of specified years (for example, child of the noncustodial parent underalternate years), or for all future years, as speci-Child born alive.You may be able to claim the rules for children of divorced orCAUTION
!
fied in the declaration.an exemption for a child who was born alive separated parents described earlier, see Apply-
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.during the year, even if the child lived only for a ing this special test to divorced or separated
The custodial parent is the parent with whom themoment. State or local law must treat the child parents, later.
child lived for the greater part of the year. Theas having been born alive. There must be proof Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,
other parent is the noncustodial parent.of a live birth shown by an official document, age, residency, and support tests to be a qualify-
If the parents divorced or separated duringsuch as a birth certificate. The child must be ing child of more than one person. Although the
the year and the child lived with both parentsyour qualifying child or qualifying relative, and all child is a qualifying child of each of these per-
before the separation, the custodial parent is thethe other tests to claim an exemption for a de- sons, only one person can actually treat the child
one with whom the child lived for the greater partpendent must be met. as a qualifying child. To meet this special test,
of the rest of the year. you must be the person who can treat the childStillborn child.You cannot claim an ex-
as a qualifying child.emption for a stillborn child. Example. Your child lived with you for 10If you and another person have the samemonths of the year. The child lived with yourKidnapped child. You can treat your child as qualifying child, you and the other person(s) canformer spouse for the other 2 months. You aremeeting the residency test even if the child has decide which of you will treat the child as aconsidered the custodial parent.been kidnapped, but both of the following state- qualifying child. That person can take all of thements must be true. Parents who never married.This special following tax benefits (provided the person is
rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-eligible for each benefit) based on the qualifying1. The child is presumed by law enforcementplies to parents who never married. child.authorities to have been kidnapped by
someone who is not a member of your • The exemption for the child.
family or the child’s family. Support Test (To Be a Qualifying • The child tax credit.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, theChild) • Head of household filing status.child lived with you for more than half of
To meet this test, the child cannot have providedthe part of the year before the date of the • The credit for child and dependent caremore than half of his or her own support for thekidnapping. expenses.year.This treatment applies for all years until the • The earned income credit.This test is different from the support test tochild is returned. However, the last year thisbe a qualifying relative, which is described later.The other person cannot take any of these bene-treatment can apply is the earlier of: However, to see what is or is not support, seefits based on this qualifying child. In other words,Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative),1. The year there is a determination that the you and the other person cannot agree to dividelater. If you are not sure whether a child providedchild is dead, or these tax benefits between you.more than half of his or her own support, you
2. The year the child would have reached If you and the other person(s) cannot agree onmay find Worksheet 1 helpful.
age 18. who will claim the child and more than oneScholarships. A scholarship received by aperson files a return claiming the same child, thechild who is a full-time student is not taken intoChildren of divorced or separated parents. IRS will disallow all but one of the claims usingaccount in determining whether the child pro-A child will be treated as the qualifying child of the tie-breaker rule in Table 6.vided more than half of his or her own support.his or her noncustodial parent if all of the follow-
Example 1—child lived with parent anding apply.
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-
Special Test for Qualifying Child of1. The parents: ter Jade lived with your mother all year. You are
More Than One Person 25 years old and earned $9,000 for the year.a. Are divorced or legally separated under Jade is a qualifying child of both you and youra decree of divorce or separate mainte- If your qualifying child is not a qualify-mother because she meets the relationship,nance, ing child for anyone else, this testage, residency, and support tests for both you
does not apply to you and you do notand your mother. However, only one of you canb. Are separated under a written separa-
TIP
need to read about it. This is also true if yourclaim her. You agree to let your mother claimtion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6Table 6. When More Than One Person Files a Return Claiming the Samemonths of the year. Qualifying Child (Tie-Breaker Rule)
2. The child received over half of his or her Caution. If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent
support for the year from the parents. under the rules for children of divorced or separated parents, see Applying this
special test to divorced or separated parents.3. The child is in the custody of one or both
parents for more than half of the year.
IF more than one person files a return claiming THEN the child will be treated as
4. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-the same qualifying child and . . . the qualifying child of the. . .
nance or written separation agreement that
only one of the persons is the child’s parent, parent.applies to 2005 provides that the noncus-
todial parent can claim the child as a de-
parent with whom the child livedpendent (and, in the case of a pre-1985two of the persons are parents of the child and they for the longer period of timeagreement, the noncustodial parent pro-do not file a joint return together, during the year.vides at least $600 for the support of the
child during the year) or the custodial par-
two of the persons are parents of the child, they do
ent signs a written declaration that he ornot file a joint return together, and the child lived parent with the highest adjusted
she will not claim the child as a dependentwith each parent the same amount of time during gross income (AGI).
for the year. the year,
none of the persons are the child’s parent, person with the highest AGI.Written declaration. The custodial parent
may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement
Page 12

Page 13 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jade. This means she can claim Jade as a your husband will be allowed to treat your son as parents described earlier, the noncustodial par-
dependent and can claim her as a qualifyinga qualifying child. This is because, during 2005, ent can claim an exemption and the child tax
child for the child tax credit, head of householdthe boy lived with him longer than with you. If credit for the child but cannot claim the child as a
filing status, credit for child and dependent careyou claimed an exemption, the child tax credit, qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
expenses, and the earned income credit, if shehead of household filing status, credit for child tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
qualifies for each of those tax benefits.and dependent care expenses, or the earned penses, or the earned income credit. If the child
income credit for your son, the IRS will disallow is the qualifying child of more than one other
Example 2—two persons unable to agree. your claim to all these tax benefits. In addition, person, only one of those persons can claim the
The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptbecause you and your husband did not live apart child as a qualifying child for head of household
that you and your mother are unable to agreethe last 6 months of the year, your husband filing status, the credit for child and dependent
and both of you claim Jade as a dependent andcannot claim head of household filing status. As care expenses, and the earned income credit.
claim her as a qualifying child for the child taxa result, his filing status is married filing sepa- No other person can claim any of these three tax
credit and earned income credit. You as therately, so he cannot claim the earned income benefits unless he or she has a different qualify-
child’s parent will be the only one allowed tocredit or the credit for child and dependent care ing child. If you and any other person file a return
claim Jade as a dependent and claim her as aexpenses. claiming the child as a qualifying child for any of
qualifying child for the child tax credit and these three tax benefits, the IRS will disallow all
earned income credit. The IRS will disallow yourExample 7—unmarried parents. You, but one of the claims using the tie-breaker rule in
mother’s claim to these tax benefits unless sheyour 5-year-old son, and your son’s father livedTable 6.
has another qualifying child. together all year. You and your son’s father are
not married. Your son is a qualifying child of bothQualifying RelativeExample 3—qualifying children split be-you and his father because he meets the rela-tween two persons. The facts are the sametionship, age, residency, and support tests forThere are four tests that must be met for aas in Example 1 except that you also have twoboth you and his father. Your adjusted grossperson to be your qualifying relative. The fourother young children who are qualifying childrenincome (AGI) is $8,000 and your son’s father’stests are:of both you and your mother. Only one of youAGI is $18,000. Your son’s father agrees to letcan claim each child as a dependent. However, 1. Not a qualifying child test,you treat the child as a qualifying child. Thisyou and your mother can split the three qualify-means you can claim him as a dependent and2. Member of household or relationship test,ing children between you. For example, you cantreat him as a qualifying child for the child taxclaim one child as a dependent and your mother 3. Gross income test, andcredit, head of household filing status, credit forcan claim the other two. child and dependent care expenses, and the4. Support test.earned income credit, if you qualify for each ofExample 4—taxpayer who is a qualifying those tax benefits.child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-except that you are only 18 years old and did notExample 8—unmarried parents. The ative can be any age. There is no age test for aprovide more than half of your own support forfacts are the same as in Example 7 except thatqualifying relative.the year. This means you are your mother’syou and your son’s father are unable to agreequalifying child and she could claim you as aand both of you claim your son as a qualifyingKidnapped child. You can treat a child asdependent. Because of the Dependent Tax- child. Only your son’s father will be allowed toyour qualifying relative even if the child has beenpayer Test explained earlier, you cannot treattreat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-kidnapped, but both of the following statementsyour daughter as a qualifying child and cannotcause his AGI, $18,000, is more than your AGI,must be true.claim her as a dependent. Only your mother can$8,000. If you claimed an exemption, the childtreat your daughter as a qualifying child.tax credit, head of household filing status, credit1. The child is presumed by law enforcement
for child and dependent care expenses, or theauthorities to have been kidnapped byExample 5—separated parents. You, earned income credit for your son, the IRS willsomeone who is not a member of youryour husband, and your 10-year-old son liveddisallow your claim to all these tax benefits.family or the child’s family.together until August 1, 2005, when your hus-
band moved out of the household. In August and 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, theExample 9—child did not live with a par-September, your son lived with you. For the rest child met the tests to be your qualifyingent. You and your 7-year-old niece, yourof the year, your son lived with your husband. relative for the part of the year before thesister’s child, lived with your mother all year. YouYour son is a qualifying child of both you and date of the kidnapping.are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Youryour husband because your son lived with eachmother’s AGI is $15,000. Your niece is a qualify-This treatment applies for all years until theof you for more than half the year and becauseing child of both you and your mother becausechild is returned. However, the last year thishe met the relationship, age, and support testsshe meets the relationship, age, residency, andtreatment can apply is the earlier of:for both of you. You and your husband are notsupport tests for both you and your mother.divorced, legally separated, or separated underHowever, only one of you can treat her as a1. The year there is a determination that thea written separation agreement, so the specialqualifying child. Your mother agrees to let youchild is dead, orrule for divorced or separated parents does nottreat the child as a qualifying child.apply. 2. The year the child would have reached
age 18.You and your husband will file separate re-Example 10—child did not live with a par-
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat yourent. The facts are the same as in Example 9
son as a qualifying child. This means, if yourexcept that you and your mother are unable to
husband does not claim your son as a qualifyingagree and both of you claim your niece as aNot a Qualifying Child Test
child, you can claim your son as a dependentqualifying child. Only your mother will be allowed
and treat him as a qualifying child for the child A child is not your qualifying relative if the child isto treat your niece as a qualifying child. This is
tax credit. However, you cannot claim head of your qualifying child or the qualifying child ofbecause your mother’s AGI, $15,000, is more
household filing status because you and your anyone else.than your AGI, $9,300. If you claimed an exemp-
husband did not live apart the last six months oftion, the child tax credit, head of household filing
Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, whothe year. As a result, your filing status is marriedstatus, credit for child and dependent care ex-
is a student, lives with you and meets all thefiling separately, so you cannot claim the earnedpenses, or the earned income credit for your
tests to be your qualifying child. She is not yourincome credit or the credit for child and depen-niece, the IRS will disallow your claim to all
qualifying relative.dent care expenses. these tax benefits.
Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives withApplying this special test to divorced or sep-Example 6—separated parents. The facts
your parents and meets all the tests to be theirarated parents.If a child is treated as theare the same as in Example 5 except that you
qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-qualifying child of the noncustodial parent underand your husband are unable to agree and both
tive.the rules for children of divorced or separatedof you claim your son as a qualifying child. Only
Page 13

Page 14 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. Your son lives with you but is hold during periods of time when one of you, or Gross income includes a partner’s share of
not your qualifying child because he is 30 years both, are temporarily absent due to special cir- the gross (not a share of the net) partnership
old and does not meet the age test. He may be cumstances such as: income.
your qualifying relative if the gross income test Gross income also includes all unemploy-
• Illness,and the support test are met. ment compensation and certain scholarship and
fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-• Education,
Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandson gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,• Business,lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncle supplies, books, and equipment required for
for 4 months, and with you for 5 months during particular courses may not be included in gross• Vacation, or
the year. He is not your qualifying child because income. For more information about scholar-• Military service.he does not meet the residency test. He may be ships, see chapter 1 of Publication 970, Tax
your qualifying relative if the gross income test Benefits for Education.If the person is placed in a nursing home forand the support test are met. Tax-exempt income, such as certain socialan indefinite period of time to receive constantsecurity benefits, is not included in gross in-medical care, the absence may be consideredcome.temporary.Member of Household or Disabled dependent working at shelteredRelationship Test workshop. For purposes of this test (the grossDeath or birth.A person who died during the
income test), the gross income of an individualyear, but lived with you as a member of yourTo meet this test, a person must either:
who is permanently and totally disabled at anyhousehold until death, will meet this test. The
1. Live with you all year as a member of your time during the year does not include income forsame is true for a child who was born during the
household, or services the individual performs at a shelteredyear and lived with you as a member of your
workshop. The availability of medical care at thehousehold for the rest of the year. The test is2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed workshop must be the main reason for thealso met if a child lived with you as a member ofunder Relatives who do not have to live individual’s presence there. Also, the incomeyour household except for any required hospitalwith you. must come solely from activities at the workshopstay following birth.
If at any time during the year the person was that are incident to this medical care.If your dependent died during the year and
your spouse, that person cannot be your qualify- A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:you otherwise qualified to claim an exemption
ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp- for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-• Provides special instruction or training de-tions, earlier. tion. signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual, andRelatives who do not have to live with you.Example. Your dependent mother died onA person related to you in any of the following • Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify-ways does not have to live with you all year as a zations or by a state, a U.S. possession, aing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp-member of your household to meet this test. political subdivision of a state or posses-tion for a dependent were also met. You can
sion, the United States, or the District of• Your child, stepchild, eligible foster child,claim an exemption for her on your return.
Columbia.or a descendant of any of them (for exam-
ple, your grandchild). (A legally adoptedLocal law violated.A person does not meet
child is considered your child.) this test if at any time during the year the rela-Support Test (To Be a Qualifyingtionship between you and that person violatesRelative)• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-local law.ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
To meet this test, you generally must provide
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other more than half of a person’s total support during
member of your household all year. However,direct ancestor, but not foster parent. the calendar year.
your relationship with her violated the laws of theHowever, if two or more persons provide• Your stepfather or stepmother. state where you live, because she was marriedsupport, but no one person provides more than
to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. half of a person’s total support, see Multiple
this test and you cannot claim her as a depen-Support Agreement, later.• A brother or sister of your father ordent.mother. How to determine if support test is met.
Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysYou figure whether you have provided more• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
treated as your own child. The term “adoptedthan half of a person’s total support by compar-father-in-law, mother-in-law,
child” includes a child who was lawfully placeding the amount you contributed to that person’sbrother-in-law, or sister-in-law.
with you for legal adoption. support with the entire amount of support thatAny of these relationships that were established person received from all sources. This includesby marriage are not ended by death or divorce.Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if hesupport the person provided from his or her own
or she lives with you all year as a member ofEligible foster child.An eligible foster child funds.
your household. A cousin is a descendant of ais an individual who is placed with you by an You may find Worksheet 1 helpful in figuring
brother or sister of your father or mother.authorized placement agency or by judgment, whether you provided more than half of a
decree, or other order of any court of competent person’s support.
jurisdiction.
Person’s own funds not used for support.
Gross Income Test
Joint return.If you file a joint return, the per- A person’s own funds are not support unless
To meet this test, a person’s gross income forson can be related to either you or your spouse. they are actually spent for support.
the year must be less than $3,200.Also, the person does not need to be related to
Example. Your mother received $2,400 inthe spouse who provides support. Gross income defined.Gross income is allsocial security benefits and $300 in interest. SheFor example, your spouse’s uncle who re-income in the form of money, property, andpaid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.ceives more than half of his support from youservices that is not exempt from tax. She put $300 in a savings account.may be your qualifying relative, even though heIn a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-Even though your mother received a total ofdoes not live with you. However, if you and youring business, gross income is the total net sales$2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-spouse file separate returns, your spouse’s un-minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-port. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-cle can be your qualifying relative only if he livesneous income from the business. port and no other support was received, youwith you all year as a member of your house-
Gross receipts from rental property are grosshave provided more than half of her support.hold.
income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to
Temporary absences. A person is consid- determine the gross income from rental prop-Child’s wages used for own support.You
ered to live with you as a member of your house- erty. cannot include in your contribution to your
Page 14

Page 15 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
child’s support any support that is paid for by the for that person’s support if it is shown that part of rooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total support
child with the child’s own wages, even if you paid the payments were not used for that purpose. as follows:
the wages. Foster care payments and expenses.Pay-
Fair rental value of lodging...... $  1,800Year support is provided.The year you pro-ments you receive for the support of a foster
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifchild from a child placement agency are consid-Clothing, transportation and
you do so with borrowed money that you repayered support provided by the agency. Similarly,recreation.................. 2,400
in a later year. payments you receive for the support of a fosterMedical expenses............ 1,200If you use a fiscal year to report your income,child from a state or county are considered sup-
you must provide more than half of the Share of food (1/5 of $5,200)..... 1,040port provided by the state or county.
dependent’s support for the calendar year inIf you are not in the trade or business ofTotal support............... $6,440which your fiscal year begins. providing foster care and your unreimbursed
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fosterArmed Forces dependency allotments.The The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800child were mainly to benefit an organizationpart of the allotment contributed by the govern- lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-ment and the part taken out of your military pay food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace’sbutions, the expenses are deductible as charita-are both considered provided by you in figuring $6,440 total support.ble contributions but are not considered supportwhether you provide more than half of the sup-you provided. For more information about theport. If your allotment is used to support persons Example 2. Your parents live with you, yourdeduction for charitable contributions, see Publi-other than those you name, you can take the spouse, and your two children in a house youcation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses areexemptions for them if they otherwise qualify. own. The fair rental value of your parents’ sharenot deductible as charitable contributions, they
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each),are considered support you provided.Example. You are in the Armed Forces. which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-If you are in the trade or business of provid-You authorize an allotment for your widowed ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,ing foster care, your unreimbursed expensesmother that she uses to support herself and her which he spends equally between your motherare not considered support provided by you.sister. If the allotment provides more than half of and himself for items of support such as cloth-each person’s support, you can take an exemp- ing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalExample.  Lauren, an eligible foster child,tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, food expense for the household is $6,000. Yourlived with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3even though you authorize the allotment only for heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Yourmonths of the year. The Smiths cared for Laurenyour mother. mother has hospital and medical expenses ofbecause they wanted to adopt her (although she
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances. $600, which you pay during the year. Figurehad not been placed with them for adoption).
These allowances are treated the same way as your parents’ total support as follows:They did not care for her as a trade or business
dependency allotments in figuring support. Theor to benefit the agency that placed her in their
allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-home. The Smiths’ unreimbursed expenses areSupport provided Father Motherance for quarters are both considered as pro-not deductible as charitable contributions but
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000vided by you for support. are considered support they provided for
Lauren. Pension spent for theirTax-exempt income. In figuring a person’s support ............. 2,100 2,100total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support Share of food (1/6 ofadvance payment to a home for the aged to take
that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- $6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000care of your relative for life and the payment is
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,based on that person’s life expectancy, theMedical expenses fornontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedamount of support you provide each year is themother.............. 6 0 0Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s lifeParents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700and tax-exempt interest. expectancy. The amount of support you provide
also includes any other amounts you providedYou must apply the support test separatelyExample 1. You provide $4,000 toward during the year. to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000your mother’s support during the year. She has lodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-earned income of $600, nontaxable social se- port of $4,100 — less than half. You providecurity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-
Total Support $2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000est of $200. She uses all these for her support. food, $600 medical) — more than half of herTo figure if you provided more than half of aYou cannot claim an exemption for your mother total support of $4,700. You meet the supportperson’s support, you must first determine thebecause the $4,000 you provide is not more test for your mother, but not your father. Heattotal support provided for that person. Total sup-than half of her total support of $9,600. and utility costs are included in the fair rentalport includes amounts spent to provide food,value of the lodging, so these are not consideredlodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalExample 2. Your brother’s daughter takes separately.care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay
cessities.her college tuition. She is personally responsible Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging,Generally, the amount of an item of supportfor the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total you are considered to provide support equal tois the amount of the expense incurred in provid-support. You cannot claim an exemption for her the fair rental value of the room, apartment,ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportbecause you provide less than half of her sup- house, or other shelter in which the person lives.is the fair rental value of the lodging.port. Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow-Expenses that are not directly related to anyance for the use of furniture and appliances, andSocial security benefits.If a husband andone member of a household, such as the cost offor heat and other utilities that are provided.wife each receive benefits that are paid by onefood for the household, must be divided amongcheck made out to both of them, half of the total Fair rental value defined.This is thethe members of the household.paid is considered to be for the support of each amount you could reasonably expect to receivespouse, unless they can show otherwise. from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isExample 1. Grace Brown, mother of MaryIf a child receives social security benefits and used instead of actual expenses such as taxes,Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theiruses them toward his or her own support, the interest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities,two children. Grace gets social security benefitsbenefits are considered as provided by the child. cost of furniture and appliances, etc. In someof $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
cases, fair rental value may be equal to the rentSupport provided by the state (welfare,portation, and recreation. Grace has no other
paid.food stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits pro- income. Frank and Mary’s total food expense for
vided by the state to a needy person generally the household is $5,200. They pay Grace’s If you provide the total lodging, the amount of
are considered support provided by the state. medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair support you provide is the fair rental value of the
However, payments based on the needs of the rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is room the person uses, or a share of the fair
recipient will not be considered as used entirely $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
Page 15

Page 16 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
has use of your entire home. If you do not pro- Since the car is bought and owned by your son, the exemption but for the support test, together
vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value the car’s fair market value ($4,500) must be provide more than half of the person’s support.
must be divided depending on how much of the included in his support. Your son has providedWhen this happens, you can agree that any
total lodging you provide. If you provide only a more than half of his own total support of $8,500one of you who individually provides more than
part and the person supplies the rest, the fair ($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying10% of the person’s support, but only one, can
rental value must be divided between both of child. You did not provide more than half of hisclaim an exemption for that person as a qualify-
you according to the amount each provides. total support, so he is not your qualifying rela-ing relative. Each of the others must sign a
tive. You cannot claim an exemption for yourstatement agreeing not to claim the exemption
Example. Your parents live rent free in ason. for that year. The person who claims the exemp-
house you own. It has a fair rental value of tion must keep these signed statements for hisMedical insurance premiums.Medical insur-$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair or her records. A multiple support declarationance premiums you pay, including premiums forrental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 identifying each of the others who agreed not tosupplementary Medicare coverage, are in-for the furniture. This does not include heat and claim the exemption must be attached to thecluded in the support you provide.utilities. The house is completely furnished with return of the person claiming the exemption.
furniture belonging to your parents. You payMedical insurance benefits.Medical in- Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallysurance benefits, including basic and supple-be used for this purpose.
included in rent for houses in the area wherementary Medicare benefits, are not part of
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the Example 1. You, your sister, and your twosupport.
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 brothers provide the entire support of yourTuition payments and allowances under the($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished mother for the year. You provide 45%, yourGI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under thehouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro- sister 35%, and your two brothers each provideGI Bill for tuition payments and allowances whilevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) 10%. Either you or your sister can claim anthey attend school are included in total support.of which you are considered to provide $4,200 exemption for your mother. The other must sign
($3,600 + $600). a statement agreeing not to take an exemptionExample. During the year, your son re-for your mother. The one who claims the exemp-Person living in his or her own home.The ceives $2,200 from the government under the GItion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara-total fair rental value of a person’s home that heBill. He uses this amount for his education. Yoution, to his or her return and must keep theor she owns is considered support contributedprovide the rest of his support — $2,000. Be-statement signed by the other for his or herby that person. cause GI benefits are included in total support,records. Because neither brother provides moreyour son’s total support is $4,200 ($2,200 +Living with someone rent free.If you live than 10% of the support, neither can take the$2,000). You have not provided more than halfwith a person rent free in his or her home, you exemption and neither has to sign a statement.of his support.must reduce the amount you provide for support
by the fair rental value of lodging he or she Example 2. You and your brother each pro-Child care expenses.If you pay someone to
provides you. vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.provide child or dependent care, you can include
The remaining 60% of her support is providedthese payments in the amount you provided forProperty. Property provided as support is equally by two persons who are not related tothe support of your child or disabled dependent,measured by its fair market value. Fair market her. She does not live with them. Because moreeven if you claim a credit for the payments. Forvalue is the price that property would sell for on than half of her support is provided by personsinformation on the credit, see Publication 503,the open market. It is the price that would be who cannot claim an exemption for her, no oneChild and Dependent Care Expenses.agreed upon between a willing buyer and a can take the exemption.willing seller, with neither being required to act,Other support items. Other items may be
and both having reasonable knowledge of theconsidered as support depending on the facts inExample 3. Your father lives with you andrelevant facts. each case. receives 25% of his support from social security,
40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un-Capital expenses. Capital items, such as
cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or yourfurniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtDo Not Include uncle can take the exemption for your father iffor a person during the year can be included inin Total Support the other signs a statement agreeing not to. Thetotal support under certain circumstances.
one who takes the exemption must attach FormThe following examples show when a capitalThe following items are not included in total2120, or a similar declaration, to his return anditem is or is not support. support. must keep for his records the signed statement
from the one agreeing not to take the exemption.Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawn 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paid
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child isby persons from their own income. 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid bySupport Test for Children ofBecause the lawn mower benefits all members
persons from their own income. Divorced or Separated Parentsof the household, you cannot include the cost of
the lawn mower in the support of your child.3. Life insurance premiums. In most cases, a child of divorced or separated
4. Funeral expenses. parents will be a qualifying child of one of theExample 2. You buy a $150 television set
parents. See Children of divorced or separatedas a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.5. Scholarships received by your child if yourparents under Qualifying Child, earlier. How-The television set is placed in your child’s bed-child is a full-time student. ever, if the child does not meet the requirementsroom. You can include the cost of the television
6. Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educationalto be a qualifying child of either parent, the childset in the support of your child.
Assistance payments used for the supportmay be a qualifying relative of one of the par-
of the child who receives them. ents. In that case, the following rules must beExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car and
used in applying the support test.register it in your name. You and your Government or charitable assistance you re-A child will be treated as being the qualifying17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-ceived because of your temporary relocationrelative of his or her noncustodial parent if all ofcause you own the car and do not give it to yourdue to Hurricane Katrina is not included in totalthe following apply.daughter but merely let her use it, you cannotsupport. Disregard these amounts in determin-
include the cost of the car in your daughter’sing who provided a person’s support. 1. The parents:total support. However, you can include in your
daughter’s support your out-of-pocket expenses a. Are divorced or legally separated underof operating the car for her benefit. Multiple Support Agreement a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance,Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using Sometimes no one provides more than half of
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro- the support of a person. Instead, two or more b. Are separated under a written separa-
vide all the rest of your son’s support — $4,000. persons, each of whom would be able to take tion agreement, or
Page 16

Page 17 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 The exemption can be released for 1 year,Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the
months of the year. for a number of specified years (for example, noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the
alternate years), or for all future years, as speci- child’s support. This amount is considered sup-
2. The child received over half of his or herfied in the declaration. port provided by the noncustodial parent even if
support for the year from the parents. the $1,200 was actually spent on things otherCustodial parent and noncustodial parent.than support.The custodial parent is the parent with whom the3. The child is in the custody of one or both
child lived for the greater part of the year. Theparents for more than half of the year. Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are
other parent is the noncustodial parent. includible in the spouse’s gross income as either4. A decree of divorce or separate mainte-If the parents divorced or separated duringalimony, separate maintenance payments, ornance or written separation agreement thatthe year and the child lived with both parentssimilar payments from an estate or trust, are notapplies to 2005 provides that the noncus-before the separation, the custodial parent is thetreated as a payment for the support of a depen-todial parent can claim the child as a de-one with whom the child lived for the greater partdent.pendent (and, in the case of a pre-1985of the rest of the year. Parents who never married.This special ruleagreement, the noncustodial parent pro-
for divorced or separated parents also applies tovides at least $600 for the support of theExample. Your child lived with you for 10parents who never married.child during the year) or the custodial par-months of the year. The child lived with yourent signs a written declaration that he orformer spouse for the other 2 months. You areMultiple support agreement.If the support ofshe will not claim the child as a dependentconsidered the custodial parent. the child is determined under a multiple supportfor the year. agreement, this special support test for divorcedChild support under pre-1985 agreement. or separated parents does not apply.All child support payments actually receivedWritten declaration. The custodial parent
from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985may use either Form 8332 or a similar statement
agreement are considered used for the support(containing the information required by the form)
of the child.to make the written declaration to release the
exemption to the noncustodial parent.
Page 17

Page 18 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 1. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year............................................ 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person’s support....................... 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes........................... 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person’s savings and other accounts at the end of the year....... 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.)............................. 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
6a. Enter the total rent paid.................................................. 6a.
6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home,
also include this amount in line 21............................................. 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses................................................. 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b).......... 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b).......................... 9.
10.Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance.................................. 10.
11.Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses....................... 11.
12.Enter total number of persons who lived in the household............................. 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13.Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person’s share of the household expenses.............. 13.
14.Enter the person’s total clothing expenses........................................ 14.
15.Enter the person’s total education expenses....................................... 15.
16.Enter the person’s total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . .16.
17.Enter the person’s total travel and recreation expenses............................... 17.
18.Enter the total of the person’s other expenses..................................... 18.
19.Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person’s support for the year............ 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20.Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50).................................................. 20.
21.Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support............... 21.
22.Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative.
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23.Enter the amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . .23.
24.Add lines 21 and 23........................................................ 24.
25.Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person’s support........ 25.
26.Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for this
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement or the support test for children of divorced or separated
parents. See Multiple Support Agreement or Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents.
Page 18

Page 19 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must list the individual taxpayer identificationWorksheet 2. Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for
number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-Exemptions
tion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22, more than Taxpayer identification numbers forthe amount on line 4 below for your filing status? aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-
resident alien who does not have and is not❏ No. Stop. Multiply $3,200 by the total number of exemptions claimed eligible to get an SSN, your dependent muston line 6d of Form 1040 or Form 1040A and enter the result on apply for an individual taxpayer identificationForm 1040, line 42, or Form 1040A, line 26. number (ITIN). For details on how to apply, see❏ Yes. Continue. Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Tax-
payer Identification Number.2. Multiply $3,200 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of
Form 1040 or Form 1040A............................... 2 . Taxpayer identification numbers for
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38, or Form
with you by an authorized placement agency,1040A, line 22......................... 3 .
you may be able to claim an exemption for the
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status: child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an
ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption• Married filing separately—
$109,475 taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the
child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application• Single—$145,950
}
...... 4 . for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending• Head of household—$182,450
U.S. Adoptions, for details.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er)—$218,950
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If the result is more than
$122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately), stop Standard Deductionhere. You cannot take a deduction for exemptions.. 5.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-married filing separately). If the result
tions. The standard deduction is a dollar amountis not a whole number, round it up to
the next higher whole number..... 6 . that reduces the amount of income on which you
are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02) and enter for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,the result as a decimal.......... 7 . such as medical expenses, charitable contribu-
tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.8. Multiply line 2 by line 7................................. 8
The standard deduction is higher for taxpayers9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result who are 65 or older or blind. If you have ahere and on Form 1040, line 42, or Form 1040A, line 26........... 9 . choice, you can use the method that gives you
the lower tax.
Social Security You benefit from the standard deduc-
Phaseout of tion if your standard deduction is moreNumbers for Dependents
than the total of your allowable item-
TIP
Exemptions ized deductions.You must list the social security number (SSN)
of any dependent for whom you claim an exemp-Persons not eligible for the standardThe amount you can claim as a deduction fortion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 ordeduction. Your standard deduction is zeroexemptions is phased out once your adjustedForm 1040A. and you should itemize any deductions yougross income (AGI) goes above a certain level
 If you do not list the dependent’s SSNhave if:for your filing status. These levels are as follows:
when required or if you list an incor-
1. You are married, filing a separate return,rect SSN, the exemption may be dis-AGI Level CAUTION
!
and your spouse itemizes deductions,allowed.Which Reduces
Filing Status Exemption Amount 2. You are filing a tax return for a short taxNo SSN. If a person for whom you expect toMarried filing separately . . $109,475 year because of a change in your annualclaim an exemption on your return does notSingle.............. 145,950 accounting period, orhave an SSN, either you or that person shouldHead of household...... 182,450
apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alienMarried filing jointly..... 218,950
Form SS-5, Application for a Social Securityduring the year. You are considered aQualifying widow(er)..... 218,950
Card, with the Social Security Administrationdual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-You must reduce the dollar amount of your(SSA). Information about applying for an SSNdent and resident alien during the year.exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part ofand Form SS-5 is available at your local SSA If you are a nonresident alien who is mar-$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-office. ried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end ofrately), that your AGI exceeds the amount It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.the year, you can choose to be treated as ashown above for your filing status. If your AGIIf you do not have a required SSN by the filingU.S. resident. (See Publication 519.) If youexceeds the amount shown above by more thandue date, you can file Form 4868, Application formake this choice, you can take the standard$122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi-deduction.the amount of your deduction for exemptions isvidual Income Tax Return, for an extension ofreduced to zero. time to file. If an exemption for you can beIf your AGI exceeds the level for your filing claimed on another person’s returnBorn and died in 2005.If your child wasstatus, use worksheet 2 to figure the amount of (such as your parents’ return), yourCAUTION
!
born and died in 2005, and you do not have anyour deduction for exemptions. standard deduction may be limited. See Stan-SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thedard Deduction for Dependents, later.child’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enter
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form
Standard Deduction Amount1040 or Form 1040A.
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.If your depen- The standard deduction amount depends on
dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, you your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or
Page 19

Page 20 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
blind, and whether an exemption can be claimed $4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he enters $4,050, theExamples
larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is married filingfor you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-
The following examples illustrate how to deter-a separate return, he enters $5,000 on line 6. Ondard deduction amounts are adjusted each year
mine your standard deduction using Tablesline 7a he enters $4,050 as his standard deduc-for inflation. The standard deduction amounts
7and 8. tion because it is smaller than $5,000, thefor most taxpayers for 2005 are shown in Table
amount on line 6.7. Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are
The amount of the standard deduction for afiling a joint return for 2005. Neither is blind.Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimeddecedent’s final tax return is the same as itThey decide not to itemize their deductions.on her parents’ 2005 tax return. She is 18 yearswould have been had the decedent continued toThey use Table 7. Their standard deduction isold and blind. She has interest income of $1,300live. However, if the decedent was not 65 or$10,000. and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-older at the time of death, the higher standard ductions. Amy uses Table 9 to find her standard
deduction for age cannot be claimed. Example 2. Assume the same facts as indeduction. She enters her wages of $2,900 on
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endline 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,150
of 2005. Larry and Donna use Table 8. Theiron line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150, the largerHigher Standard Deduction for Agestandard deduction is $11,000. of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single, Amy enters
(65 or Older) $5,000 on line 6. She enters $3,150 on line 7a.
Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a jointThis is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 andIf you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledreturn for 2005. Both are over age 65. Neither is6. Because she checked one box in the top partto a higher standard deduction if you are age 65blind. If they do not itemize deductions, they useof the worksheet, she enters $1,250 on line 7b.or older at the end of the year. You are consid-Table 8. Their standard deduction is $12,000.She then adds the amounts on lines 7a and 7bered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday. and enters her standard deduction of $4,400 on
Therefore, you can take a higher standardStandard Deduction for line 7c.
deduction for 2005 if you were born before Janu-Dependents
ary 2, 1941. Who Should Itemize
The standard deduction for an individual forUse Table 8 to figure the standard deduction
whom an exemption can be claimed on anotherYou should itemize deductions if your total de-amount.
person’s tax return is generally limited to theductions are more than the standard deduction
greater of: amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussedHigher Standard Deduction for 1. $800, or earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-Blindness
dard deduction.2. The individual’s earned income for the
You should first figure your itemized deduc-If you are blind on the last day of the year andyear plus $250 (but not more than the reg-
tions and compare that amount to your standardyou do not itemize deductions, you are entitledular standard deduction amount, generally
deduction to make sure you are using theto a higher standard deduction. Use Table 8.$5,000).
method that gives you the greater benefit.You qualify for this benefit if you are totally orHowever, if the individual is 65 or older or blind,partly blind. You may be subject to a limit on somethe standard deduction may be higher.
of your itemized deductions if yourIf an exemption for you (or your spouse if youadjusted gross income (AGI) is morePartly blind.If you are partly blind, you must CAUTION
!
are married filing jointly) can be claimed onthan $145,950 ($72,975 if you are married filingget a certified statement from an eye doctor orsomeone else’s return, use Table 9 to determineseparately). See the instructions for Schedule Aregistered optometrist that: your standard deduction. (Form 1040), line 28, for more information on
Earned income defined.Earned income is figuring the correct amount of your itemized de-1. You cannot see better than 20/200 in thesalaries, wages, tips, professional fees andductions.better eye with glasses or contact lenses,other amounts received as pay for work youor When to itemize. You may benefit fromactually perform. itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form2. Your field of vision is not more than 20For purposes of the standard deduction,1040) if you:degrees. earned income also includes any part of a schol-
arship or fellowship grant that you must include1. Do not qualify for the standard deduction,If your eye condition will never improve be-in your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publica-or the amount you can claim is limited,yond these limits, the statement should includetion 970 for more information on what qualifiesthis fact. You must keep the statement in your 2. Had large uninsured medical and dentalas a scholarship or fellowship grant.records. expenses during the year,
If your vision can be corrected beyond theseExample 1. Michael is single. His parents3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,limits only by contact lenses that you can wearclaim an exemption for him on their 2005 tax
4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi-only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,return. He has interest income of $780 and
ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-you can take the higher standard deduction forwages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.
ductions,blindness if you otherwise qualify. Michael uses Table 9 to find his standard deduc-
tion. He enters $150 (his earned income) on line5. Had large uninsured casualty or theft1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $800 (thelosses,Spouse 65 or Older or Blind larger of $400 and $800) on line 5, and $5,000
6. Made large contributions to qualified chari-on line 6. The amount of his standard deduction,You can take the higher standard deduction if ties, oron line 7a, is $800 (the smaller of $800 andyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:$5,000). 7. Have total itemized deductions that are
more than the standard deduction to which1. You file a joint return, or you otherwise are entitled.Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time
2. You file a separate return and can claim ancollege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2005If you decide to itemize your deductions,exemption for your spouse because yourtax return. Joe is married and files a separatecomplete Schedule A and attach it to your Formspouse had no gross income and an ex-return. His wife does not itemize deductions on1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, lineemption for your spouse could not be her separate return. 28, on Form 1040, line 40.claimed by another taxpayer. Joe has $1,500 in interest income and
wages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-Electing to itemize for state tax or other
You cannot claim the higher standardtions. Joe finds his standard deduction by usingpurposes. Even if your itemized deductions
deduction for an individual other thanTable 9. He enters his earned income, $3,800, are less than the amount of your standard de-
yourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and enters duction, you can elect to itemize deductions on
Page 20

Page 21 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your federal return rather than take the standard have itemized — or if you itemize your deduc- You and your spouse can use the method
deduction. You may want to do this, for example, tions and later find you should not have — you that gives you the lower total tax, even though
if the tax benefit of being able to itemize your can change your return by filing Form 1040X. one of you may pay more tax than you would
deductions on your state tax return is greater have paid by using the other method. You bothMarried persons who filed separatethan the tax benefit you lose on your federal must use the same method of claiming deduc-returns. You can change methods of takingreturn by not taking the standard deduction. To tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otherdeductions only if you and your spouse bothmake this election, you must check the box on should itemize because he or she will not qualifymake the same changes. Both of you must file aline 29 of Schedule A. for the standard deduction. See Persons notconsent to assessment for any additional taxeligible for the standard deduction, earlier.either one may owe as a result of the change.Changing your mind. If you do not itemize
your deductions and later find that you should
Page 21

Page 22 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2005 Standard Deduction Tables Table 9. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents
If you are married filling a separate return and your spouse Use this worksheet only if someone else can claimitemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you an exemption for you (or your spouse if marriedcannot take the standard deduction even if you were bornCAUTION
!
filing jointly).before January 2, 1941, or you are blind.
If you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are blind,Table 7. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
worksheet.Your standard
If your filing status is... deduction is: Born beforeYou January 2, 1941 Blind Single or Married filing separately $5,000
Married filing jointly or Qualifying
Your spouse, if claiming Born beforewidow(er) with dependent child 10,000
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 Blind Head of household 7,300
*Do not use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1941 or you are blind, or
if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 8 or 9 instead.
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined1.
below). If none, enter -0-.
2. Additional amount 2. $250
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
Table 8. Standard Deduction Chart for People Born 4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $800
Before January 2, 1941, or Who are Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4.5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
6. Enter the amount shown below forchart.
your filing status.Born beforeYou Blind January 2, 1941 • Single or Married filing separately—
$5,000 6.
Your spouse, if claiming Born before Blind • Married filing jointly or Qualifyingspouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 widow(er) with dependent child—
$10,000
Total number of boxes you checked • Head of household—$7,300
AND the number THEN
7. Standard deduction.in the box your
above is... standard a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. IfIF your deduction born after January 1, 1941, and notfiling status is... is... blind, stop here. This is your
standard deduction. Otherwise, goSingle 1 $6,250 on to line 7b. 7a.2 7,500
b. If born before January 2, 1941, orMarried filing jointly 1 11,000 blind, multiply $1,250 ($1,000 if or Qualifying 2 12,000 married or qualifying widow(er) withwidow(er) with 3 13,000 dependent child) by the number in
dependent child 4 14,000 the box above. 7b.
Married filing 1 6,000 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
separately 2 7,000 standard deduction for 2005. 7c.
3 8,000
4 9,000 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services youHead of household 1 8,550 performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship2 9,800 that you must include in your income.
*If someone can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table 9, instead.
Page 22

Page 23 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
news by email. search purposes.How To Get Tax Help
• Get information on starting and operating• Services. You can walk in to your local
a small business. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
ness day for personal, face-to-face taxorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- Phone. Many services are available help. An employee can explain IRS let-tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- by phone.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best ters, request adjustments to your tax ac-
for you, you will have quick and easy access to count, or help you set up a payment plan.
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-tax help. If you need to resolve a tax problem,
tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order have questions about how the tax law
current-year forms, instructions, and pub-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you applies to your individual tax return, orlications and prior-year forms and instruc-have attempted to deal with an IRS problem you’re more comfortable talking withunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- tions. You should receive your order someone in person, visit your local Tax-payer Advocate. within 10 days. payer Assistance Center where you can
The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with spread out your records and talk with an
resents your interests and concerns within theyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-IRS by protecting your rights and resolving• Solving problems. You can get pointment is necessary, but if you prefer,problems that have not been fixed through nor-face-to-face help solving tax problems you can call your local Center and leavemal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- a message requesting an appointment tonot change the tax law or make a technical taxsistance Centers. An employee can ex- resolve a tax account issue. A represen-decision, they can clear up problems that re-plain IRS letters, request adjustments totative will call you back within 2 businesssulted from previous contacts and ensure thatyour account, or help you set up a pay- days to schedule an in-person appoint-your case is given a complete and impartial ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As- ment at your convenience. To find thereview. sistance Center for an appointment. To number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontactsTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate: find the number, go to or look in the phone book under United
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the States Government, Internal Revenue• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at
phone book under United States Govern- Service.1-877-777-4778.
ment, Internal Revenue Service. Mail. You can send your order for• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access forms, instructions, and publicationsoffice in your area. to TTY/TDD equipment, call to the address below and receive a• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions orresponse within 10 business days after yourTTY/TDD user. to order forms and publications. request is received.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate.
press 2 to listen to pre-recorded National Distribution Centermessages covering various tax topics.For more information, see Publication 1546, P.O. Box 8903
How To Get Help With Unresolved Tax • Refund information. If you would like to Bloomington, IL 61702-8903Problems (now available in Chinese, Korean, check the status of your 2005 refund, call
CD-ROM for tax products. You canRussian, and Vietnamese, in addition to English1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto- order Publication 1796, IRS Taxand Spanish). mated refund information or call Products CD-ROM, and obtain:1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least
Free tax services.To find out what services • A CD that is released twice so you have6 weeks from the date you filed your re-are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to the latest products. The first releaseturn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax ships in late December and the final re-Have your 2005 tax return available be-publications and an index of tax topics. It also lease ships in late February.cause you will need to know your socialdescribes other free tax information services,security number, your filing status, and• Current-year forms, instructions, andincluding tax education and assistance pro- the exact whole dollar amount of your publications.grams and a list of TeleTax topics. refund. • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-Internet. You can access the IRS cations.website 24 hours a day, 7 days a Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-• Tax Map: an electronic research tool andweek, at www.irs.gov to: ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give finding aid.
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• E-file your return. Find out about com- • Tax law frequently asked questionswe use several methods to evaluate the qualitymercial tax preparation and e-file serv- (FAQs).of our telephone services. One method is for aices available free to eligible taxpayers. • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-second IRS representative to sometimes listen• Check the status of your 2005 refund. sponse system.in on or record telephone calls. Another is to askClick on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to • Fill-in, print, and save features for mostsome callers to complete a short survey at thewait at least 6 weeks from the date you
tax forms.end of the call.filed your return (3 weeks if you filed
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.electronically). Have your 2005 tax return Walk-in. Many products and servicesavailable because you will need to know • Toll-free and email technical support.are available on a walk-in basis.your social security number, your filing Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Infor-
status, and the exact whole dollar mation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders• Products. You can walk in to many postamount of your refund. for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick• Download forms, instructions, and publi- toll free to buy the CD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5up certain forms, instructions, and publi-cations. handling fee).cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-• Order IRS products online. CD-ROM for small businesses.cery stores, copy centers, city and county• Research your tax questions online. Publication 3207, The Small Businessgovernment offices, credit unions, and of-
• Search publications online by topic or Resource Guide CD-ROM for 2005,fice supply stores have a collection of
keyword. has a new look and enhanced navigation fea-products available to print from a
tures. This year’s CD includes:• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible
published in the last few years. • Helpful information, such as how to pre-proofs. Also, some IRS offices and librar-
pare a business plan, find financing fories have the Internal Revenue Code, reg-• Figure your withholding allowances using
your business, and much more.our Form W-4 calculator. ulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and
Page 23

Page 24 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• All the business tax forms, instructions,• Web links to various government agen- An updated version of this CD is available each
and publications needed to successfully cies, business associations, and IRS or- year in early April. You can get a free copy by
manage a business. ganizations. calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting
www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
• Tax law changes for 2005. • “Rate the Product” survey—your oppor-
tunity to suggest changes for future edi-• IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, in-
tions.structions, and publications by searching
on a keyword or topic.
Page 24

Page 25 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Child tax credit.............. 1 1 Death of................... 1 4A F
Earned income.............. 4Child, qualifying............. 1 1Abroad, citizens traveling or Fair rental value............. 1 5
Exemption for.............. 1 0working: Children: Figures (See Tables and figures)
Filing requirements.......... 4Filing requirements.......... 3 Adoption (See Adopted child; Filing requirements:
Earned income, unearnedAdoption)Absence, temporary...... 8 ,  1 1 , Citizens outside U.S......... 3
income, and gross incomeBirth of child:14 Deceased taxpayer.......... 3
levels (Table 2)......... 3Head of household, qualifyingAccounting periods: Dependents................. 4person to file as......... 8 Married, filing jointJoint returns................ 5 Table 2................... 3Widow(er) with dependent return................... 1 1Adopted child...........11, 14 Generally (Table 1).......... 2child, qualifying person toNot allowed to claimAdoption: Gross income levels (Tablefile as.................. 9 dependents.............. 1 1Taxpayer identification 1 ) ........................ 2Claiming parent, when child is Qualifying child............. 1 1number .................. 1 9 Other situations requiring filinghead of household........ 8 Qualifying relative.......... 1 3Advance earned income credit: (Table 3)................. 4Custody of................. 1 2Social security number..... 1 9Filing requirements (Table Penalty for failure to file...... 3Death of child: Adoption taxpayer3 ) ........................ 4 Puerto Rico, residents of..... 4Head of household, qualifying identificationAge: What’s New for 2005........ 1person to file as......... 8 number ................ 1 9Filing status Who must file........ 1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4Widow(er) with dependent Alien dependents........ 1 9determination............. 3 Filing status................ 5 - 9child, qualifying person toStandard deduction for..... 2 0Gross income and filing Age 65 and older............ 3file as.................. 9 Worksheet (Table 9)...... 2 2requirements (Table 1).... 2 Annulled marriages.......... 5Dividends of (See this heading: Unearned income........... 4Standard deduction for age 65 Change to:Investment income of child Divorced parents............ 1 2or older.................. 2 0 Joint return after separateunder age 14) Divorced taxpayers:Test....................... 1 1 returns................. 7Filing requirements as Child custody:.............. 1 2Aliens: Separate returns after jointdependents (Table 2)...... 3 Filing status................. 5Dual-status (See Dual-status return................7 ,  8Investment income of child Divorce and remarriage totaxpayers) under age 14...........2 ,  4 Determination of..........3 ,  5same person............ 5Nonresident (See Nonresident Dependent filing requirements Head of household........5 ,  7Joint returns, responsibilityaliens) (Table 2)............... 3 Marital status, determinationf o r........................ 5Alimony ..................... 1 7 Interest and dividends..... 4 o f ........................ 5Relief from................ 5Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Parents’ election to report on Married filing jointly (See JointPersonal exemption........ 1 0Filing requirements (Table Form 8814............2 ,  4 returns)Domestic help, no exemption3 ) ........................ 4Kidnapped ................. 1 2 Married filing separately (Seefor ........................ 1 1Amended returns: (See also Social security number..... 1 9 Married filing separately)
Dual-status taxpayers:Form 1040X).............7 ,  2 1Stillborn................... 1 2 Unmarried persons (See Single
Exemptions................. 9Change from itemized to Church employees: taxpayers)
standard deduction (or vice Joint returns not available.... 6Filing requirements (Table Food stamps ................ 1 5versa)................... 2 0 3 ) ........................ 4 Foreign employment:American citizens abroad.... 3 Citizen or resident test...... 1 1 Citizens outside U.S., filingEAnnulled marriages: Citizens outside U.S.: requirements.............. 3Earned income:Filing status................. 5 Filing requirements.......... 3 Foreign students............ 1 1Defined for purposes ofArmed forces: Comments on publication.... 2 Form 1040:standard deduction....... 2 0Combat zone, signing return forCommon law marriage ....... 5 Personal exemption......... 9Dependent filing requirementsspouse ................... 6Community property states: Social security numbers.... 1 9(Table 2)................. 3Dependency allotments..... 1 5 Married filing separately, Use of....................5 ,  6Earned income credit:GI Bill benefits............. 1 6 treatment of income....... 7 Form 1040, Schedule A:Advance filing requirementsMilitary quarters Cousin ...................... 1 4 Itemized deduction limit..... 2 0(Table 3)................. 4allotments............... 1 5Custody of child............. 1 2 Form 1040A:Elderly persons:Assistance (See Tax help)
Personal exemption......... 9Home for the aged......... 1 5ATINs (Adoption taxpayer Social security numbers.... 1 9Standard deduction for age 65identification D Use of....................5 ,  6or older.................. 2 0numbers) ................. 1 9Death: Form 1040EZ:Eligible foster child......11, 14Of child.................... 1 1
Personal exemption......... 9Equitable relief:Of dependent............8 ,  1 4
B Use of...................... 5Innocent spouse relief....... 6Of spouse ................5 ,  6
Birth: Form 1040X:Exemptions ...............9-19Decedents: (See also Death of
Of child..................8 ,  1 1 Change of filing status....... 7Amount:spouse)..................... 5
Of dependent............8 ,  1 4 Itemized deductions, change toFiling requirements.......... 3 What’s New for 2005...... 1
Blind persons: standard deduction....... 2 1Deduction for exemptions,Deductions (See Personal
Standard deduction for..... 2 0 Standard deduction, change todetermination of (Worksheetexemption;  Standard
itemized deductions...... 2 12 ) ....................... 1 9deduction)
Form 8332:Dependents................ 1 0Dependent taxpayer test.... 1 1C Release of exemption toDual-status taxpayers....... 9Dependents:Canada, resident of.......9 ,  1 1 noncustodial parent...... 1 2How to claim................ 9Birth of.................... 1 4Capital expenses............ 1 6 Form 8814:Nonresident aliens.......... 9Born and died within
Child born alive............. 1 2 Parents’ election to reportPersonal (See Personalyear..................... 1 9
Child care expenses......... 1 6 child’s interest andexemption)Child’s earnings: (See also
dividends...............2 ,  4Child custody............... 1 2 Phaseout ................1 ,  1 9Children, subheading:
Form 8857:Types of.................... 9Child support under pre-1985 Investment income of child
agreement ................ 1 7 under age 14)...........2 ,  4U.S. citizen or resident....... 9 Innocent spouse relief....... 6
Page 25

Page 26 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form SS-5: Insurance premiums: Filing status................. 6Puerto Rico:
Life........................ 1 6 Change to................ 7Social Security Number Residents of................ 4
Medical.................... 1 6How to file.................. 6request.................. 1 9
Individual retirementIRAs (See Individual retirementForm W-7:
Qarrangements (IRAs)...... 6arrangements (IRAs))Individual taxpayer identification
Qualifying:Itemized deductions........ 2 1number request.......... 1 9Itemized deductions:
Child...................... 1 1Personal exemption......... 9Changing from standard toForm W-7A:
Rental activity losses........ 7 Person ..................... 7itemized deduction (or viceAdoption taxpayer identification
Special rules................ 6 Relative................... 1 3versa)................... 2 1number request.......... 1 9
Widow/widower ............. 9Married taxpayers: (See alsoChoosing to itemize........ 2 0Foster care payments and
Joint returns)................ 5Limits on.................2 ,  2 0expenses ................. 1 5
Age 65 or older spouse,What’s New for 2005...... 2Foster child..........11, 14, 15 Rstandard deduction....... 2 0Married filing separately.... 2 1Free tax services............ 2 3 Recapture taxes.............. 4Blind spouse, standardWhen to itemize............ 2 0Funeral expenses........... 1 6 Relationship test........11, 14deduction................ 2 0ITINs (Individual taxpayer
Dual-status alien spouse..... 6 Relative, qualifying.......... 1 3identification
Filing status................. 5Remarriage after divorce..... 5numbers) ................. 1 9G
Medical insurance Rental income and expenses:GI Bill benefits.............. 1 6 premiums ................. 1 6Losses from rental real estateGross income: J Medical savings accounts activities.................. 7Defined..................... 3Japan, residents of........... 9 (MSAs): Residency test.............. 1 1Filing requirements (Table Joint return test............. 1 1 Filing requirements (Table1 ) ...................... 2 3 ) ........................ 4Joint returns:Dependent filing requirements Accounting period........... 5 SMedicare taxes, not(Table 2)................. 3 Death of spouse during support ................... 1 6Scholarships......4 ,  12, 14, 16,Self-employed persons...... 3 year...................... 5 20Member of household orTest....................... 1 4Dependents on............. 1 4 relationship test........... 1 4Self-employed persons:Group-term life insurance: Divorced taxpayers.......... 5 Filing requirements (TableMexico, resident of........9 ,  1 1Uncollected social security/ Filing status................. 5 3 ) ........................ 4Military (See Armed forces)Medicare taxes: Guardian of spouse, signing Gross income............... 3Missing children:Reporting of (Table 3)..... 4 a s........................ 6 Separate returns (See MarriedPhotographs of, included in IRSHow to file and forms........ 5 filing separately)publications............... 2Innocent spouse............ 6H Separated parents........... 1 2More information (See Tax help)Nonresident or dual-status alienHead of household: Separated taxpayers:Multiple supportspouse ................... 6Considered unmarried....... 7 Filing status................. 5agreement ................ 1 6Personal exemption......... 9Cost of keeping up home.... 7 Living apart but not legallyResponsibility for............ 5Filing requirements (Table separated................. 5Signing..................... 6N1 ) ........................ 2 Personal exemption........ 1 0
National of the UnitedHow to file.................. 7 Signatures:States..................... 1 1Nonresident alien spouse.... 7 Joint returns................ 6K Nonresident aliens........... 2Personal exemption......... 9 Single taxpayers:Kidnapped children: Dependents................ 1 9Qualifying person........... 7 Filing status................. 5Head of household status Exemptions................. 9Qualifying person to file Gross income filinga n d ...................... 8Spouse ..................... 7a s......................5 ,  7 requirements (Table 1).... 2Qualifying child............. 1 2 Earned income credit...... 7Qualifying surviving spouse with How to file and forms........ 5Qualifying relative.......... 1 3dependent child.........5 ,  9 Personal exemption......... 9Widow(er) with dependent
Health insurance Social security and Medicarechild...................... 9Opremiums ................. 1 6 taxes:Overseas taxpayers.......... 3Help (See Tax help) Reporting of (Table 3)....... 4
LHome: Support, not included in..... 1 6
PLife insurance premiums.... 1 6Aged, home for............. 1 5 Social security benefits..... 1 5
Parent:Cost of keeping up.......... 7 Limit on itemized Social security numbers
Head of household, claimdeductions................ 2 0Household workers, no (SSNs):
f o r........................ 8What’s New for 2005........ 2exemption for............. 1 1 Child’s..................... 1 9
Parents, divorced orLocal income taxes:Hurricane Katrina......7 ,  9 ,  1 0 , Dependents................ 1 9
separated ................. 1 2Itemized deductions........ 2 011, 16 Spouse: (See also Joint
Penalties:Local law violated........... 1 4 returns)..................... 5
Failure to file................ 3Lodging ..................... 1 5 Deceased ................6 ,  1 0
I Personal exemption.......... 9 Dual-status alien spouse..... 6Losses:
Important changes: Deceased spouse.......... 1 0 Exemption for............... 9Rental real estate
Standard deduction.......... 1 Divorced or separated Innocent spouse relief....... 6activities.................. 7
Income: spouse .................. 1 0Nonresident alien........... 7
Gross ..................... 1 4 Head of household.......... 9 Signing joint returns......... 6
MTax exempt................ 1 5 How to claim................ 9 Surviving (See Surviving
Marital status: Joint return................. 9 spouse)Individual retirement
Determination of............ 5 Phaseout ................... 1arrangements (IRAs): SSNs  (See Social security
Separate return............. 9Filing requirements (Table Married dependents, filing joint numbers (SSNs))
Spouse’s exemption......... 93 ) ........................ 4return..................... 1 1 Standard deduction......19-21
What’s New for 2005........ 1Married filing separately..... 6 Married filing jointly (See Joint 2005 changes.............. 2 2
Who cannot claim........... 9Individual taxpayer returns) Age 65 or older............. 2 0
Phaseout of exemptions...... 1identification numbers Amount .................... 1 9Married filing separately:
(ITINs)..................... 1 9 Photographs: Blind persons.............. 2 0Changing method from or to
Missing children, included in Changing from itemized toInnocent spouse relief: itemized deductions...... 2 1
IRS publications........... 2 standard deduction (or viceForm 8857 .................. 6 Community property
versa)................... 2 1Joint returns................ 6 states.................... 7Publications (See Tax help)
Page 26

Page 27 of 27 of Publication 501 13:20 -  3-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Widow(er) with dependent Filing of ( See Filing Unmarried persons (See SingleStandard deduction (Cont.)
child...................... 9 requirements) taxpayers)Comparison with itemized
Death or birth of child...... 9 Joint returns (See Joint returns)deduction amount........ 2 0
Eligibility rules............ 9 Who must file........ 1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4Dependents................ 2 0 WHow to file................ 9Earned income defined..... 2 0 Tax-exempt income ......... 1 5Welfare benefits............. 1 5Kidnapped child........... 9Married filing jointly.......... 5 Taxes, not support.......... 1 6What’s New for 2005:Persons not eligible........ 1 9 Taxpayer Advocate.......... 2 3 Exemption amount.......... 1Tables and figures.......... 2 2 Temporary absences ....11, 14T Exemption phaseout......... 1What’s New for 2005........ 1 Tips:Tables and figures: (See also Limit on itemizedState or local income taxes: Reporting of (Table 3)....... 4Worksheets)............... 1 8 deduction................. 2Itemized deductions........ 2 0 Filing requirements: Total support................ 1 5 Who must file............... 1Stillborn child............... 1 2 Dependents (Table 2)..... 3 TTY/TDD information........ 2 3Widow/widower  (See SurvivingStudents: Gross income levels (Table spouse)Tuition, benefits under GIDefined.................... 1 1 1 ) ...................... 2Bill........................ 1 6Worksheets:Foreign.................... 1 1 Other situations requiring Deduction for exemptions,Suggestions for filing (Table 3).......... 4 determination of.......... 1 9Upublication................. 2 Standard deduction: Head of household status andU.S. citizen or resident...... 1 1Support test: Age 65 or older or blind cost of keeping upU.S. citizens abroad:Qualifying child............. 1 2 (Table 8).............. 2 2 home ..................... 7Filing requirements.......... 3Qualifying relative.......... 1 4 Dependents, worksheet for Standard deduction......... 2 2U.S. national................ 1 1(Table 9).............. 2 2Surviving spouse: Support test................ 1 8
Most people (Table 7).... 2 2Death of spouse (See Death of U.S. possessions:
■spouse) Income from................ 4Tax help..................... 2 3
Gross income filing Unearned income of child (SeeTax returns:
requirements (Table 1).... 2 Children, subheading:Amended (See Form 1040X)
Investment income of child
under age 14)
Page 27