Userid: NEDICK00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\pzqbb\documents\2008 Business Products\Pub. 334\P334.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2008Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet www.irs.gov
www.irs.gov/efile
Dec 05, 2008

Page 2 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to your regular job or business may be
self-employment.Contents
Introduction ............................. . 2 Independent contractor.  People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,What's New for 2008 ....................... . 3 subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
are in an independent trade, business, or profession inWhat's New for 2009 ....................... . 4
which they offer their services to the general public are
Reminders ............................... . 4 generally independent contractors. However, whether they
are independent contractors or employees depends on thePhotographs of Missing Children ............ . 5 facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ........ . 5 an independent contractor if the payer has the right to
control or to direct only the result of the work and not how it2. Accounting Periods and Methods ......... . 12 will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment3. Dispositions of Business Property ........ . 16
tax. For more information on determining whether you are
4. General Business Credits ............... . 18 an independent contractor or an employee, see Publica-
tion 15-A, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide.5. Business Income ...................... . 20
Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ........ . 27
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and7. Figuring Gross Profit ................... . 29 Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.8. Business Expenses .................... . 31
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss .............. . 40 Limited liability company (LLC). A limited liability com-
pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax ............... . 41 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 45
reports its income and deductions on its owner's federal
12. How To Get More Information ............ . 47 income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Schedule C or C-EZ.Index ................................... . 50
Husband and wife business. If you and your spouse
jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
Introduction share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnershipThe purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, filemation about the federal tax laws that apply to small
Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income. For morebusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory
information, see Publication 541, Partnerships.employees. This publication has information on business
ExceptionÐCommunity income.  If you and yourincome, expenses and tax credits that may help you file
your income tax return. spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-
munity property under the community property laws of a
Are you self-employed? You are self-employed if you state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treat
carry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
independent contractor. ship. The only states with community property laws are
Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mex-Sole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns ico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in youran unincorporated business by himself or herself. How- reporting position will be treated as a conversion of theever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited entity.liability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you ExceptionÐQualified joint venture.  If you and yourelect to treat the LLC as a corporation. spouse materially participate as the only members of a
jointly owned and operated business, and you file a jointTrade or business.  A trade or business is generally an
return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to beactivity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum-
taxed as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.stances of each case determine whether or not an activity
To make this election, you must divide all items of income,is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a
gain, loss, deduction, and credit between you and yourprofit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a
spouse in accordance with your respective interests in theprofit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to
venture. Each of you must file a separate Schedule C orfurther the interests of your business.
C-EZ.You do not have to carry on regular full-time business
activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time business
Page 2 Publication 334 (2008)

Page 3 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in the 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax questions sent to
following table. either of the above addresses.
IF you need information about: THEN you should What's New for 2008see:
Corporations ................ . Publication 542 The following are some of the tax changes for 2008. For
Farming ................... . Publication 225 information on other changes, go to www.irs.gov, and click
Fishermen (Capital Construction on More Forms and Publications. Then, click on What's
Fund) ..................... . Publication 595 Hot in forms and publications, or see Publication 553.
Partnerships ................ . Publication 541
Passive activities ............. . Publication 925 Self-employment tax. The maximum net
self-employment earnings subject to the social securityRecordkeeping .............. . Publication 583
part of the self-employment tax increases to $102,000 forRental ..................... . Publication 527
2008.S corporations ............... . Instructions for
Form 1120S
Optional method to figure net earnings. For tax years
beginning after 2007, the amount of gross and net income
What you need to know. Table A (shown later) provides from self-employment you may have when using the non-
a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet farm optional method or the farm optional method to figureyour federal tax obligations. After each question is the your self-employment tax has increased. This allows elect-location in this publication where you will find the related ing taxpayers to secure up to four credits of social securitydiscussion. benefits coverage. In future years, the threshold will be
increased to maintain that level of coverage. See chapterIRS mission. Provide America's taxpayers top quality
10.service by helping them understand and meet their tax
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit. For taxand fairness to all.
years beginning in 2008, the maximum section 179 ex-
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- pense deduction is generally increased from $125,000 to
ments about this publication and your suggestions for $250,000 (higher limits apply to certain property). For more
future editions. information, see Depreciation in chapter 8.
You can write to us at the following address:
Standard mileage rate. For 2008, the standard mileage
rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panelInternal Revenue Service truck for business miles is:Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B • 50.5 cents per mile for the period January 1 through
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 June 30, and
Washington, DC 20224 • 58.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 through
December 31.We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone For more information, see Car and Truck Expenses in
number, including the area code, in your correspondence. chapter 8.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
Additional tax relief for businesses affected by themust be included in the address.) Please put ªPublications
Kansas storms and tornadoes. Special rules not cov-Commentº on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
ered in this publication may apply. For more information,spond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
see Publication 4492-A, Information for Taxpayers Af-feedback and will consider your comments as we revise
our tax products. fected by the May 4, 2007, Kansas Storms and Tornadoes.
Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/ Additional tax relief for affected businesses in theformspubs to download forms and publications, call Midwestern disaster areas. Special rules not covered in1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receive this publication may apply. For more information, see Pub-a response within 10 days after your request is received. lication 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpayers in the
Midwestern Disaster Areas.
Internal Revenue Service
Additional tax relief for businesses affected by feder-1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
ally declared disasters. Special rules not covered in thisBloomington, IL 61705-6613
publication may apply. For more information, see Publica-
tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
information available on www.irs.gov  or call
Publication 334 (2008) Page 3

Page 4 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1 (page 6).
What forms must I file? See chapter 1 (page 10).
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1
(page 9).
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2
month? (page 12).
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2
(page 12).
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5 (page 20).
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8
(page 31).
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8 (page 40).
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9 (page 40).
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3 (page 16).
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11 (page 45).
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12 (page 47).
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may alsoWhat's New for 2009 have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans-
action understatements. Reportable transactions include:The following are some of the tax changes for 2009. For
information on other changes, go to www.irs.gov, and click 1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar to
on More Forms and Publications. Then, click on What's tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS,
Hot in forms and publications, or see Publication 553.
2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
dentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimumSelf-employment tax. The maximum net
fee,self-employment earnings subject to the social security
part of the self-employment tax increases to $106,800 for 3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party2009. has, contractual protection against disallowance of
the tax benefits,Standard mileage rate. For 2009, the standard mileage
4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-rate for the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certaintruck for business miles is 55 cents per mile. For more
foreign currency transactions) or $4 million in anyinformation, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
combination of tax years,
5. Transactions entered into before August 3, 2007,
Reminders with asset holding periods of 45 days or less and that
result in a tax credit of more than $250,000, and
Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers 6. Transactions the same or substantially similar to one
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as
accounting and may not be required to account for invento- a transaction of interest.
ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2. For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Reportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re-
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are
Page 4 Publication 334 (2008)

Page 5 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Identification NumbersPhotographs of Missing
This section explains three types of taxpayer identificationChildren
numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to
get them.The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-
Social security number (SSN). Generally, use your SSNgraphs of missing children selected by the Center may
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thisappear in this publication on pages that would otherwise
number on each of your individual income tax forms, suchbe blank. You can help bring these children home by
as Form 1040 and its schedules.looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5,  Application for a(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website
at www.socialsecurity.gov. 
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The1.
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you mustFiling and Paying attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-Business Taxes pleted tax return and mail both to the following address.
Internal Revenue Service
ITIN OperationIntroduction
P.O. Box 149342This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to Austin, TX 78714-9342pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
taxpayer identification numbers.
The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructionsTable 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically. for Form W-7. If you must include another person's SSN
Table 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, on your return and that person does not have and cannot
their due dates, and the forms you use to report them. get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN. The application is
also available in Spanish. The form is available from theTable 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical IRS website at www.irs.gov or you can callforms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out 1-800-829-3676 to order the form.of business.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle theYou may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- holder to social security benefits or change thedars. It has tax calendars that tell you when to file holder's employment or immigration status.
CAUTION
!returns and make tax payments.
TIP
Employer identification number (EIN). You must also
Useful Items have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number if
you do either of the following.You may want to see:
• Pay wages to one or more employees.Publication
• File pension or excise tax returns.❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNForm (and Instructions) on your Schedule C or C-EZ.
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return You can apply for an EIN:
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals • Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/
businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business once the application information is validated.
❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business • By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica- • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
tions and forms. ployer Identification Number.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the How Do I File?
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your File your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach
Schedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit orEIN.
loss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form
1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss fromWhen you need identification numbers of other per- your business. If you operated more than one business assons. In operating your business, you will probably make a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedulecertain payments you must report on information returns. C for each business. You can use the simpler ScheduleThese payments are discussed under Information Re- C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie-turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of torship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the other
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total requirements listed in Part I of the schedule.
amount paid during the year. You must include the payee's
identification number and your identification number on the IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)returns and statements.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on the em-
ployee's social security card. If the employee's name is not You may be able to file your tax returns electronically using
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re- an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRS
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of the
employee's name was changed due to marriage or di- manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-
vorce. sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and more
accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with aForm W-4, Employee's Withholding Allowance Certifi-
paper return, you are responsible for making sure yourcate, is completed by each employee so the correct federal
return contains accurate information and is filed on time.income tax can be withheld from their pay.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRSIf your employee does not have an SSN, he or she examination of your return.should file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
You can file most commonly used business forms usingOther payee. If you make payments to someone who is IRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website at
not your employee and you must report the payments on www.irs.gov.
an information return, get that person's SSN. If you must
report payments to an organization, such as a corporation Electronic signatures. Paperless filing is easier than youor partnership, you must get its EIN. think and it's available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
To get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request callyÐincluding those first-time filers who were 16 or older
for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. at the end of 2008. If you file electronically using tax
preparation software or a tax professional, you will partici-A payee who does not provide you with an identification
pate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identification number)number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
program. If you are married filing jointly, you and yourmation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-
spouse will each need to create a PIN and enter thesetions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
PINs as your electronic signatures.5498, and W-2G.
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2007 income tax
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any
Income Tax math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB isThis part explains whether you have to file an income tax accurate and matches the information on record with the
return and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
tax. check your annual Social Security Statement.
With a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign and
Do I Have To File nothing to mail Ðnot even your Forms W-2. For more
details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-an Income Tax Return?
site at www.irs.gov.
You have to file an income tax return for 2008 if your net
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your State returns. In most states, you can file an electronic
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400, state return simultaneously with your federal return. For
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any more information, check with your local IRS office, state
other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc- tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at www.
tions. irs.gov.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you, 1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit itor you can have your refund deposited directly to your
electronically to the IRS.checking or savings account.
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as 2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3 pare your return and transmit it for you electronically.weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
You will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-filerefund in as few as 10 days.
Signature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enterOffset against debts. As with a paper return, you may your self-selected PIN on your return.not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due Depending on the provider and the specific servicesamounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorizedchild support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look forhas been offset against your debts. an ªAuthorized IRS e-file Providerº sign.
Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re-
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed Using Your Personal Computer
your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return
A computer with Internet access is all you need to file youravailable because you will need to know the filing status,
tax return using IRS e-file. When you use your personalthe first social security number shown on the return, and
computer, you can e-file your return from your home anythe exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on
time of the day or night. Sign your return electronicallyyour refund, do one of the following.
using a self-selected PIN to complete the process. There is• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where's My Refund. no signature form to submit or Forms W-2 to send in.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa- Free Internet filing options. More taxpayers can nowtion, and follow the recorded instructions. prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
using commercial tax preparation software accessible• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in your
through www.irs.gov or www.usa.gov. The IRS is partner-form instructions.
ing with the tax software industry to offer free preparation
and filing services to a significant number of taxpayers.Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15, Security and privacy certificate programs will assure tax2009, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for thesecan make your payment electronically by scheduling an services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at www.electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings irs.gov.account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also downloadUsing an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless completely online by using tax preparation software avail-
returns for their clients. You have two options. able on the Internet.
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance • You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund faster with Direct DepositÐin as few as 10 days.
Free Internet filing options • Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2009) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other options include crediting an overpayment from yourFiling Through Employers and Financial
2008 return to your 2009 estimated tax, or mailing a checkInstitutions
or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher.
Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask your EFTPS
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as an
1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or callemployee, member, or customer benefit.
1-800-555-4477.
2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a taxFree Help With Your Return obligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS.
Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide 3. Benefits of EFTPS:from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income a. The chance of an error in making your payments
taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) is reduced.
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older b. You receive immediate confirmation of everywith their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronic transaction.filing.
When Is My Tax Return Due? Penalty for underpayment of tax. If you did not pay
enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2008 by
Form 1040 for calendar year 2008 is due by April 15, 2009. withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
and interest. Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor- If you cannot file your return on time, use Form 4868,
mation, see Publication 505.Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S.
Individual Income Tax Return, to request an automatic
6-month extension. For calendar year taxpayers, this will
extend the tax filing due date until October 15. Filing an Self-Employment (SE) Tax
extension does not extend the time to pay your taxes, only
the time to file the tax return. Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and MedicareHow Do I Pay Income Tax?
taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it If you earned income as a statutory employee,as you earn or receive income during the year. An em- you do not pay SE tax on that income.ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.
CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax Social security coverage. Social security benefits are
(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your available to self-employed persons just as they are to
return. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to your
do not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay coverage under the social security system. Social security
any tax due when you file your return. For more information coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disability
on estimated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-
and Estimated Tax. care) benefits.
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
What are my payment options? You can pay your esti- come, you could cause your social security bene-
mated tax electronically using various options. If you pay fits to be lower when you retire.
CAUTION
!
electronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES
payment vouchers. These options include: How to become insured under social security. You
must be insured under the social security system before1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-Tax Payment System (EFTPS). sured if you have the required number of credits (also
2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal called quarters of coverage), discussed next.
when you file Form 1040 electronically. Earning credits in 2008 and 2009. For 2008, you re-
3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet. ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$1,050 ($1,090 for 2009) of income subject to social secur-
ity taxes. Therefore, for 2008, if you had income
(self-employment and wages) of $4,200 that was subject to Employment Taxessocial security taxes, you received four credits ($4,200 ÷
$1,050). If you have employees, you will need to file forms to reportFor an explanation of the number of credits you must employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-have to be insured and the benefits available to you and ing items.your family under the social security program, consult your
• Social security and Medicare taxes.nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
• Federal income tax withholding.Making false statements to get or to increase
social security benefits may subject you to penal- • Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.ties.
CAUTION
!
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
Employer's Tax Guide. That publication explains your taxThe Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for
responsibilities as an employer.posting self-employment income. Generally, the SSA
will give you credit only for self-employment income re- To help you determine whether the people working forported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15 you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer'sdays after the tax year you earned the income. If you file Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has informationyour tax return or report a change in your self-employment to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec- dent contractor or an employee.ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA
will not change its records to increase your If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
self-employment income. independent contractor, you may be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-
CAUTION
!Who must pay self-employment tax. You must pay SE alty.tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
An independent contractor is someone who isfollowing applies. 
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or
1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. 
church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more. Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are This section identifies some of the excise taxes you may
and even if you are already receiving social se- have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any of
curity or Medicare benefits. the following.
CAUTION
!
• Manufacture or sell certain products.SE tax rate. The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-Maximum earnings subject to SE tax. Only the first
ucts.$102,000 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings
in 2008 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social • Receive payment for certain services.security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,retirement (tier 1) tax.
Excise Taxes.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2008
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax.
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at • Environmental taxes on the sale or use ofleast $102,000, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of ozone-depleting chemicals and imported productsthe SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must containing or manufactured with these chemicals.pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
earnings. • Communications and air transportation taxes.
Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment • Fuel taxes.
to income on line 27 of Form 1040. • Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
TIP
and tractors.
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a varietyMore information. For information on methods of calcu-
of different articles.lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by:1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ2 15th day of 4th month after end of 
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 314.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 314.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 January 314.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See Information Returns Forms 1099±to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other formsÐsee the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2008.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high- information returns and when you have to file them, see
ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form W-2G.
2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneousinformation, see the instructions for Form 2290. Income, to report certain payments you make in your
business. These payments include the following items.Depositing excise taxes. If you have to file a quarterly
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit • Payments of $600 or more for services performed
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on for your business by people not treated as your em-
depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720. ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
accountants, or directors.
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rentsInformation Returns paid to real estate agents.
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forIf you make or receive payments in your business, you
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
The IRS compares the payments shown on the information • Royalty payments of $10 or more.returns with each person's income tax return to see if the
• Payments to certain crew members by operators ofpayments were included in income. You must give a copy
fishing boats.of each information return you are required to file to the
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
low, you may have to use other returns to report certain
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax M File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
M File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
M File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax M File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes M File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 16 of Form 941 or line 15 of Form 944.
M File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do
not forget to check box d, Final: Business closed or stopped paying wages,
under Type of Return.
Information returns M Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
M Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
M File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales of Waiver of penalties. These penalties will not apply if
$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment. and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- required information, or for including incorrect information,
ment, to report payments to your employees, such as on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income, you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
income credit payments. For more information on what to 10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2 required to file for the year.)
and W-3.
Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of CashPenalties. The law provides for the following penalties if Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do not if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-correctly report the information. For more information, see tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cashthe General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-W-2G. cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier's and
traveler's checks and money orders. Cash does not in-• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap-
clude a check drawn on an individual's personal accountplies if you do not file information returns by the due
(personal check). For more information, see Publicationdate, do not include all required information, or re-
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-port incorrect information.
ceived in a Trade or Business).• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orment to a payee by the required date, do not include
causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, orall required information, or report incorrect informa-
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.tion.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later.
2. If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
Accounting Periods 31 of each year.
and Methods Fiscal tax year. A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on theIntroduction
last day of a month.You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year. books and records and report your income and expensesAlso, you must consistently use an accounting method that using the same tax year.clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year. For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Useful Items
Change in tax year. Generally, you must file Form 1128,You may want to see:
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, to
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See thePublication
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify for❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If
you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must beSee chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-tions and forms.
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine(generally your income tax return), you must use your
when and how income and expenses are reported. Yourbooks and records for a specific interval of time called an
accounting method includes not only the overall method ofaccounting period. The annual accounting period for your
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
use for any material item.the following tax years.
You choose an accounting method for your business• A calendar tax year. when you file your first income tax return that includes a
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year.
change your accounting method, you must generally getUnless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year. A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the • Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You do not keep books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under must use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu- income.
lations.
Business and personal items. You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two or more businesses. If you have two or more sepa- Debts paid by another person or canceled. If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
relief as income. If you receive income in this way, youincome of each business. They are separate and distinct
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-only if you maintain complete and separate books and
celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt records for each business.
under Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven- you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier to you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory is special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generally Repayments in chapter 11 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales and Expenses.
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includes
items of income you actually or constructively receive business expenses for which you contest liability. How-
during your tax year. If you receive property or services, ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid in
you must include their fair market value in income. advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
Example. On December 30, 2007, Mrs. Sycamore sent
Expenses paid in advance. You can deduct an expenseyou a check for interior decorating services you provided to
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.her. You received the check on January 2, 2008. You must
include the amount of the check in income for 2008.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2008 for a business insurance policy effec-Constructive receipt. You have constructive receipt of
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inincome when an amount is credited to your account or
2008 and $500 in 2009.made available to you without restriction. You do not need
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as Accrual Method
having received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2008. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2009. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2008. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one IncomeÐGeneral Rule
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is received Under an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en- curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De- accuracy.
cember 2008. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until Example. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2009. She must include this payment in her 2008 payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2008. You
income because it was constructively received in 2008. billed the customer in the first week of January 2009, but
you did not receive payment until February 2009. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax include the amount received for the computer in your 2008year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
IncomeÐSpecial Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2008, from a patient. She could not deposit the The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-
check in her business account until January 2, 2009. She ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
must include this fee in her income for 2008. schedule for services.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estimated income. If you include a reasonably estimated Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
amount in gross income, and later determine the exact capitalize a business expense until economic performance
amount is different, take the difference into account in the occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
tax year in which you make the determination. to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
Change in payment schedule for services. If you per- property is used. If your expense is for property or services
form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you you provide to others, economic performance occurs as
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree you provide the property or services. An exception allows
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete the certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
services and then receive the difference. tax year even though economic performance has not oc-
curred. For more information on economic performance,Advance payments for services. Generally, you report see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-an advance payment for services to be performed in a later lication 538.tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
However, if you receive an advance payment for services Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies incan elect to postpone including the advance payment in December 2008. You receive the supplies and the bill inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post- December, but you pay the bill in January 2009. You canpone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2008 because all events that fix the
For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv- fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liability
ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi- could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-
cation also explains special rules for reporting the following ance occurred in that year.
types of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2008 even if the• Advance payments for service agreements.
supplies are not delivered until 2009 (when economic• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty performance occurs).contracts.
Keeping inventories. When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid interest.
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
• Prepaid rent. business, you must generally take inventories into account
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-Advance payments for sales. Special rules apply to in-
crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.cluding income from advance payments on agreements for
For more information, see Inventories, later.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your Special rule for related persons. You cannot deductbusiness. If the advance payments are for contracts involv- business expenses and interest owed to a related personing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary who uses the cash method of accounting until you maketo treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a the payment and the corresponding amount is includible ingift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat the related person's gross income. Determine the relation-amounts that are due and payable as amounts you re- ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theceived. expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If aYou generally include an advance payment in income deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-for the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can tinue to apply even if your relationship with the personuse an alternative method. For information about the alter- ends before the expense or interest is includible in thenative method, see Publication 538. gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediate
Expenses family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generally a list of other related persons, see Related Persons underdeduct or capitalize a business expense when both the Accrual Method in Publication 538.following apply.
Combination Method1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when:
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,
and special methods of accounting if the combinationa. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use itity, and
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.b. The liability can be determined with reasonable
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-accuracy.
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
2. Economic performance has occurred. purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, 
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
later.) You can use the cash method for all other Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years. If
items of income and expenses. you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year
period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,• If you use the cash method for figuring your income, include the period of any predecessor. If your business hasyou must use the cash method for reporting your not been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base yourexpenses. average on the period it has existed including any short tax
• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex- years, annualizing the short tax year's gross receipts.
penses, you must use an accrual method for figuring Materials and supplies that are not incidental. If youyour income. account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
• If you use a combination method that includes the that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items
cash method, treat that combination method as the you would otherwise include in inventory in the year you
cash method. sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever is
later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year toInventories
determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year.Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
your business, you must keep an inventory and use the Changing accounting method. If you are a qualifyingaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise. taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want toHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method change to the cash method or to account for inventoriableof accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer- items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustchandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori- file Form 3115 , Application for Change in Accountingable items as materials and supplies that are not incidental Method.(discussed later).
More information.  For more information about the quali-1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more
information about the qualifying small business taxpayer2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in InternalProcedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.2002-18.
Items included in inventory. If you are required to ac-Qualifying taxpayer. You are a qualifying taxpayer if: count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1 • Merchandise or stock in trade.million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts
• Raw materials.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and • Work in process.dividing by 3.)
• Finished products.• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
• Supplies that physically become a part of the itemsection 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
intended for sale.
Qualifying small business taxpayer. You are a qualify-
Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at theing small business taxpayer if:
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine thetax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is value of your inventory, you need a method for identifyingmore than $1 million but not more than $10 million. the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is items.figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for alland the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total kinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourby 3.) inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect• You are not prohibited from using the cash method
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent fromunder section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
year to year.• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue More information. For more information about invento-
Procedure 2002-28). ries, see Publication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
another method. A change in your accounting methodUniform Capitalization Rules includes a change in:
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize 1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production crual method, andor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 2. Your treatment of any material item.
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application forcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approvalsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop- to change an accounting method under either the auto-erty. matic change procedures or the advance consent request
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For moreActivities subject to the uniform capitalization rules. information, see the form instructions. You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro-
Automatic change procedures. Certain taxpayers canduced for your use other than in a business or an activity
presume to have IRS approval to change their method ofcarried on for profit.
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film, the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop- change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
erty. tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.• Acquire property for resale.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
matic change. For more information, see the InstructionsExceptions. These rules do not apply to the following
for Form 3115.property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions. 3.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
Dispositions of b. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information, Business Property
see Inventories, earlier.
IntroductionSpecial Methods
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in someThere are special methods of accounting for certain items
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss thatof income or expense. These include the following.
is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Publication a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to535, Business Expenses. report the gain or loss.
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
535. Useful Items
You may want to see:• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication 535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To PublicationDepreciate Property.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. Form (and Instructions)
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
Change in ❏ Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
Accounting Method See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
generally get IRS approval before you can change to
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofWhat Is a Disposition gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of aof Property? business must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, AssetA disposition of property includes the following transac- Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide thistions. information. The buyer and seller should each attach Form
• You sell property for cash or other property. 8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
the sale occurred. • You exchange property for other property. For more information about the sale of a business, see
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation chapter 2 of Publication 544.
of a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium. How Do I Figure
• You transfer property to satisfy a debt. a Gain or Loss?
• You abandon property.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Lossyour mortgage or repossesses your property.
IF your... THEN you have a...• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
you receive property or money in payment. Adjusted basis is more than the
amount realized Loss.• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop- Amount realized is more than
erty or money in payment. the adjusted basis Gain.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketsee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needdetails about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.tion 544.
Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsNontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherare not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange is disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise use a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutdispose of the property you receive. basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.
Like-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex-
change of property for the same kind of property. It is the Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of property is your
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
like-kind exchange, the property traded and the property minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-
received must be both of the following. alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-
ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,• Business or investment property. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
• Like property.
Amount realized. The amount you realize from a disposi-
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about value of all property or services you receive. The amount
like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. you realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
Installment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop- property you transferred is subject, such as real estate
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax taxes or a mortgage.
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer's purchase of your
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort- Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at which
gage from a third party, you probably have an installment the property would change hands between a buyer and a
sale. seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
For more information about installment sales, see Publi- sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
cation 537, Installment Sales.
Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
Sale of a business. The sale of a business usually is not disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated gross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property Page 17

Page 18 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer- Dispositions of business property and depreciable
tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax- property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
from the disposition of property held for personal use. Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and
Is My Gain or Loss Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Ordinary or Capital? Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and ScheduleYou must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
D (Form 1040). or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital Casualties and thefts. Use Form 4684, Casualties andgain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may alsoinvestment is a capital asset.
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses. 4.For more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
General BusinessIs My Capital Gain or Loss
CreditsShort Term or Long Term?
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss Introduction
is long or short term depends on how long you own the Your general business credit for the year consists of yourproperty before you dispose of it. The time you own prop- carryforward of business credits from prior years plus theerty before disposing of it is called the holding period. total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
general business credit for the current year may be in-Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or creased later by the carryback of business credits fromLong-Term Gain or Loss? later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
IF you hold the
Useful Itemsproperty... THEN you have a...
You may want to see:
1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
PublicationMore than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.
❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544. Form (and Instructions)
❏ 3800 General Business Credit
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividualsWhere Do I Report
See chapter 12  for information about getting publica-Gains and Losses? tions and forms.
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
how to fill them out. Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. You will also have to complete Form 3800.
Agricultural chemicals security credit (Form 8931).
This credit applies to qualified agricultural chemical secur-
ity expenses paid or incurred by eligible agricultural busi-
nesses. For more information, see Form 8931.
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels credit (Form 6478). Credit for small employer pension plan startup costs
This credit consists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol (Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup
credit, small ethanol producer credit, and cellulosic biofuel costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu-
producer credit. For more information, see Form 6478. tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-
fied employee pension. For more information, seeAlternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Form Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business8911). This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).vehicle refueling property you placed in service. For more
Disabled access credit (Form 8826). This credit is ainformation, see Form 8911.
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910). This pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who
credit consists of the following four credits for new vehicles have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
you placed in service. For more information, see Form enable your business to comply with the Americans with
8910. Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see Form
8826.• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit.
Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit.
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,
see Form 8906.• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. 
Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
ment credit (Form 8844). You may qualify for this credit ifBiodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form
you have employees and are engaged in a business in an8864). This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in
empowerment zone or renewal community for which theyour business. For more information, see Form 8864.
credit is available. For more information, see Form 8844
Carbon dioxide sequestration credit (Form 8933). This and Publication 954.
credit is for carbon dioxide which is captured at a qualified
Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909). Thisfacility and disposed of in a secure geological storage or
credit is available for manufacturers of eligible appliances.used in a qualified enhanced oil or natural gas recovery
For more information, see Form 8909.project. For more information, see Form 8933.
Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908). This credit isCredit for contributions to selected community devel-
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold foropment corporations (Form 8847). This credit applies to
use as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.certain contributions made to a selected community devel-
opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor- Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-mation, see Form 8847. plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs you
paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-Credit for employer social security and Medicare taxes
tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846). This credit
is generally equal to your (employer's) portion of social Investment credit (Form 3468). The investment credit issecurity and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by em- the total of the following credits. For more information, seeployees of your food and beverage establishment where Form 3468.tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless of
• Rehabilitation credit.whether the food is consumed on or off your business
premises. For more information, see Form 8846. • Energy credit.
Credit for employer differential wage payments (Form • Qualifying advanced coal project credit.
8932). This credit provides certain small businesses with • Qualifying gasification project credit.an incentive to continue to pay wages to an employee
performing services on active duty in the uniformed serv-
ices of the United States for a period of more than 30 days. Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
For more information, see Form 8932. This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel by a
qualified small business. For more information, see FormCredit for employer-provided childcare facilities and 8896.services (Form 8882). This credit applies to the qualified
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified Low-income housing credit (Form 8586). This credit
expenses you paid for childcare resource and referral generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-
services. For more information, see Form 8882. ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
Form 8586.Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).
This credit is designed to encourage businesses to in- Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923). This
crease the amounts they spend on research and experi- credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur for
mental activities, including energy research. For more certain mine rescue team employees. For more informa-
information, see Form 6765. tion, see Form 8923.
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
New markets credit (Form 8874). This credit is for quali- Alternative minimum tax (AMT). Although you may not
fied equity investments made in qualified community de- owe AMT, you may still need to figure your tentative mini-
velopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874. mum tax on Form 6251 if you claim certain general busi-
ness credits. After you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your taxNonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907). This return. credit is for gas produced from biomass; liquid, gaseous, or
solid synthetic fuels produced from coal; and coke or coke
gas. For more information, see Form 8907.
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820). This credit applies to
qualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs, known
5.as ªorphan drugs for rare diseases and conditions.º For
more information, see Form 8820.
Qualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form Business Income8900). This credit applies to certain regional and switching
railroads who may be able to claim a credit for expenses
made to upgrade their railroad tracks (including roadbed,
Introductionbridges, and related track structures). For more informa-
tion, see Form 8900. This chapter primarily explains business income and how
to account for it on your tax return, what items are notRenewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-production credit (Form 8835). This credit is for the sale
cupations.of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
If there is a connection between any income you receiveUnited States or U.S. possessions from qualified energy
and your business, the income is business income. Aresources at a qualified facility. For more information, see
connection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomeForm 8835.
would not have been made if you did not have the busi-Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). This credit pro- ness.vided businesses with an incentive to hire long-term family You can have business income even if you are notassistance recipients. It may be available for employees involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Incomewho began work for you before 2007. The work opportunity from work you do on the side in addition to your regular jobcredit provides a similar incentive for employees who be- can be business income.gan working for you after 2006. For more information see You report most business income, such as income fromForm 8861 and Form 5884. selling your products or services, on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884). This credit pro- But you report the income from the sale of business as-
vides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from sets, such as land and office buildings, on other forms
targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on selling
ment rate or other special employment needs. For more business assets, see chapter 3.
information, see Form 5884. Nonemployee compensation. Business income
includes amounts you received in your business
that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIP
How To Claim the Credit This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC you
the forms you need to claim your current year business received. 
credits.
In addition to the credit form, you also need to file Form
3800.
Kinds of Income
You must report on your tax return all income you receive
from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
checks, and credit card charges. But business income can
be in other forms, such as property or services. These and
other types of income are explained next.
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business income
from sources outside the United States (foreign
income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!
return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If you
live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude
part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens specified number of hours. Each member has access to a
and Resident Aliens Abroad. directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-
ices available.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-Bartering for Property or Services ices to be performed. You are not required to provide
services unless requested by another member, but youBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must can use as many of the offered services as you wishinclude in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair without paying a fee.market value of property or services you receive in ex- You must include the fair market value of any serviceschange for something else. If you exchange services with you receive from club members in your gross receiptsanother person and you both have agreed ahead of time when you receive them even if you have not provided anyon the value of the services, that value will be accepted as services to club members.the fair market value unless the value can be shown to be
otherwise. Information returns. If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per- forms.form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
change Transactions. the corporation. You must include the fair market value of
the shares in income. • Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. 
For information about these forms, see the General In-Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art to
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G.compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
Real Estate Rentsclude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
rental income. If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C ororganization that each year gives its members a directory C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofof members and the services each member provides. owner described in the preceding sentence, report theMembers get in touch with other members directly and rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For morebargain for the value of the services to be performed. information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-In return for accounting services you provided for the erty.house painter's business, the house painter painted your
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market Real estate dealer. You are a real estate dealer if you arevalue of the services you received from the house painter. engaged in the business of selling real estate to customersThe house painter must include the fair market value of with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rentyour accounting services in his or her gross receipts. you receive from real estate held for sale to customers is
subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from realExample 4. You are a member of a barter club that estate held for speculation or investment is not subject touses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts for SE tax.goods or services provided or received. As soon as units
are credited to your account, you can use them to buy Trailer park owner. Rental income from a trailer park is
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer park
members. owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-
You must include the value of credit units you received tial services for the convenience of your tenants.
in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are  You generally are considered to provide substantial
credited to your account. services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants'
convenience and normally are not provided to maintain theThe dollar value of units received for services by an
lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifemployee of the club, who can use the units in the same
the compensation for the services makes up a materialmanner as other members, must be included in the em-
part of the tenants' rental payments.ployee's gross income for the tax year in which received. It
Examples of services that are not normally provided foris wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes
the tenants' convenience include supervising and main-(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income
taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributingtax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em-
a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-ployer's Tax Guide.
ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use Examples of services that are normally provided to
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-
agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments. Rental in- method of accounting, you must include in gross income
come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels, interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
if you provide services for the occupants. may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
Generally, you are considered to provide services for in chapter 8.
the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve- Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged onnience and are not services normally provided with the an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachrental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installmentthe occupants is maid service. However, providing heat Sales.and light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting
trash are services normally provided for the occupants' Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income toconvenience. dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease
come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentthat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment
separately from your business activity, the dividends fromare income in the year you receive them. This is true no
the stock are nonbusiness income.matter what accounting method or period you use.
If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all or
granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your part of the dividend as business income on your return. To
gross receipts in the year received. find out how much you have to report, see Recovery of
items previously deducted under Other Income, later.Lease cancellation payments. Report payments you re-
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross
Canceled Debtreceipts in the year received.
Payments to third parties. If your lessee makes pay- The following explains the general rule for including can-
ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your celed debt in income and the exceptions to the general
debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross rule.
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee's payment of
General Ruleyour property taxes on leased real property.
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanSettlement payments. Payments you receive in settle-
as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledment of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased property
amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report theto its original condition are income in the amount that the
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.nected by the lessee.
Personal Property Rents Exceptions
If you are in the business of renting personal property The following discussion covers some exceptions to the
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental general rule for canceled debt.
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the Price reduced after purchase. If you owe a debt to the
preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re- seller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of amount you owe, you generally do not have income from
those payments, include them in your gross receipts as the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
explained in that discussion. the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income
Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-
Interest and dividends may be considered business in- celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
come. have led to a deduction.
Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you Example. You get accounting services for your busi-have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi- ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in- ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Yourcome if you are in the business of lending money. accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
Uncollectible loans. If a loan payable to you becomes accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual depends on your method of accounting.
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Cash method Ð You do not include the canceled 1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
debt in income because payment of the debt would property used in a trade or business.
have been deductible as a business expense. 2. It was secured by such real property.
• Accrual method Ð You include the canceled debt in 3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingincome because the expense was deductible when times.you incurred the debt.
a. Before January 1, 1993.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of
b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumedaccounting, see chapter 2.
to acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
real property.
Exclusions
4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,
ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent itReduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-
does not exceed the debt being refinanced.ness. For more information, see Form 982.  
You cannot exclude more than either of the following
1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case amounts.
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-
1. The excess (if any) of:ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you business debt (immediately before the cancella-
are insolvent. See Publication 908. tion), over
3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a b. The fair market value (immediately before the
qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225, cancellation) of the business real property that is
Farmer's Tax Guide. security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- erty business debt secured by this property imme-ness debt. This situation is explained later. diately before the cancellation.
5. The canceled debt is qualified principal residence
indebtedness which is discharged after 2006 and 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
before 2010. See Form 982. held by you immediately before the cancellation.
These adjusted bases are determined after any basis6. The discharge of certain indebtedness of a qualified reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-individual because of Midwestern disasters. See vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take intoPublication 4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay- account depreciable real property acquired in con-ers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas. templation of the cancellation.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa- Election. To make this election, complete Form 982
tions 2 through 6 do not apply. If it takes place when you and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in
are insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by
apply to the extent you are insolvent. the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed your
return for the year without making the election, you can still
Debt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any make the election by filing an amended return within 6
debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
you hold. sions). For more information, see When to File in the form
instructions.Qualified real property business debt. You can elect to
exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
Other Incomereal property business debt. If you make the election, you
must reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by The following discussion explains how to treat other typesthe amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning of business income you may receive.of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property Restricted property. Restricted property is property thatbefore that time, you must reduce its basis immediately has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receivebefore the disposition. restricted stock or other property for services performed,
Cancellation of qualified real property business the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost
debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (other is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be
tions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information on including restricted property in income, see tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. will not report as income any part of the $300 he may
recover in any future year.Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ
Exception for depreciation. This rule does not applya gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.
explained next.Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.
Recapture of depreciation. In the following situations,
Promissory notes. Report promissory notes and other you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to you deducted in previous years.
customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report
Listed property. If your business use of listed propertythem at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% orinterest) when you receive them.
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the property
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi- in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment tion deduction. You do this by including in income on
you receive for the lost income of your business from Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
the payment. For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa- ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determinetion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the whether property is used more than 50% in your business.following injuries connected with your business.
Section 179 property. If you take a section 179 deduc-• Patent infringement. tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty. asset and before the end of the asset's recovery period the
percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must• Antitrust injury. recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
including in income on Schedule C part of the deductionEconomic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount toagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco- include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 tonomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following find out when you recapture the deduction.amounts.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property. If you sell• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havethe tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asin the tax year to recover that amount. ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de- tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-
ducted. tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets.
Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Items That Are Not IncomeKickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
In some cases the property or money you receive is notinclude them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
income.related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold.
Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not
Recovery of items previously deducted. If you recover income until you realize the increases through a sale or
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year, other taxable disposition.
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneereduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsincome, you must include with your return a computation
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-showing how you figured the exclusion.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in- shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other until it is sold.
allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
exemptions for a total of $7,000. He would not pay income ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on merchandise consigned to you in your income when Sales tax. State and local sales taxes imposed on the
buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over toyou sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
state or local governments, are not income.commission, depending upon the method of accounting
you use.
Construction allowances. If you enter into a lease after Guidelines for SelectedAugust 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent Occupations
reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both
the following conditions. This section provides information to determine whether
your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Form• Under a short-term lease of retail space. 1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).
• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as afied long-term real property for use in your business
direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any ofat that retail space.
the following.
Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the con- • Income from salesÐpayments you receive fromstruction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the customers for products they buy from you.amount you spent for construction or improvements.
• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receiveShort-term lease. A short-term lease is a lease (or for sales and the sales of others who work underother agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for you.15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
ing business.• Take into account options to renew when figuring
You must report this income regardless of whether it iswhether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not
reported to you on an information return.take into account any option to renew at fair market
value determined at the time of renewal. You are a direct seller if you meet all the following
conditions.• Two or more successive leases that are part of the
same transaction (or a series of related transactions) 1. You are engaged in one of the following trades orfor the same or substantially similar retail space are businesses.treated as one lease.
a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products
Retail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc- either in a home or other place that is not a per-
cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on a
business of selling tangible personal property or services buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis for
to the general public. resale in a home or other place of business that is
not a permanent retail establishment.Qualified long-term real property. Qualified long-term
real property is nonresidential real property that is part of, b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shopping
or otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts news (including any services directly related to
to the landlord when the lease ends. that trade or business).
Exchange of like-kind property. If you exchange your 2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
business property or property you hold for investment not) for services described above is directly related
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business to sales or other output (including performance of
or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized. services) rather than to the number of hours worked.
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not 3. Your services are performed under a written contractdeductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the between you and the person for whom you performtrade-in of a business automobile for another business the services, and the contract provides that you willautomobile. For more information, see Form 8824. not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-
poses.Leasehold improvements. If a tenant erects buildings or
makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
Executor or administrator. If you administer a deceasedvalue of the property due to the improvements is not
person's estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C orincome to you. However, if the facts indicate that the
C-EZ if you are one of the following:improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the
increase in value would be income. 1. A professional fiduciary.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not 2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)
income. and both of the following apply.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The estate includes an active trade or business in • You are in the business of delivering or distributing
newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-which you actively participate.
lated services such as soliciting customers and col-b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade lecting receipts).or business.
• Substantially all your pay for these services directly
relates to your sales or other output rather than to3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that
the number of hours you work.requires extensive managerial activities on your part
for a long period of time, provided these activities are • You perform the services under a written contract
enough to be considered a trade or business. that says you will not be treated as an employee for
federal tax purposes. If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report
them on line 21 of Form 1040.
This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy theFishing crew member.  If you are a member of the crew
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the numberthat catches fish or other water life, your earnings are of papers you deliver.reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require-
ments shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member. Newspaper or magazine vendor. If you are 18 or older
and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings are
Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re- reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-
ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an tions apply.
insurance company because of services you performed for • You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all sumers.the following conditions are met.
• You sell them at a fixed price.• You received payments after your agreement to per-
• Your earnings are based on the difference betweenform services for the company ended.
the sales price and your cost of goods sold.• You did not perform any services for the company
after your service agreement ended and before the This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aend of the year in which you received the payment. minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether or
not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines• You entered into a covenant not to compete against
you return to your supplier.the company for at least a 1-year period beginning
on the date your service agreement ended. Notary public. Fees you receive for services you perform
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.• The amount of the payments depended primarily on
These payments are not subject to self-employment taxpolicies sold by you or credited to your account dur-
(see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).ing the last year of your service agreement or the
extent to which those policies remain in force for Public official. Public officials generally do not report
some period after your service agreement ended, or what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C or
both. C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an elected
tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed• The amount of the payment did not depend to any percentage of the taxes collected. Public office includesextent on length of service or overall earnings from any elective or appointive office of the United States or itsservices performed for the company (regardless of possessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its politicalwhether eligibility for the payments depended on subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any oflength of service). these.
Public officials of state or local governments report their
fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a feeInsurance agent, retired. Income paid by an insurance
basis and if their services are eligible for, but not coveredcompany to a retired self-employed insurance agent based
by, social security under a federal-state agreement.on a percentage of commissions received before retire-
ment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal Real estate agent or direct seller. If you are a licensedcommissions and deferred commissions for sales made real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings arebefore retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.C-EZ.
• Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of tate agent or direct seller directly relates to youran insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or sales or other output rather than to the number ofC-EZ. hours you work.
Newspaper carrier or distributor. You are a direct seller • You perform the services under a written contract
and your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if that says you will not be treated as an employee for
all the following conditions apply. federal tax purposes.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com- Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for- charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop- the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your propertymore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually orSecurities trader. You are a trader in securities if you are
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of theengaged in the business of buying and selling securities for
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you willyour own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or
have taxable income, even if you do not accept the moneyloss from the disposition of securities is not reported on
until the next year.Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer ,
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con- Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow cus-tracts. For more information about securities traders, see tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses. lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Accounting for Your Income Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.
at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or anothertion discusses some of the more common differences that
type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustmay affect business transactions.
subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year
You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orand according to your regular method of accounting (see
theft loss.chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing
For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories
tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party. All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
6.paid to a third party.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental How To Figureagreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you. Cost of Goods Sold
Cash discounts. These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
IntroductionFor income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts. If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.Personal Use in chapter 6). This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,
2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac- wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-
count. ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.
This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-You must use the chosen method every year for all your ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,purchase discounts. or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceIf you use the second method, the credit balance in the business and also sell or charge for the materials andaccount at the end of your tax year is business income. supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods plies to you.sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price If you must account for an inventory in your busi-
of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the ness, you must generally use an accrual method
average or estimated discounts received on the merchan- of accounting for your purchases and sales. For
CAUTION
!
dise. more information, see chapter 2.
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2007
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition ofFiguring Cost of Goods Sold
the property, and in 2007, you properly deducted $50 of
on Schedule C Lines 35 administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-
erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
Through 42 allowed for 2008 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the
Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the
42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross
are explained in the discussion that follows. income for 2008 must not include the $400. You remove
that amount from opening inventory for 2008.35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last
year's closing inventory, attach explanation ....... .
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
uted property in 2008 at a cost of $400, you would includeuse .................................. .
the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to
yourself ............................... . sold for 2008 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.38 Materials and supplies ..................... .
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-39 Other costs ............................. .
duction for the contributed property.40 Add lines 35 through 39 .................... .
41 Inventory at end of year .................... .
Line 3642 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ........ . Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal Use
Line 35 If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
Inventory at Beginning of Year bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased for
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of manufacture into a finished product.
merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro- Trade discounts. The differences between the stated
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them are
process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used called trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closing Do not show the discount amount separately as an item in
inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ- gross income.
ence in a schedule attached to your return. An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
inventory reduced by any manufacturer's rebate that rep-Donation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop- resents a trade discount.erty that you sell in the course of your business), the
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-
smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices for
or its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost prompt payments. There are two methods of accounting
incurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-
otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of rate discount account or deduct them from total purchases
the contribution. You must remove the amount of your for the year. Whichever method you use, you must be
contribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is consistent. If you want to change your method of figuring
not part of the cost of goods sold. inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for
If the cost of donated inventory is not included in your Change in Accounting Method. For more information, see
opening inventory, the inventory's basis is zero and you Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.
cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youinventory's cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your must include this credit balance in your business income atmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchase the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year in reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.the cost of goods sold for that year.
A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven- Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct all
tory. See Food Inventory  in Publication 526, Charitable returns and allowances from your total purchases during
Contributions. the year.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale. If you withdraw mer-Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses
chandise for your personal or family use, you must excludean accrual method of accounting. In 2008 you contributed
this cost from the total amount of merchandise you boughtproperty from inventory to a church. It had a fair market
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac- Containers. Containers and packages that are an integral
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per- part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
sonal use. You must also charge the amount to your goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
drawing account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
A drawing account is a separate account you should
Freight-in. Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as a Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-ªwithdrawals accountº or ªpersonal account.º penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. TheLine 37 overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary
Cost of Labor expenses of the manufacturing operation are included in
your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer- Line 40chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not
Add Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop- The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theerly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both the goods available for sale during the year.direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to Inventory at End of Yearthose employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include a Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, aspart of the wages you pay to employees who work directly appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materialson the product part time if you can determine that part of and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) fromtheir wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor. Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay usually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function that year.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
the manufacturing process. Line 42
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor. Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of labor end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costs year.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals, Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
Introductionbusiness expense when you use them. Business ex-
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any businessOther Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
If you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourExamples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing or
gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained latermining process that you charge to your cost of goods sold
under Additions to Gross Profit.are as follows.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell products. If you are filing Schedule Inventory at beginning of year. Compare this figure with
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts. last year's ending inventory. The two amounts should
Figure net receipts (line 3) on Schedule C by subtracting usually be the same.
any returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-(line 1). Returns and allowances include cash or credit
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,refunds you make to customers, rebates, and other al-
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to removelowances off the actual sales price.
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how toNext, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawnreceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your
from sale in chapter 6.business.
Inventory at end of year. Check to make sure your pro-Businesses that sell services. You do not have to figure
cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an
dures should ensure all items have been included inincome-producing factor for your business. Your gross
inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts
Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as theminus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most
only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-professions and businesses that sell services rather than
able at office supply stores. These forms have columns forproducts can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in
recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value ofthis way.
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
made the physical count, who priced the items, who madeIllustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of
the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. Thesethe income statement of a retail business shows how gross
forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-profit is figured.
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record to
Income Statement support its validity.
Year Ended December 31, 2008 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts .............................. . $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances .................. . 14,940
Net receipts ............................... . $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold ...................... . 288,140
Gross profit ............................... . $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows: If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year .................. . $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases ................... . $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use ... . 2,650 283,250 the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale ...................... . $321,095
goods sold and the selling price.Minus: Inventory at end of year ................. . 32,955
Cost of goods sold ......................... . $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason for
Consider the following items before figuring your gross the difference.
profit. Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts. At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year'sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-Sales tax collected. Check to make sure your records
centage of 331/3%.show the correct sales tax collected.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local If your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amounts regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the 1. Created or acquired in your business.
income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include 2. Closely related to your business when it becameincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income partly or totally worthless.from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and8. services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts orBusiness Expenses notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for theseIntroduction
accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
You can deduct the costs of running your business. These you were owed was included in your gross in-
CAUTION
!
costs are known as business expenses. These are costs come either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a
you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods prior year.
sold but can deduct in the current year.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-To be deductible, a business expense must be both
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces- can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-
business. An expense does not have to be indispensable come.
to be considered necessary. Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-For more information about the general rules for deduct- ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535, ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsBusiness Expenses. owed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
If you have an expense that is partly for business if you never included those amounts in income.
and partly personal, separate the personal part
More information. For more information about businessfrom the business part. The personal part is not
CAUTION
!
bad debts, see chapter 10 in Publication 535.deductible.
Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
Useful Items business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
You may want to see: tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Car and Truck Expenses❏ 535 Business Expenses
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourSee chapter 12  for information about getting publica- vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtions and forms. transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an alterna-Bad Debts
tive motor vehicle  (Form 8910) you place in
service during the year. The vehicle must meetIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
TIP
certain requirements and you do not have to use it in youra bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
business to qualify for the credit. Alternative motor vehicledebts and nonbusiness bad debts.
includes qualified fuel cell motor vehicles, advanced leanA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
burn technology motor vehicles, qualified hybrid motoroperating your trade or business. You may be able to
vehicles, and qualified alternative fuel motor vehicles. deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
ness tax return.
Local transportation expenses. Local transportation ex-
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all theBusiness bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss from
following.the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business
of your business or profession when you are travel- purposes. For 2008, the standard mileage rate is 50.5
ing within the city or general area that is your tax cents per mile for the period January 1 through June 30,
home. Tax home is defined later. 2008, and 58.5 cents per mile for the period July 1 through
December 31, 2008.• Visiting clients or customers.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for• Going to a business meeting away from your regular a year, you cannot deduct your actual expensesworkplace. for that year except for business-related parking
CAUTION
!
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace fees and tolls.
when you have one or more regular places of work.
Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you want toThese temporary workplaces can be either within the
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,area of your tax home or outside that area.
you must choose to use it in the first year the car is
Local business transportation does not include expenses available for use in your business. In later years, you can
you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actual
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis- expenses.
cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment. If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
However, if you use your car while traveling away from you must choose to use it for the entire lease period
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your (including renewals).
car expense deduction. 
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You cannot use
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi- the standard mileage rate if you:
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your 1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
business or work is located. 2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,
Example. You operate a printing business out of rented 3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to other than straight line, for example, ACRS or
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip MACRS,
transportation between your customers and your print 4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,shop.
5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on theYou cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or car,truck between your home and your main or regu-
lar workplace. These costs are personal commut- 6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or
CAUTION
!
ing expenses. 7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-
bursement.Office in the home. Your workplace can be your home
if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stan-principal place of business. For more information, see
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedBusiness Use of Your Home, later.
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingExample. You are a graphics designer. You operate
expenses.)your business out of your home. Your home qualifies as
your principal place of business. You occasionally have to Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stan-drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualcan deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be- car or truck expenses.tween your home and your clients.
If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
deduction both ways to see which gives you aMethods for Deducting
larger deduction.
TIPCar and Truck Expenses
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck, items.
you generally can use one of the following methods to
Depreciation Lease payments Registrationfigure your expenses. Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires• Standard mileage rate.
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
• Actual expenses. If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
Standard mileage rate. You may be able to use the ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop. deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000 Schedule C-EZ.
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
Depreciation method. The method for depreciating mostmiles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%
business and investment property placed in service after(16,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recoverybusiness expense.
System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
More information. For more information about the rules cation 946.
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463.
Section 179 deduction. You can elect to deduct a limited
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in theReimbursing Your Employees year you place the property in service. This deduction is
for Expenses known as the ªsection 179 deduction.º The maximum
amount you can elect to deduct during 2008 is generallyYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your $250,000 (higher limits apply to certain property).  Thisemployees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse- limit is generally reduced by the amount by which the costment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it of the property placed in service during the tax year ex-depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses ceeds $800,000. The total amount of depreciation (includ-under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For ing the section 179 deduction) you can take for adetails, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That chapter passenger automobile you use in your business and firstexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells place in service in 2008 is $2,960. Special rules apply toyou whether to report the reimbursement on your em- trucks and vans. For more information, see Publicationployee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. 946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction,
what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to
recapture the deduction.
Depreciation Your section 179 election for the cost of any sport
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles isIf property you acquire to use in your business is expected limited to $25,000. For more information, see the
CAUTION
!to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.the entire cost as a business expense in the year you
acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one Listed property. You must follow special rules and re-tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-This method of deducting the cost of business property is erty. Listed property is any of the following.called depreciation.
• Most passenger automobiles.The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946. • Most other property used for transportation.
What property can be depreciated? You can depreciate • Any property of a type generally used for entertain-
property if it meets all the following requirements. ment, recreation, or amusement.
• It must be property you own. • Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in- • Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-
come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex- tions equipment).
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in
your business. For more information about listed property, see Publica-
tion 946.• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service. Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
that it must be something that wears out, decays, • Depreciation on property placed in service during thegets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value current tax year.from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
• A section 179 deduction.cost of land because land does not wear out, be-
come obsolete, or get used up. • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
when it was placed in service).• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same
year. If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
Repairs.  You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
CAUTION
!
ments that do not increase the value of your property,
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption assistance.Employees' Pay
• Cafeteria plans.
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give • Dependent care assistance.your employees for the services they perform for your
• Educational assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an • Group-term life insurance coverage.ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
• Welfare benefit funds.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you• The pay must be reasonable. provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost
• The pay must be for services performed. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as aChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includerequirements.
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179
You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal deduction or a depreciation deduction.
withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringeprietor, you are not an employee of the business.
benefits you provide from your employees'
If you had employees during the year, you must wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ. fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,
CAUTION
!
Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses. 1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business
• Fringe benefits (discussed later). bad debts.
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee 3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-
to repay if they are for personal services actually ployees, including long-term care insurance.
performed.
4. Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services.
bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6. Workers' compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or• Vacation pay.
job-related diseases suffered by employees in your
business, regardless of fault.Fringe benefits. A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the
performance of services. The following are examples of 7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurancefringe benefits. fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered
• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs. taxes under state law.
• Meals and lodging. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead
expenses you have during long periods of disability• The use of a car. caused by your injury or sickness.
• Flights on airplanes. 9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
• Discounts on property or services. used in your business for liability, damages, and
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events. mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
If you use the standard mileage rate to figure yourEmployee benefit programs include the following. car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance
• Accident and health plans. premiums.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are • You have more than one source of income subject to
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the self-employment tax.
contract. • You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to
11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost foreign earned income).
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause. care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums. You cannot deduct premiums
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,on the following kinds of insurance.
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
amounts credited to a reserve set up for asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
self-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get end of the current tax year.
business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti- Example. In 2008, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas- tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2008, 2009,
ualties, Disasters, and Thefts. and 2010 when you signed the contract, you can only
deduct the premium for 2008 on your 2008 tax return. You2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a
can deduct in 2009 and 2010 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-
those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list.
More information. For more information about deducting3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 6 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any person Interest
with a financial interest in your business if you are
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy. You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-
You are included among possible beneficiaries of est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts related
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay to your business. Interest relates to your business if you
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy. use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
A person has a financial interest in your business does not matter what type of property secures the loan.if the person is an owner or part owner of the You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of thebusiness or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen- • You are legally liable for that debt.erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
• Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity
repaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to • You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the intereston your life or on the life of another person with a you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business andfinancial interest in your business to get or protect a part personal, you must divide the interest between thebusiness loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a personal part and the business part.business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
as interest on business loans or as an expense of Example. In 2008, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds During 2008, you used the car 60% for business and 40%of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expensesused to liquidate the debt. on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% ×  $600) for
2008 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest ofSelf-employed health insurance deduction. You may $240 is a nondeductible personal expense.be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
dental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance More information. For more information about deductingfor you and your family. interest, see chapter 4 in Publication 535. That chapter
explains the following items.How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can use
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your • Interest you can deduct.deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
• Interest you cannot deduct.use the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 535.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.ness use.
Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-• When to deduct interest. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-on which interest is charged at a rate below the
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallapplicable federal rate.)
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored waysLegal and Professional Fees to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deductible Rent Expense
on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you do
them to the basis of the property. not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a business
expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourIf the fees include payments for work of a personal
business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to thenature (such as making a will), you can take a business
property, you cannot deduct the rent.deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
business. The personal part of legal fees for producing or Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deductioncollecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rentyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi- paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return
Related persons include members of your immediaterelating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole oremployee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForA (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount Accounting Periods and Methods.you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for
your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee. Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use part of
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, seePension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
You can set up and maintain the following small business Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in your busi-
retirement plans for yourself and your employees. ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ- year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
ees) plans. the period to which it applies.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans). More information. For more information about rent, see
chapter 3 in Publication 535.SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your Taxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees' fees if contributions to the plan do not business.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions from Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50% state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a come) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and payfederal income tax.
over to the state or local government. Do not
CAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses oftaxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discusseddeduct payments you made as an employer to a state
briefly in chapter 1.unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax. You can deduct one-half of your as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. a separate item.Self-employment tax is discussed in chapters 1 and 10. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForPersonal property tax. You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes.C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for their tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per- C-EZ.
sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessary
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
conditions are met.
Real estate taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalC-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
longer than an ordinary day's work.or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the 2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni- of your work while away from home.
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-For more information about real estate taxes, see chap- ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.ter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules It includes the entire city or general area in which yourfor deducting the following items. business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-
tion.• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses youstreets, water mains, and sewer lines.
can deduct.• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel byduring the year.
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of business destination.accounting and choose to accrue real estate tax
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine. You can deductrelated to a definite period ratably over that period.
fares for these and other types of transportation between
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on and your work location away from home.
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofservice or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
sending baggage and sample or display material betweenproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
your regular and temporary work locations.the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the Car or truck. You can deduct the costs of operating and
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, add maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Assets. Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business,  and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
you rent a car while away from home on business, you can • Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
customers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals
in Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long
463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youlaundry while on your business trip.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi- plan. For details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices. chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on yourTips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense
employee's Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.in this list.
More information. For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463.
Business Use
Entertainment expenses. You may be able to deduct of Your Homebusiness-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
deduct only 50% of these expenses. for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
The following are examples of entertainment expenses. then, your deduction may be limited.
• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the- To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
aters, or sporting events. home, you must meet the following tests.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be: • You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
• You have no other fixed location where you conductuse, later),
substantial administrative or management activities
b. Regular, of your business.
c. For your business, and
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
larly for your business, but your home office does not2. The business part of your home must be one of the
qualify as your principal place of business based on thefollowing:
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-
a. Your principal place of business (defined later), ness based on the following factors.
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients, • The relative importance of the activities performed at
clients, or customers in the normal course of your each location.
business, or • If the relative importance factor does not determine
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home) your principal place of business, you can also con-
you use in connection with your business. sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
Exclusive use. To qualify under the exclusive use test, cannot be identified as your principal place of business,
you must use a specific area of your home only for your you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for
trade or business. The area used for business can be a other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, see
room or other separately identifiable space. The space Publication 587.
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition. Deduction limit. If your gross income from the businessYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use use of your home equals or exceeds your total businesstest if you use the area in question both for business and expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourfor personal purposes. business expenses related to the use of your home. If your
gross income from the business use is less than your totalExample. You are an attorney and use a den in your business expenses, your deduction for certain expenseshome to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax returns. for the business use of your home is limited.Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is not Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-business deduction for its use. ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
Exceptions to exclusive use. You do not have to meet gross income from the business use of your home minus
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in either the sum of the following.
of the following ways.
1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples. even if you did not use your home for business (such
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty2. As a daycare facility. and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day- 2. The business expenses that relate to the businesscare Providers). activity in the home (for example, business phone,
supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not toRegular use. To qualify under the regular use test, you the use of the home itself.must use a specific area of your home for business on a
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you your self-employment tax.
do not use that area for any other purpose. Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction. 
Principal place of business. You can have more than More information. For more information on deductingone business location, including your home, for a single expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for tion 587.the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principal
place of business, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct or Lossthem.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Bank fees.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Donations to business organizations.
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Education expenses. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-penses.
come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more• Environmental cleanup costs. than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Impairment-related expenses.
But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter• Interview expense allowances. briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations
that may limit your loss are explained in the Instructions for• Licenses and regulatory fees.
Schedule C, line G and line 32.• Moving machinery.
If you have more than one business, you must• Outplacement services. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
a separate Schedule C.• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
CAUTION
!
nonperformance of a contract.
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
operating condition. Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
• Repayments of income. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications. for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You• Supplies and materials. can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
• Utilities. another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct • Your trade or business.
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex- • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
penses. For more information, see Publication 535. business expenses).
• Bribes and kickbacks. • A casualty or theft.
• Charitable contributions. • Moving expenses.
• Demolition expenses or losses. • Rental property.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
A loss from operating a business is the most commoning, airline, and hotel clubs. reason for an NOL.
• Lobbying expenses. For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claimagency or instrumentality because you broke the
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.law.
• Personal, living, and family expenses.
• Political contributions. Not-for-Profit Activities
• Repairs that add to the value of your property or If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, theresignificantly increase its life. is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come Islands, or American Samoa, however, are subject to the
under this limit. tax. For SE tax purposes, they are not nonresident aliens.
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 For more information on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S.
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex- Tax Guide for Aliens.
plains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualifiedto make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister orcan deduct.
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption
from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-
tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
10. bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew
Self-Employment (SE) on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earnings
are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.
Tax
1. You do not get any pay for the work except your
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds fromThe SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all theand even if you are already receiving social se- following conditions.curity and Medicare benefits.
CAUTION
!
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.
b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum
catch.Who Must Pay SE Tax?
c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as
Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cash
(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment pay is traditional in the fishing industry.
were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn-
ings from self-employment. 2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-
ceeds from the sale of the catch.Sole proprietor or independent contractor. If you are
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac- 3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.
tor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to 4. The boat's operating crew normally numbers fewerfigure your earnings subject to SE tax. than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is considered
as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the averageSE tax rate.  The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
size of the crew on trips made during the last four(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)
Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax. You are not subject to SE tax if you are under age 18Only the first $102,000 of your combined wages, tips, and and you are working for your father or mother.net earnings in 2008 is subject to any combination of the
12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax. as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ butAll of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-2008 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement
(tier 1) tax. State or local government employee. You are subject to
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur- SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are
least $102,000, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of not covered under a federal-state social security agree-
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must ment.
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
Foreign government or international organization em-earnings.
ployee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following
conditions are true.Special Rules and Exceptions
1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,
Aliens. Resident aliens are generally subject to the same Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin
subject to SE tax. Residents of the Virgin Islands, Puerto Islands by:
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. A foreign government, Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment, or Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
c. An international organization. There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
self-employment.2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages. 1. The regular method.
2. The nonfarm optional method.U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you
3. The farm optional method.are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living
outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE You must use the regular method unless you are eligibletax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from to use one or both of the optional methods.self-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion.
Why use an optional method?  You may want to use theException.  The United States has social security optional methods (discussed later) when you have a lossagreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa- or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.tion under two social security systems. Under these agree-
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitments, you generally must only pay social security and
coverage.Medicare taxes to the country in which you live. The coun-
try to which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate • You incurred child or dependent care expenses forwhich serves as proof of exemption from social security tax which you could claim a credit. (An optional methodin the other country. may increase your earned income, which could in-For more information, see the Instructions for Schedule crease your credit.)SE (Form 1040).
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,
More Than One Business which could increase your credit.)
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (AnIf you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one
optional method may increase your earned income,trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net
which could increase your credit.)profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your
profit from another business. Effects of using an optional method. Using an optional
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.Community Property Income
If you use either or both optional methods, you must
If any of the income from a trade or business, other than a figure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even if
partnership, is community property income under state you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the regular method.
spouse carrying on the trade or business. The optional methods may be used only to figure your
SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method youGain or Loss use to determine SE tax.
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in trade Regular Method
nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun- Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35%
tary conversion. (.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line
4a.Lost Income Payments Net earnings figured using the regular method are also
called actual net earnings.If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or other
sources for the lost business income is included in earn- Nonfarm Optional Method
ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you
receive the payment, it still relates to your business and is Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do
included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though your not come from farming. You may use this method if you
business is temporarily inactive. meet all the following tests.
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings.
means that your actual net earnings from You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of your actual net earnings from self-employment.
the 3 tax years before the one for which you use this
Gross nonfarm income of $6,300 or less. The followingmethod. The net earnings can be from either farm or
examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when grossnonfarm earnings or both.
nonfarm income is $6,300 or less.
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,548 and
one after another. less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann
Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
self-employment were $800 in 2006 and $900 in 2007. She
meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.a. Less than $4,548, and
She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5b. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in- years. Her gross income and net profit in 2008 are ascome. follows:
Gross nonfarm income .................. . $5,400Net nonfarm profits. Net nonfarm profit generally is the Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200total of the amounts from:
Ann's actual net earnings for 2008 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040), .9235). Because her net profit is less than $4,548 and less
• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-
farm optional method to figure net earnings of $3,600 (2/3 ×• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from $5,400). Because these net earnings are higher than hernonfarm partnerships), and actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $3,600
• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). for 2008.
However, you may need to adjust the amount reported Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,548 but
on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss. not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. As-
sume that in Example 1 Ann's gross income is $1,000 andGross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method togenerally is the total of the amounts from: figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-
tional method because her net profit is not less than• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040),
72.189% of her gross income.• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. Shenonfarm partnerships), and
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $3,600 (2/3
• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). ×  $5,400) as her net earnings.
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not payIf you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the
any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarmfollowing table to figure your net earnings from
optional method because her net earnings under bothself-employment under the nonfarm optional method.
methods are less than $400.
Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings Gross nonfarm income of more than $6,300. The fol-
lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings whenIF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings gross nonfarm income is more than $6,300.income is ... are equal to ...
$6,300 or less Two-thirds of your gross Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $4,548 and
nonfarm income. less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. John
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn-More than $6,300 $4,200
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2006 and
$9,500 in 2007. He meets the test for being self-employed
Actual net earnings. Your actual net earnings are on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is, method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit
multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) in 2008 are as follows:
to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings are
equivalent to net earnings figured using the regular Gross nonfarm income .................. . $12,000
Net nonfarm profit ...................... . $1,200method.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John's actual net earnings for 2008 are $1,108 ($1,200 Table 10-2. ExampleÐFarm and Nonfarm
×  .9235). Because his net profit is less than $4,548 and Earnings
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $4,200. Income and
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net Earnings Farm Nonfarm
earnings, he can report net earnings of $4,200 for 2008. Gross income $3,000 $6,000
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $4,548. Actual net earnings  $900  $500
Assume that in Example 1 John's net profit is $5,400. He Optional netmust use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm earnings (2/3 of grossoptional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less income)  $2,000 $4,000than $4,548.
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As- Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations ofsume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He methods you can use to figure net earnings fromcan use the nonfarm optional method and report $4,200 as self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-his net earnings from self-employment. come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.
• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farmFarm Optional Method and nonfarm income.
Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a • Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-farming business. See Publication 225 for information come and the regular method for nonfarm income.about this method.
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm income
and the optional method for nonfarm income.Using Both Optional Methods
• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farm
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be and nonfarm income.
able to use both optional methods to determine your net Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earningsearnings from self-employment. figured using the regular method. To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
ods, you must:
Table 10-3. ExampleÐNet Earnings• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa-
rately under each method. Do not combine farm Netearnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your net Earnings 1 2 3 4earnings under either method.
• Add the net earnings figured under each method to Actual
arrive at your total net earnings from  farm $ 900 $ 900
self-employment.
OptionalYou can report less than your total actual farm and non-  farm $ 2,000 $ 2,000farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net
earnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report Actualno more than $4,200 as your combined net earnings from nonfarm $ 500 $ 500self-employment.
OptionalExample. You are a self-employed farmer. You also nonfarm $4,000 $4,000
operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and Amount
optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are you can
shown in Table 10-2. report: $1,400 $2,500 $4,900 $4,200*
*Limited to $4,200 because you used both optional methods.
Fiscal Year Filer
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
earnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Self-Employment
Tax
11.Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE
tax. Then enter the SE tax on line 57 of Form 1040 and
attach Schedule SE to Form 1040. Your RightsMost taxpayers can use Section AÐShort Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use as a TaxpayerSection BÐLong Schedule SE.
If you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form The first part of this chapter explains some of your most
1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
not otherwise have to file a federal income tax the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
CAUTION
!
return.
Joint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file
Declaration ofa joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or
both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of Taxpayer Rightsyou have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must
complete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse
Protection of your rights. IRS employees will explainuses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout youruse the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
contact with us.Attach both schedules to the joint return.
More than one business. If you have more than one Privacy and confidentiality. The IRS will not disclose to
trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss) anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
business will reduce your profit from another business. File for information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
one Schedule SE showing the earnings from do not provide requested information.
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, or
Professional and courteous service. If you believe thatF for each business.
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separate
ployee's supervisor. If the supervisor's response is notbusinesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourprofit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking business
area or the center where you file your return.that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for
the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and Representation. You can either represent yourself or,another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show- with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-ing your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing resent you in your place. Your representative must be atotal earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500. person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as an
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. If
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
cases.
You can have someone accompany you at an interview.
You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided you
tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.
Payment of only the correct amount of tax. You are
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
under the law Ðno more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthly
installment payments.
Help with unresolved tax problems. The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more
information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS Repeat examinations. If we examined your return for
office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact usAppeals and judicial review. If you disagree with us as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinueabout the amount of your tax liability or certain collection the examination.actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You can also ask a court to review your Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-
case. posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensiveRelief from certain penalties and interest. The IRS will and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights arewaive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appealacted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor- Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don't Agree,rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appealis the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS Rights, and Claims for Refund.employee. If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.
Examinations, Appeals, District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,
the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youCollections, and Refunds kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
Examinations (audits). We accept most taxpayers' re- court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may be
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest. able to recover some of your administrative and litigation
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unless
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you may you tried to resolve your case administratively, including
receive a refund. going through the appeals system, and you gave us the
The process of selecting a return for examination usu- information necessary to resolve the case.
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-programs to identify returns that may have incorrect cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingamounts. These programs may be based on information payment of federal taxes. It describes:returns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli- • What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
ance projects. Second, we use information from outside do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
sources that indicates that a return may have incorrect your bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
amounts. These sources may include newspapers, public payments, delaying collection action, and submitting
records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa- an offer in compromise.
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a • IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing areturn for examination. lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andPublication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal release of property.Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
procedures that we follow in examinations. The following Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail insections give an overview of how we conduct examina- Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.tions.
Innocent spouse relief. Generally, both you and yourBy mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for payingby mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for
the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on yourmore information or a reason why we believe a change to
joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to youryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail or
spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Formyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. If
8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
must be filed within 2 years from the IRS's first attempt tonation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will
collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, such as byexplain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-
applying your refund from one year to the joint liability. Fortate to write to us about anything you do not understand.
more information, see Publication 971, Innocent SpouseBy interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your Relief, and Form 8857. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that the Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think you
examination take place at a reasonable time and place that paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within
is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner 3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2
proposes any changes to your return, he or she will explain years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
changes, you can meet with the examiner's supervisor. not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns, sponsored and presented by IRS partners who are federal
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- tax specialists. Workshop topics vary from a general over-
tion on refunds. view of taxes to more specific topics such as recordkeep-
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you ing and retirement plans. Although most are free, some
must file within 3 years from the date the return was due workshops have fees associated with them. Any fees
(including extensions) to get that refund. charged for a workshop are paid to the sponsoring organi-
zation, not the IRS.
For more information, visit www.irs.gov/businesses/
small.
Subscribe to e-news for small businesses. Join the12. e-News for Small Businesses mailing list to receive up-
dates, reminders, and other information useful to small
business owners and self employed individuals. Visit theHow To Get website at www.irs.gov/businesses/small and click on
ªJoin mailing list.ºMore Information
Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-This section describes the help the IRS and other federal able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi- It contains a list of free tax publications and describes othernesses. free tax information services, including tax education and
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Accessible versions of IRS published products areInternal Revenue Service available on request in a variety of alternative formats for
people with disabilities.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
Internet. You can access the IRS website atpublications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
tax help.
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-
Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization ble taxpayers.
within the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are
• Check the status of your 2008 refund. Go to www.experiencing economic harm, who are seeking help in
irs.gov and click on Where's My Refund. Wait atresolving tax problems that have not been resolved
least 72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt ofthrough normal channels, or who believe that an IRS
your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing asystem or procedure is not working as it should.
paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return,You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS toll-free
wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically).case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD
Have your 2008 tax return available so you can1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance.
provide your social security number, your filing sta-You can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate,
tus, and the exact whole dollar amount of your re-whose phone number and address are listed in your local
fund.telephone directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer
Advocate Service Ð Your Voice at the IRS. You can file • Download forms, instructions, and publications.
Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis-
• Order IRS products online.tance (And Application for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or
ask an IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For • Research your tax questions online.
more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). LITCs are in- • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published independent organizations that provide low income taxpay- the last few years.ers with representation in federal tax controversies with the
IRS for free or for a nominal charge. The clinics also • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
provide tax education and outreach for taxpayers with holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
limited English proficiency or who speak English as a • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed using our Al-second language. Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer ternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant.Clinic List, provides information on clinics in your area. It is
available at www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office. • Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email.Small business workshops. Small business workshops
are designed to help the small business owner understand • Get information on starting and operating a small
and fulfill their federal tax responsibilities. Workshops are business.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone. Many services are available by phone. stores have a collection of products available to print
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc- search purposes.
tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in- • Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayerstructions. You should receive your order within 10 Assistance Center every business day for personal,days. face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
help you set up a payment plan. If you need toquestions at 1-800-829-1040.
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help tax law applies to your individual tax return, or yousolving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax- are more comfortable talking with someone in per-payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance CenterIRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or where you can spread out your records and talk withhelp you set up a payment plan. Call your local an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointmentTaxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To is necessary, but if you prefer, you can call yourfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or local Center and leave a message requesting anlook in the phone book under United States Govern- appointment to resolve a tax account issue. A repre-ment, Internal Revenue Service. sentative will call you back within 2 business days to
schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
nience. If you have an ongoing, complex tax accountTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
problem or a special need, such as a disability, anquestions or to order forms and publications.
appointment can be requested. All other issues will• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to be handled without an appointment. To find the num-pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics. ber, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
phone book under United States Government, Inter-• Refund information. To check the status of your
nal Revenue Service.2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 during business
hours or 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-
mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Wait at least Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of your tions, and publications to the address below. You
e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper should receive a response within 10 days after
return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait your request is received.
14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have
your 2008 tax return available so you can provide Internal Revenue Service
your social security number, your filing status, and 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
the exact whole dollar amount of your refund. Re- Bloomington, IL 61705±6613
funds are sent out weekly on Fridays. If you check
DVD for tax products. You can order Publicationthe status of your refund and are not given the date
1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:it will be issued, please wait until the next week
before checking back.
• Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and
professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a
• Tax law frequently asked questions.second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-
a short survey at the end of the call. tem.
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code.Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
able on a walk-in basis. • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, • Toll-free and email technical support.libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li- • Two releases during the year.
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county ± The first release will ship the beginning of January
government offices, credit unions, and office supply 2009.
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
± The final release will ship the beginning of March tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.
2009. BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
are in business or are interested in starting a business can
Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.
Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee). SCORE provides small business counseling and training
to current and prospective small business owners. SCORESmall Business Resource Guide 2009. This
is made up of current and former business people whoonline guide is a must for every small business
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,owner or any taxpayer about to start a business.
manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offersThis year's guide includes:
a variety of small business workshops.• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-
Internet. You can visit the SBA website at www.ness plan, find financing for your business, and
sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website, you canmuch more.
find a variety of information of interest to small
• All the business tax forms, instructions, and publica- business owners.tions needed to successfully manage a business.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at• Tax law changes for 2009.
1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid. information about programs available to assist
small business owners.• Web links to various government agencies, business
associations, and IRS organizations. Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
Development Center or Business Information• ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour opportunity to sug-
Center to request assistance with your smallgest changes for future editions.
business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBA• A site map of the guide to help you navigate the website or call the SBA Answer Desk.pages with ease.
• An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module that gives prac-
tical tips for teens about starting their own business,
Other Federal Agenciescreating a business plan, and filing taxes.
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-The information is updated during the year. Visit www.
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº in the upper right-hand
able from the Superintendent of Documents at thecorner for more information.
Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at www.Small Business Administration
access.gpo.gov.
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
and educational programs, counseling services, financial
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-
tance provided by the SBA.
Superintendent of DocumentsSmall Business Development Centers (SBDCs). U.S. Government Printing OfficeSBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv- P.O. Box 979050ices to current and prospective small business owners who St. Louis, MO 63917-9000cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800
business. or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DC
area.
Business Information Centers (BICs). BICs offer a
small business reference library, management video
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Changing accounting Refined coal ................... . 20A
method ........................ . 15 Renewable electricity .......... . 20Accounting method:
Research ...................... . 19Charitable contributions ....... . 40Accrual .................... . 13, 31
Small employer pension planClaim for refund ................ . 46Automatic procedures ......... . 16
startup costs ................ . 19Cash ....................... . 13, 31 Collection of tax ................ . 46
Taxes paid on certain employeeChange in ..................... . 16 Combination method of tips .......................... . 19Combination ................... . 14 accounting .................... . 14 Welfare-to-work ................ . 20Special ........................ . 16 Comments on publication ....... . 3 Work opportunity .............. . 20Accounting periods ............ . 12 Condemned property ........... . 18 Credit for employer-providedAccrual method: Consignments .................. . 24 childcare facilities ............ . 19Income - general rule .......... . 13 Construction allowances ....... . 25 Credit for small employer pensionIncome - special rules ......... . 13 Cost of goods sold ............. . 27 plan startup costs ............ . 19Of accounting .................. . 13 Credit:Adjusted basis .................. . 17 Advanced lean burn technologyAdministrator ................... . 25 Dmotor vehicle credit ......... . 19
Agricultural chemicals security Damages ........................ . 24Agricultural chemicals
credit .......................... . 18 Debt:security ...................... . 18
Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel fuels Bad ............................ . 31Alcohol and cellulosic biofuel
credit .......................... . 19 Canceled ...................... . 22fuels ......................... . 19
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling Qualified real propertyAlternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit ................ . 19 business .................... . 23property ..................... . 19
Refund offset against ........... . 7Alternative minimum tax ....... . 20 Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 19
Definitions:Alternative motor vehicle Biodiesel fuels ................. . 19
Accounting methods ........... . 12credit .......................... . 19 Carbon dioxide
Accounting periods ............ . 12Appeal rights ................... . 46 sequestration ................ . 19
Barter .......................... . 21Appreciation .................... . 24 Diesel fuels, renewable ........ . 19
Basis .......................... . 17Disabled access ............... . 19Audits ........................... . 46 Business bad debt ............. . 31Distilled spirits ................. . 19Automobile  (See Car expenses) Calendar tax year .............. . 12Employer-provided Cash discount ............. . 27, 28childcare .................... . 19 Disposition of property ......... . 17B Empowerment zone Drawing account ............... . 29Bad debts ....................... . 31 employment ................. . 19 Entertainment expenses ....... . 38Barter income ................... . 21 Energy efficient appliance ..... . 19 Fair market value .............. . 17Basis of property ............... . 17 Energy efficient home ......... . 19 Fiscal tax year ................. . 12Biodiesel and renewable diesel How to claim ................... . 20 Fringe benefit .................. . 34fuels credit .................... . 19 Indian coal ..................... . 20 Local transportationBribes ........................... . 40 Indian employment ............ . 19 expenses .................... . 31Business expenses ............. . 31 Investment ..................... . 19 Necessary expense............ . 31Business income ............... . 20 Low sulfur diesel fuel Net operating loss ............. . 40production ................... . 19Business use of your home .... . 38 Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31
Low-income housing ........... . 19 Ordinary expense .............. . 31
Mine rescue team training ..... . 19 Principal place of business .... . 39C New markets .................. . 20 Qualified long-term realCanceled debt .................. . 22 Nonconventional source property ..................... . 25Cancellation of qualified real fuel .......................... . 20 Qualified real property businessproperty business debt ...... . 23 Orphan drug ................... . 20 debt ......................... . 23Capital gain or loss ............. . 18 Qualified alternative fuel motor Rent ........................... . 36
Car expenses ............... . 31, 32 vehicle credit ................ . 19 Restricted property ............ . 23
Carbon dioxide sequestration Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle Retail space ................... . 25
credit .......................... . 19 credit ........................ . 19 Self-employment (SE) tax ...... . 8
Cash discount .............. . 27, 28 Qualified hybrid motor vehicle Sole proprietor .................. . 2
credit ........................ . 19Cash method: Tax home ...................... . 32
Expenses ...................... . 13 Qualified railroad track Trade discount ............. . 27, 28
Income ........................ . 13 maintenance ................ . 20 Travel expenses ............... . 37
Page 50 Publication 334 (2008)

Page 51 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation: Rent ........................... . 36 8844 (empowerment zone
credit) ....................... . 19Deduction...................... . 33 Taxes .......................... . 36
Listed property ................. . 33 Travel .......................... . 37 8845 (Indian employment
Truck .......................... . 31 credit) ....................... . 19Depreciation, recapture ........ . 24
8846 (credit for social security onDirect seller ................. . 25, 26
tip income) .................. . 19Disabled access credit ......... . 19 F 8857 (innocent spouse) ........ . 46Disposition of property: Fair market value ............... . 17 8861 (welfare-to-workBusiness property ............. . 16 Filing business taxes ............ . 5 credit) ....................... . 20Installment sale ............ . 17, 18 Fishing crew member ...... . 26, 41 8864 (biodiesel/renewable dieselLike-kind exchange .... . 17, 18, 25 Form: credit) ....................... . 19Nontaxable exchange ......... . 17 720 (excise tax return) .......... . 9 8874 (new markets credit) ..... . 20Sale of a business ............. . 17 940 (unemployment tax) ....... . 10 8879 (self-selected PIN) ........ . 7Distilled spirits credit ........... . 19 941 (quarterly employment 8881 (pension plan startup costsDividend income ................ . 22 tax) .......................... . 10 credit) ....................... . 19Donation of inventory .......... . 28 944 (annual employment 8882 (employer-provided childcareDrawing account ................ . 29 tax) .......................... . 10 credit) ....................... . 19Due date of return ............... . 8 982 (discharge of 8886 (transaction statement) ... . 4indebtedness) ............... . 23 8896 (low sulfur diesel1040 (tax return) ............ . 6, 10 credit) ....................... . 19E 1040-ES (estimated tax) .... . 8, 10 8900 (railroad track maintenanceEconomic injury ................ . 24 1040-V (voucher) ............... . 7 credit) ....................... . 20e-file .............................. . 6 1099-B (barter) ................ . 21 8906 (distilled spirits credit) .... . 19EFTPS ............................ . 8 1099-MISC 8907 (nonconventional fuelElectronic filing .................. . 6 (miscellaneous) ......... . 10, 21 credit) ....................... . 20Employee ........................ . 6 1128 (change tax year) ........ . 12 8908 (energy efficient homeEmployee benefit programs .... . 34 2210 (underpayment of estimated credit) ....................... . 19Employees' pay ................. . 34 tax) ........................... . 8 8909 (appliance credit) ........ . 192290 (excise tax for heavyEmployer identification number 8910 (alternative vehicletrucks) ....................... . 10(EIN) ............................ . 5 credit) ................... . 19, 313115 (change accountingEmployment taxes: 8911 (alternative fuel refuelingmethod) ..................... . 16About ........................... . 9 property credit) .............. . 193468 (investment credit) ....... . 19Deduction for .................. . 37 8931 (agricultural chemicals3800 (general businessEmpowerment zone employment security) ..................... . 18credit) ....................... . 18credit .......................... . 19 Final ........................... . 114562 (depreciation) ............ . 33Energy efficient appliance Information returns ............ . 104684 (casualty and theft) ...... . 18credit .......................... . 19 Schedule C (sole proprietor) .... . 6,4797 (sale of businessEnergy efficient home credit ... . 19 10property) ................ . 18, 24Entertainment expenses  (See Schedule C-EZ (sole4868 (extension) ................ . 8Travel expenses) proprietor) .................... . 65884 (work opportunityEscrow, payments placed in ... . 27 Schedule SE (self-employmentcredit) ....................... . 20Estimated tax .................... . 8 tax) ....................... . 9, 106251 (alternative minimum SS-4 (application for EIN) ....... . 5Examinations (audits) .......... . 46 tax) ...................... . 18, 20 SS-5 (application for SSN) ...... . 5Excise taxes: 6252 (installment sale) ......... . 18
W-2 (report wages) ........ . 10, 11About ........................... . 9 6478 (alcohol and cellulosic biofuel
W-3 (transmittal of W-2) ....... . 10Deduction for .................. . 37 fuels) ........................ . 19
W-4 (employee withholding) .... . 6Executor ........................ . 25 6765 (research credit) ......... . 19
W-7 (application for ITIN) ....... . 58109 (deposit coupon) ......... . 10Expenses ....................... . 31
W-9 (request for TIN) ........... . 68300 (cash payments overBad debts...................... . 31
When to file .................... . 10$10,000) .................... . 11Car ............................ . 31
Which to file ................... . 108586 (low-income housingDepreciation ................... . 33
Fringe benefits .................. . 34credit) ....................... . 19Employees' pay ................ . 34
8594 (asset acquisition) ....... . 17Entertainment.................. . 37 Fuel taxes ....................... . 37
8820 (orphan drug credit) ...... . 20Home, business use ........... . 38
8824 (like-kind exchange) .... . 17,Insurance ...................... . 34 GInterest ........................ . 35 18
Gains and losses ............... . 24Legal and professional fees ... . 36 8826 (disabled access
General business credits ....... . 18Meals .......................... . 37 credit) ....................... . 19
Gross profit:Nondeductible ................. . 40 8829 (business in home) ...... . 39
Accuracy ...................... . 30Other .......................... . 40 8835 (renewable electricity, coal
Pension plans ................. . 36 credit) ....................... . 20 Additions to .................... . 30
Publication 334 (2008) Page 51

Page 52 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Guidelines for selected Interest: Constructions allowances ...... . 25
occupations  (See also Expenses ...................... . 35 Exchange of like-kind
Occupations, selected) ........ . 25 Income ........................ . 22 property ..................... . 25
Leasehold improvements ...... . 25Inventories ...................... . 15
Loans .......................... . 25Investment credit ............... . 19H Sales tax ...................... . 25Health insurance, deduction for Notary public ............... . 26, 41self-employed ................ . 35 K Not-for-profit activities ......... . 40Home, business use of ......... . 38 Kickbacks ................... . 24, 40
Hotels, boarding houses, and
Oapartments ................... . 22 L Occupations, selected:Husband and wife business ..... . 2 Lease bonus .................... . 22 Administrator .................. . 25Lease cancellation Direct seller ................ . 25, 26I payments ..................... . 22 Executor ....................... . 25
Identification numbers .......... . 5 Legal fees ....................... . 36 Fishing crew member .......... . 26
Income  (See also Not Like-kind exchanges ....... . 17, 25 Insurance agent, former ....... . 26
income) ........................ . 24 Limited liability company ....... . 2 Insurance agent, retired ....... . 26
Accounting for your ............ . 27 Newspaper carrier orListed property ................. . 24
Barter .......................... . 21 distributor ................... . 26Lobbying expense .............. . 40
Business ....................... . 20 Newspaper or magazineLocal transportationDamages ...................... . 24 vendor ....................... . 26expenses ..................... . 31
Gains and losses .............. . 24 Notary public .................. . 26Lodging ......................... . 38Kickbacks...................... . 24 Public official .................. . 26Long-term capital gain orKinds of income ............... . 20 Real estate agent .............. . 26loss ........................... . 18Lost income payments ......... . 24 Securities dealer ............... . 27Lost income payments ......... . 24Other .......................... . 23 Securities trader ............... . 27Low sulfur diesel fuel productionPaid to a third party ............ . 27 Office in the home  (See alsocredit .......................... . 19Personal property rent ......... . 22 Business use of your home) ... . 32Low-income housing credit .... . 19Promissory notes .............. . 24 Optional methods, using
Recapture of depreciation ..... . 24 both ........................... . 44
Recovery of items previously M Ordinary gain or loss ........... . 18
deducted .................... . 24 Meals  (See Travel expenses) Orphan drug credit ............. . 20Rental ..................... . 21, 22 Methods for figuring netRestricted property ............ . 23 earnings ...................... . 42 PIncome tax: Mileage rate for vehicles ....... . 32 Parking fees .................... . 32About ........................... . 6 Mine rescue team trainingDeduction for .................. . 36 Partners, husband and wife ..... . 2credit .......................... . 19How to pay ..................... . 8 Pay, kinds of .................... . 34Motor vehicle, alternativeUnderpayment penalty .......... . 8 Paying:credit .......................... . 19Income tax return, who must Business taxes ................. . 5
file .............................. . 6 Income tax ...................... . 8
NIncreased deduction limit ....... . 3 Payments to third parties ...... . 22
Net operating losses ........... . 40Independent contractor ... . 2, 9, 41 Penalties and fines ............. . 40
Net profit or loss ................ . 40Indian employment credit ...... . 19 Penalty:
New markets credit ............. . 20 Failure to file Form 8300 ....... . 11Individual taxpayer identification
Failure to file informationNewspaper carrier ornumber (ITIN) .................. . 5
returns ...................... . 11distributor .................... . 26Information returns ............. . 10
Failure to furnish correct payeeNewspaper or magazineInformation, How to get
statements .................. . 11vendor ........................ . 26more .......................... . 47
Underpayment of tax ........... . 8Nonbusiness bad debt ......... . 31Innocent spouse relief .......... . 46
Waiver of ...................... . 11Nonconventional source fuelInstallment sales ................ . 17
Pension plans ................... . 36credit .......................... . 20Insurance:
Personal property tax .......... . 37Nondeductible insuranceExpense ....................... . 34
Prepaid expense:premiums ..................... . 35Nondeductible premiums ...... . 35
Extends useful life ............. . 35NonemployeePrepayment ................... . 35
Rent ........................... . 36compensation ................ . 20Proceeds ...................... . 27
Professional fees ............... . 36Self-employed health .......... . 35 Nontaxable exchanges ......... . 17
Promissory notes ............... . 24Insurance agent: Not income:
Public official ................... . 26Former......................... . 26 Appreciation ................... . 24
Retired......................... . 26 Punitive damages............... . 24Consignments ................. . 24
Page 52 Publication 334 (2008)

Page 53 of 53 of Publication 334 10:18 -  5-DEC-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Effects of using an optional Suggestions for publication .... . 3Q
method ...................... . 42 SUV .............................. . 33Qualified railroad track
Farm optional method ......... . 44maintenance credit ........... . 20
Fiscal year filer ................ . 44Qualified real property business TFishing crew member .......... . 41debt ........................... . 23 Tax help  (See Information, How toGain or loss .................... . 42 get more)Government employee ........ . 41 Tax home ................... . 32, 37R Joint return .................... . 45 Tax preparation fees............ . 36Real estate: Lost income payments ......... . 42Agent .......................... . 26 Tax refund:Maximum earnings:Dealer ......................... . 21 Claim for ....................... . 46For 2008 ................... . 3, 9Rent ........................... . 21 Offset against debts ............ . 7For 2009 ..................... . 4Taxes .......................... . 37 Tax return:Subject to ................... . 41
Recovery of items previously How to file ...................... . 6Methods for figuring net
deducted ...................... . 24 Who must file ................... . 6earnings ..................... . 42
Refund: Tax year ......................... . 12More than one business ... . 42, 45
Inquiries ........................ . 7 Calendar ....................... . 12Nonfarm optional method ...... . 42
Offsets against debts ........... . 7 Change in ..................... . 12Notary public .................. . 41
Fiscal .......................... . 12Related persons: Optional methods:
Unreasonable rent ............. . 36 Taxes:Farm ........................ . 44
Deduction for .................. . 36Nonfarm ..................... . 42Renewable electricity, refined coal,
Employment ................ . 9, 37Rate ........................... . 41and Indian coal production
Excise ...................... . 9, 37Regular method ............... . 42credit .......................... . 20
Fuel............................ . 37Residing abroad ............... . 42Rent expense ................... . 36
Income ..................... . 6, 36Special rules andRental income .................. . 21
Paid on certain employeeexceptions ................... . 41Repayment of income .......... . 13 tips .......................... . 19Tax rate ........................ . 9Reportable transaction disclosure Personal property .............. . 37Time limit for posting income ... . 9statement ...................... . 4 Real estate .................... . 37Who must pay ................. . 41Reporting self-employment Sales .......................... . 37Why use an optionaltax ............................. . 45 Self-employment............ . 8, 37method ...................... . 42Research credit ................. . 19 Taxpayer Advocate ............. . 47Section 179 ...................... . 3Restricted property ............. . 23 Deduction...................... . 33 Taxpayer rights ................. . 45Retirement plans  (See Pension Property ....................... . 24 Third parties, Payments to ..... . 22plans) Securities: Tolls ............................. . 32
Dealer ......................... . 27 Trade discount .............. . 27, 28S Trader ......................... . 27 Trade or business ............... . 2Salaries ......................... . 34 Self-employed health insurance Trailer park owner .............. . 21Sale of a business .............. . 17 deduction ..................... . 35 Transportation expenses ....... . 31Sale of property  (See also Self-employment tax  (See SE tax) Travel expenses ................ . 37Disposition of property) ........ . 17 Settlement payments ........... . 22
Sales of assets ................. . 16 Short-term capital gain or USales tax ........................ . 37 loss ........................... . 18 Underpayment of tax penalty ... . 8Schedule C ....................... . 6 Signature, electronic ............ . 6 Uniform capitalization rules .... . 16Schedule C-EZ ................... . 6 Small Business
Administration ................ . 49Schedule SE (Form 1040) ....... . 9
WSocial security coverage ........ . 8Schedule SE, filing
Wages ........................... . 34requirement ................... . 45 Social security number (SSN) ... . 5
Welfare-to-work credit .......... . 20SE tax: Sole proprietor ............... . 2, 41
Work opportunity credit ........ . 20About ........................... . 8 Sport utility vehicle ............. . 33
Aliens .......................... . 41 Standard mileage rate .......... . 32 ■Church employee .............. . 41 For 2008 ........................ . 3
Community property income ... . 42 For 2009 ........................ . 4
Deduction for .................. . 37 Statutory employee .............. . 2Earning credits ................. . 8
Publication 334 (2008) Page 53