Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 27  8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 502
Medical and 
Dental 
Expenses
For use in preparing
2025 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 502, such as legislation enacted after it was 
published, go to IRS.gov/Pub502.
Reminders
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. Y ou can help bring 
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
calling 800-THE-LOST (800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
Introduction
This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
cal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A 
(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses and whose ex-
penses you can and can’t include in calculating the de-
duction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and how 
to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to report the 
deduction on your tax return and what to do if you sell 
medical property or receive damages for a personal injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this 
publication the term “medical expenses” is often used to 
refer to medical and dental expenses.
Y ou can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the 
part of your medical and dental expenses that is more 
than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income (AGI).
This publication also explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses and health insurance premi-
ums if you are self-employed.
Pub. 502 covers many common medical expenses but 
not every possible medical expense. If you can’t find the 
expense you are looking for, refer to the definition of medi-
cal expenses under What Are Medical Expenses, later.
See How T o Get T ax Help near the end of this publica-
tion for information about getting publications and forms.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue 
Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Publication 502 (2025)  Catalog Number 15002Q
Feb 5, 2026 Department of the T reasury  Internal Revenue Service  www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to  IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other 
T ax-Favored Health Plans
Forms (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income T ax Return
1040-SR U.S. Income T ax Return for Seniors
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
8962 Premium T ax Credit (PTC)
What Are Medical Expenses?
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga-
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease and for the pur-
pose of affecting any part or function of the body. These 
expenses include payments for legal medical services 
rendered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and other 
medical practitioners. They include the costs of equip-
ment, supplies, and diagnostic devices needed for these 
purposes.
Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate or 
prevent a physical or mental disability or illness. They 
don’t include expenses that are merely beneficial to gen-
eral health, such as vitamins or a vacation.
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for in-
surance that covers the expenses of medical care and the 
amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care. 
Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualified 
long-term care services and limited amounts paid for any 
qualified long-term care insurance contract.
  969
  1040
  1040-SR
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  8962
What Expenses Can You 
Include This Year?
Y ou can include only the medical and dental expenses 
you paid this year but generally not payments for medical 
or dental care you will receive in a future year. (But see 
Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses Can Y ou In-
clude, later, for an exception.) This is not the rule for deter-
mining whether an expense can be reimbursed by a flexi-
ble spending arrangement (FSA). If you pay medical 
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the check 
is generally the date of payment. If you use a 
“pay-by-phone” or “online” account to pay your medical 
expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan-
cial institution showing when payment was made is the 
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical 
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the 
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amount 
charged.
If you didn’t claim a medical or dental expense that 
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file 
Form 1040 -X, Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax Re-
turn, to claim a refund for the year in which you overlooked 
the expense. Don’t claim the expense on this year’s return. 
Generally, a claim for refund must be filed within 3 years 
from the date the original return was filed or within 2 years 
from the time the tax was paid, whichever is later.
Y ou can’t include medical expenses that were paid by 
insurance companies or other sources. This is true 
whether the payments were made directly to you, to the 
patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non-
community property state and file separate returns, each 
of you can include only the medical expenses each ac-
tually paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint 
checking account in which you and your spouse have the 
same interest are considered to have been paid equally by 
each of you, unless you can show otherwise.
Community property states.  If you and your spouse 
live in a community property state and file separate re-
turns or are registered domestic partners in Nevada, 
Washington, or California, any medical expenses paid out 
of community funds are divided equally. Generally, each of 
you should include half the expenses. If medical expenses 
are paid out of the separate funds of one individual, only 
the individual who paid the medical expenses can include 
them. If you live in a community property state and aren’t 
filing a joint return, see Pub. 555. 
How Much of the Expenses 
Can You Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) 
only the amount of your medical and dental expenses that 
is more than 7.5% of your AGI.
2 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 3 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Whose Medical Expenses
Can You Include?
Y ou can generally include medical expenses you pay for 
yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who was 
your spouse or your dependent either when the services 
were provided or when you paid for them. There are differ-
ent rules for decedents and for individuals who are the 
subject of multiple support agreements. See Support 
claimed under a multiple support agreement , later, under 
Qualifying Relative.
Spouse
Y ou can include medical expenses you paid for your 
spouse. T o include these expenses, you must have been 
married either at the time your spouse received the medi-
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.
Example 1.  Y our spouse received medical treatment 
before you were married. Y ou paid for the treatment after 
getting married. Y ou can include these expenses in figur-
ing your medical expense deduction even if you and your 
spouse file separate returns.
If your spouse had paid the expenses, you couldn’t in-
clude your spouse’s expenses on your separate return. 
The amounts your spouse paid during the year would be 
included on their separate return. If you filed a joint return, 
the medical expenses both of you paid during the year 
would be used to figure the medical expense deduction.
Example 2. This year, you paid medical expenses for 
your spouse, Kitt, who died last year. Y ou married Royal 
this year and the two of you file a joint return. Because you 
were married to Kitt when Kitt received the medical serv-
ices, you can include those expenses in figuring your 
medical expense deduction for this year.
Dependent
Y ou can include medical expenses you paid for your de-
pendent. For you to include these expenses, the person 
must have been your dependent either at the time the 
medical services were provided or at the time you paid the 
expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependent 
for purposes of the medical expense deduction if both of 
the following requirements are met.
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined later) or a 
qualifying relative (defined later).
2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resident 
of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your quali-
fying child was adopted, see Exception for adopted 
child, later.
Y ou can include medical expenses you paid for an individ-
ual that would have been your dependent except that:
1. The person received gross income of $5,200 or more 
in 2025;
2. The person filed a joint return for 2025; or
3. Y ou or your spouse if filing jointly could be claimed as 
a dependent on someone else’s 2025 return.
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or 
national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-
ber of your household for 2025, that child doesn’t have to 
be a U.S. citizen or national or a resident of the United 
States, Canada, or Mexico.
Qualifying Child
A qualifying child is a child who:
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, 
or a descendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew);
2. Was:
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2025 and younger than 
you (or your spouse if filing jointly),
b. Under age 24 at the end of 2025, a full-time stu-
dent, and younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly), or
c. Any age and permanently and totally disabled;
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2025;
4. Didn’t provide over half of their own support for 2025; 
and
5. Didn’t file a joint return, other than to claim a refund.
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as your 
own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed with 
you for legal adoption.
Y ou can include medical expenses that you paid for a 
child before adoption if the child qualified as your depend-
ent when the medical services were provided or when the 
expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons for 
medical expenses they paid under an agreement with you, 
you are treated as having paid those expenses provided 
you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attrib-
utable to the medical care of the child.
But if you pay the agency or other person for medical 
care that was provided and paid for before adoption nego-
tiations began, you can’t include them as medical expen-
ses.
Tip:  Y ou may be able to take a credit for other expen-
ses related to an adoption. See the Instructions for Form 
8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more information.
Child of divorced or separated parents.  For purposes 
of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of 
divorced or separated parents can be treated as a de-
pendent of both parents. Each parent can include the 
medical expenses they pay for the child if:
1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half the year;
Publication 502 (2025) 3

Page 4 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. The child receives over half of the child’s support dur-
ing the year from the parents; and
3. The child’s parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year.
This doesn’t apply if the child’s dependency is being 
claimed under a multiple support agreement (discussed 
later).
Qualifying Relative
A qualifying relative is a person:
1. Who is your:
a. Son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your grand-
child),
b. Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, or a son or 
daughter of any of them,
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sibling of either 
of them (for example, your grandmother, grandfa-
ther, aunt, or uncle),
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother, 
son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
e. Any other person (other than your spouse) who 
lived with you all year as a member of your house-
hold if your relationship didn’t violate local law,
2. Who wasn’t a qualifying child (see Qualifying Child, 
earlier) of any taxpayer for 2025, and
3. For whom you provided over half of their support in 
2025. But see Child of divorced or separated parents, 
earlier, Support claimed under a multiple support 
agreement next, and Kidnapped child under Qualify-
ing Relative in Pub. 501.
Support claimed under a multiple support agree-
ment. If you are considered to have provided more than 
half of a qualifying relative’s support under a multiple sup-
port agreement, you can include medical expenses you 
pay for that person. A multiple support agreement is used 
when two or more people provide more than half of a per-
son’s support, but no one alone provides more than half.
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in 
the agreement can’t be included as medical expenses by 
anyone. However, you can include the entire unreim-
bursed amount you paid for medical expenses.
Example. Y ou and your three siblings each provide 
one-fourth of your parent’s total support. Under a multiple 
support agreement, you treat your parent as your depend-
ent. Y ou paid all of your parent’s medical expenses. Y our 
siblings repaid you for three -fourths of these expenses. In 
figuring your medical expense deduction, you can include 
only one -fourth of your parent’s medical expenses. Y our 
siblings can’t include any part of the expenses. However, if 
you and your siblings share the nonmedical support items 
and you separately pay all of your parent’s medical expen-
ses, you can include the unreimbursed amount you paid 
for your parent’s medical expenses in your medical expen-
ses.
Decedent
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are 
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental 
expenses on the decedent’s final income tax return. This 
includes expenses for the decedent’s spouse and de-
pendents as well as for the decedent.
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent 
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece-
dent’s estate for the decedent’s medical care as paid by 
the decedent at the time the medical services were provi-
ded. The expenses must be paid within the 1 -year period 
beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are 
the survivor or personal representative making this choice, 
you must attach a statement to the decedent’s Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR (or the decedent’s amended return, Form 
1040-X) saying that the expenses haven’t been and won’t 
be claimed on the estate tax return.
Caution:  Qualified medical expenses paid before 
death by the decedent aren’t deductible if paid with a 
tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA, Medicare Ad-
vantage MSA, or health savings account.
What if the decedent’s return had been filed and the 
medical expenses weren’t included?  Form 1040 -X 
can be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated 
as paid, unless the period for claiming a refund has 
passed. Generally, a claim for refund must be filed within 3 
years of the date the original return was filed, or within 2 
years from the time the tax was paid, whichever date is 
later.
Example. Hudson properly filed a 2024 income tax re-
turn. Hudson died in 2025 with unpaid medical expenses 
of $1,500 from 2024 and $1,800 in 2025. If the expenses 
are paid within the 1 -year period, Hudson’s survivor or 
personal representative can file an amended return for 
2024 claiming a deduction based on the $1,500 medical 
expenses. The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2025 
can be included on the decedent’s final return for 2025.
What if you pay medical expenses of a deceased 
spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for 
your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as 
medical expenses on your Schedule A (Form 1040) in the 
year paid, whether they are paid before or after the dece-
dent’s death. The expenses can be included if the person 
was your spouse or dependent either at the time the medi-
cal services were provided or at the time you paid the ex-
penses.
4 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 5 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What Medical Expenses Are 
Includible?
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuring 
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed in 
alphabetical order.
This list doesn’t include all possible medical expenses. 
T o determine if an expense not listed can be included in 
figuring your medical expense deduction, see What Are 
Medical Expenses, earlier.
Abortion
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a legal abortion.
Acupuncture
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for acupuncture.
Alcoholism
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by 
the center during treatment.
Y ou can also include in medical expenses amounts you 
pay for transportation to and from alcohol recovery sup-
port organization (for example, Alcoholics Anonymous) 
meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant 
to competent medical advice that membership in the alco-
hol recovery support organization is necessary for the 
treatment of a disease involving the excessive use of alco-
hol.
Ambulance
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
ambulance service.
Annual Physical Examination
See Physical Examination, later.
Artificial Limb
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an artificial limb.
Artificial Teeth
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for artificial teeth.
Bandages
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
supplies such as bandages.
Birth Control Pills
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
Body Scan
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of an elec-
tronic body scan.
Braille Books and Magazines
Y ou can include in medical expenses the part of the cost 
of Braille books and magazines for use by a visually im-
paired person that is more than the cost of regular printed 
editions.
Breast Pumps and Supplies
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of breast 
pumps and supplies that assist lactation. This doesn’t in-
clude the costs of excess bottles for food storage.
Breast Reconstruction Surgery
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay 
for breast reconstruction surgery, as well as breast pros-
thesis, following a mastectomy for cancer. See Cosmetic 
Surgery, later.
Capital Expenses
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
special equipment installed in a home or for improvements 
if their main purpose is medical care for you, your spouse, 
or your dependent. The cost of permanent improvements 
that increase the value of your property may be partly in-
cluded as a medical expense. The cost of the improve-
ment is reduced by the increase in the value of your prop-
erty. The difference is a medical expense. If the value of 
your property isn’t increased by the improvement, the en-
tire cost is included as a medical expense.
Certain improvements made to accommodate a home 
to your disabled condition or that of your spouse or your 
dependents who live with you don’t usually increase the 
value of the home and the cost can be included in full as 
medical expenses. These improvements include, but 
aren’t limited to, the following items.
• Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
• Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your 
home.
• Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and interior 
doorways.
Publication 502 (2025) 5

Page 6 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Installing railings, support bars, or other modifications 
to bathrooms.
• Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
• Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but eleva-
tors generally add value to the house).
• Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other 
warning systems.
• Modifying stairways.
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether or 
not in bathrooms).
• Modifying hardware on doors.
• Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.
• Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to your 
disabled condition are considered medical care. Addi-
tional costs for personal motives, such as for architectural 
or aesthetic reasons, aren’t medical expenses.
Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure 
the amount of your capital expense to include in your 
medical expenses.
Capital Expense 
Worksheet
Worksheet A.
Keep for Y our Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of your 
medical expenses due to a home improvement.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home 
improvement .......................... 1.  
2. Enter the value of your home 
immediately after the 
improvement ............... 2.  
3. Enter the value of your home 
immediately before the 
improvement ............... 3.  
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the 
increase in the value of your home due to the 
improvement .......................... 4.  
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you 
have no medical expenses due to the home 
improvement; stop here.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your 
medical expenses due to the home 
improvement .......................... 5.  
Operation and upkeep.  Amounts you pay for operation 
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses 
as long as the main reason for them is medical care. This 
rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of 
the capital asset qualified as a medical care expense.
Improvements to property rented by a person with a 
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb-
ing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medi-
cal reasons, in a rented house are medical expenses.
Example. Y ou have arthritis and a heart condition. Y ou 
can’t climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On the doctor’s ad-
vice, you install a bathroom with a shower stall on the first 
floor of your two -story rented house. The landlord didn’t 
pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special 
plumbing and didn’t lower the rent. Y ou can include the 
entire amount you paid as medical expenses.
Car
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
hand controls and other special equipment installed in a 
car for the use of a person with a disability.
Special design.  Y ou can include in medical expenses 
the difference between the cost of a regular car and a car 
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car for 
medical reasons are explained under T ransportation, later.
Chiropractor
Y ou can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a 
chiropractor for medical care.
Christian Science Practitioner
Y ou can include in medical expenses fees you pay to 
Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
Condoms
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to purchase condoms.
Contact Lenses
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
contact lenses needed for medical reasons. Y ou can also 
include the cost of equipment and materials required for 
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzyme 
cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.
Crutches
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to buy or rent crutches.
6 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 7 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dental Treatment
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay 
for the prevention and alleviation of dental disease. Pre-
ventive treatment includes the services of a dental hygien-
ist or dentist for such procedures as teeth cleaning, the 
application of sealants, and fluoride treatments to prevent 
tooth decay. T reatment to alleviate dental disease includes 
services of a dentist for procedures such as X -rays, fil-
lings, braces, extractions, dentures, and other dental ail-
ments. But see T eeth Whitening under What Expenses 
Aren’t Includible, later.
Diagnostic Devices
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of devices 
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease.
Example. Y ou have diabetes and use a blood sugar 
test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. Y ou can include 
the cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical expen-
ses.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as 
either:
• Medical expenses, or
• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a credit 
for dependent care. See Pub. 503, Child and Depend-
ent Care Expenses.
Y ou can choose to apply them either way as long as you 
don’t use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a 
medical expense deduction.
Drug Addiction
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
an inpatient’s treatment at a therapeutic center for drug 
addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by 
the center during treatment.
Y ou can also include in medical expenses amounts you 
pay for transportation to and from drug treatment meetings 
in your community if the attendance is pursuant to compe-
tent medical advice that the membership is necessary for 
the treatment of a disease involving the excessive use of 
drugs.
Drugs
See Medicines, later.
Eye Exam
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye examinations.
Eyeglasses
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea-
sons. See Contact Lenses, earlier, for more information.
Eye Surgery
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye 
surgery or radial keratotomy.
Fertility Enhancement
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of the fol-
lowing procedures performed on yourself, your spouse, or 
your dependent to overcome an inability to have children.
• Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including tem-
porary storage of eggs or sperm).
• Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-
gery that prevented the person operated on from hav-
ing children.
But see Surrogacy Expenses  under What Expenses 
Aren’t Includible, later.
Founder’s Fee
See Lifetime Care—Advance Payments, later.
Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
Y ou can include in medical expenses the costs of buying, 
training, and maintaining a guide dog or other service ani-
mal to assist a visually impaired or hearing disabled per-
son or a person with other physical disabilities. In general, 
this includes any costs, such as food, grooming, and vet-
erinary care, incurred in maintaining the health and vitality 
of the service animal so that it may perform its duties.
Health Institute
Y ou can include in medical expenses fees you pay for 
treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-
ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical 
or mental disability or illness of the individual receiving the 
treatment.
Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO)
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medi-
cal care from an HMO. These amounts are treated as 
medical insurance premiums. See Insurance Premiums , 
later.
Publication 502 (2025) 7

Page 8 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hearing Aids
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearing 
aid and batteries, repairs, and maintenance needed to op-
erate it.
Home Care
See Nursing Services, later.
Home Improvements
See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Hospital Services
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution 
if a principal reason for being there is to receive medical 
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging. 
Also see Lodging, later.
Insurance Premiums
Y ou can include in medical expenses insurance premiums 
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Y ou can’t in-
clude in medical expenses insurance premiums that were 
paid and for which you are claiming a credit or deduction. 
Medical care policies can provide payment for treatment 
that includes:
• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays;
• Prescription drugs and insulin;
• Dental care;
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses; and
• Long-term care (subject to additional limitations). See 
Qualified Long-T erm Care Insurance Contracts under 
Long-T erm Care, later.
If you have a policy that provides payments for other 
than medical care, you can include the premiums for the 
medical care part of the policy if the charge for the medi-
cal part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part must 
be separately stated in the insurance contract or given to 
you in a separate statement.
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan
Don’t include in your medical and dental expenses any in-
surance premiums paid by an employer -sponsored health 
insurance plan unless the premiums are included on your 
Form W-2, Wage and T ax Statement. Also, don’t include 
any other medical and dental expenses paid by the plan 
unless the amount paid is included on your Form W-2.
Example. Y ou are a federal employee participating in 
the premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee 
Health Benefits (FEHB) program. Y our share of the FEHB 
premium is paid by making a pre -tax reduction in your sal-
ary. Because you are an employee whose insurance 
premiums are paid with money that is never included in 
your gross income, you can’t deduct the premiums paid 
with that money.
Long-term care services.  Contributions made by your 
employer to provide coverage for qualified long -term care 
services under a flexible spending or similar arrangement 
must be included in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages on your Form W-2.
Retired public safety officers.  If you are a retired pub-
lic safety officer, don’t include as medical expenses any 
health or long -term care insurance premiums that you 
elected to have paid with tax -free distributions from a re-
tirement plan. This applies only to distributions that would 
otherwise be included in income.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  If you 
have medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health 
reimbursement arrangement, you can’t include those ex-
penses in your medical expenses.
Medicare Part A
If you are covered under social security (or if you are a 
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are 
enrolled in Medicare Part A. The payroll tax paid for Medi-
care Part A isn’t a medical expense.
If you aren’t covered under social security (or weren’t a 
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you can 
voluntarily enroll in Medicare Part A. In this situation, you 
can include the premiums you paid for Medicare Part A as 
a medical expense.
Medicare Part B
Medicare Part B is a supplemental medical insurance. 
Premiums you pay for Medicare Part B are a medical ex-
pense. Check the information you received from the Social 
Security Administration to find out your premium.
Medicare Part D
Medicare Part D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance 
program for persons with Medicare Part A or B. Y ou can 
include as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medi-
care Part D.
Personal Protective Equipment
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay 
for personal protective equipment, such as masks, hand 
sanitizer and hand sanitizing wipes, for the primary pur-
pose of preventing the spread of Coronavirus Disease 
2019 (COVID -19). For more information, see IRS An-
nouncement 2021-7.
Prepaid Insurance Premiums
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for 
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your 
8 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 9 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dependents after you reach age 65 are medical care ex-
penses in the year paid if they are:
1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often; 
and
2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age 65 
(but not for less than 5 years).
Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
Y ou must include in gross income cash payments you re-
ceive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. Y ou 
must also include in gross income the value of unused 
sick leave that, at your option, your employer applies to 
the cost of your continuing participation in your employer’s 
health plan after you retire. Y ou can include this cost of 
continuing participation in the health plan as a medical ex-
pense.
If you participate in a health plan where your employer 
automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the 
cost of your continuing participation in the health plan (and 
you don’t have the option to receive cash), don’t include 
the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. Y ou 
can’t include this cost of continuing participation in that 
health plan as a medical expense.
Insurance Premiums You Can’t Include
Y ou can’t include premiums you pay for:
• Life insurance policies;
• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings;
• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc.;
• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each week 
for a stated number of weeks if you are hospitalized for 
sickness or injury;
• The part of your car insurance that provides medical 
insurance coverage for all persons injured in or by 
your car because the part of the premium providing in-
surance for you, your spouse, and your dependents 
isn’t stated separately from the part of the premium 
providing insurance for medical care for others; or
• Health or long-term care insurance if you elected to 
pay these premiums with tax-free distributions from a 
retirement plan and these distributions would other-
wise have been included in income.
T axes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-
care taxes, aren’t insurance premiums.
Coverage for nondependents. Generally, you can’t de-
duct any additional premium you pay as the result of in-
cluding on your policy someone who isn’t your spouse or 
dependent, even if that person is your child under age 27. 
However, you can deduct the additional premium if that 
person is:
• Y our child whom you don’t claim as a dependent be-
cause of the rules for children of divorced or separa-
ted parents;
• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
on your return except that person received $5,200 or 
more of gross income or filed a joint return; or
• Any person you could have claimed as a dependent 
except that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else’s 2025 re-
turn.
Also, if you had family coverage when you added this indi-
vidual to your policy and your premiums didn’t increase, 
you can enter on Schedule A (Form 1040) the full amount 
of your medical and dental insurance premiums.
Intellectually and Developmentally 
Disabled, Special Home for
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping a 
person who is intellectually and developmentally disabled 
in a special home, not the home of a relative, on the rec-
ommendation of a psychiatrist to help the person adjust 
from life in a mental hospital to community living.
Laboratory Fees
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay 
for laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
Lactation Expenses
See Breast Pumps and Supplies, earlier.
Lead-Based Paint Removal
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of removing 
lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a 
child who has or had lead poisoning from eating the paint. 
These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or crack-
ing) or within the child’s reach. The cost of repainting the 
scraped area isn’t a medical expense.
If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area with 
wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital expen-
ses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Don’t include the cost 
of painting the wallboard as a medical expense.
Learning Disability
See Special Education, later.
Legal Fees
Y ou can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid 
that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
ness. However, you can’t include in medical expenses 
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees for 
conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or other 
fees that aren’t necessary for medical care.
Publication 502 (2025) 9

Page 10 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lifetime Care—Advance Payments
Y ou can include in medical expenses a part of a life -care 
fee or “founder’s fee” you pay either monthly or as a lump 
sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The part 
of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-
ble to medical care. The agreement must require that you 
pay a specific fee as a condition for the home’s promise to 
provide lifetime care that includes medical care. Y ou can 
use a statement from the retirement home to prove the 
amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement 
must be based either on the home’s prior experience or on 
information from a comparable home.
Dependents with disabilities.  Y ou can include in medi-
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution for 
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or 
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you be-
come unable to provide care. The payments must be a 
condition for the institution’s future acceptance of your 
child and must not be refundable.
Payments for future medical care. Generally, you can’t 
include in medical expenses current payments for medical 
care (including medical insurance) to be provided sub-
stantially beyond the end of the year. This rule doesn’t ap-
ply in situations where the future care is purchased in con-
nection with obtaining lifetime care of the type described 
earlier.
Lodging
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of meals 
and lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principal 
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See 
Nursing Home, later.
Y ou may be able to include in medical expenses the 
cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-
tion. Y ou can include the cost of such lodging while away 
from home if all of the following requirements are met.
1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical 
care.
2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a licensed 
hospital or in a medical care facility related to or the 
equivalent of a licensed hospital.
3. The lodging isn’t lavish or extravagant under the cir-
cumstances.
4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure, 
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home.
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg-
ing can’t be more than $50 for each night for each person. 
Y ou can include lodging for a person traveling with the per-
son receiving the medical care. For example, if a parent is 
traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be in-
cluded as a medical expense for lodging. Meals aren’t in-
cluded.
Don’t include the cost of lodging while away from home 
for medical treatment if that treatment isn’t received from a 
doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility re-
lated to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that 
lodging isn’t primarily for or essential to the medical care 
received.
Long-Term Care
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
qualified long -term care services and certain amounts of 
premiums paid for qualified long-term care insurance con-
tracts.
Qualified Long-Term Care Services
Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos-
tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care 
services (defined later) that are:
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and
2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a li-
censed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual.  An individual is chronically ill 
if, within the previous 12 months, a licensed health care 
practitioner has certified that the individual meets either of 
the following descriptions.
1. The individual is unable to perform at least two activi-
ties of daily living without substantial assistance from 
another individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of 
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eating, 
toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
nence.
2. The individual requires substantial supervision to be 
protected from threats to health and safety due to se-
vere cognitive impairment.
Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte-
nance or personal care services is care which has as its 
primary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual 
with needed assistance with the individual’s disabilities 
(including protection from threats to health and safety due 
to severe cognitive impairment).
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts
A qualified long -term care insurance contract is an insur-
ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified 
long-term care services. The contract must:
1. Be guaranteed renewable;
2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other money 
that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or borrowed;
3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the death 
of the insured or complete surrender or cancellation of 
the contract, and dividends under the contract must 
be used only to reduce future premiums or increase 
future benefits; and
10 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 11 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurred for 
services or items that would be reimbursed under 
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondary 
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-
odic payments without regard to expenses.
The amount of qualified long -term care premiums you 
can include is limited. Y ou can include the following as 
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).
1. The most you can include depends on the age at the 
end of 2025 of the person for whom the premiums 
were paid.
a. Age 40 or under—$480.
b. Age 41 to 50—$900.
c. Age 51 to 60—$1,800.
d. Age 61 to 70—$4,810.
e. Age 71 or over—$6,020.
2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care 
services.
Note: The limit on premiums is for each person.
Also, if you are an eligible retired public safety officer, 
you can’t include premiums for long-term care insurance if 
you elected to pay these premiums with tax -free distribu-
tions from a qualified retirement plan made directly to the 
insurance provider and these distributions would other-
wise have been included in your income.
Meals
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at 
a hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for be-
ing there is to get medical care.
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of 
meals that aren’t part of inpatient care. Also see 
Weight-Loss Program and Nutritional Supplements, later.
Medical Conferences
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for ad-
mission and transportation to a medical conference if the 
medical conference concerns the chronic illness of your-
self, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of the 
medical conference must be primarily for and necessary 
to the medical care of you, your spouse, or your depend-
ent. The majority of the time spent at the conference must 
be spent attending sessions on medical information.
Caution:  The cost of meals and lodging while attend-
ing the conference isn’t deductible as a medical expense.
Medicines
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
prescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one 
that requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an in-
dividual. Y ou can also include amounts you pay for insulin. 
Except for insulin, you can’t include in medical expenses 
amounts you pay for a drug that isn’t prescribed.
Imported medicines and drugs.  If you imported medi-
cines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines and 
Drugs From Other Countries under What Expenses Aren’t 
Includible, later.
Nursing Home
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of medical 
care in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar insti-
tution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. This 
includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a 
principal reason for being there is to get medical care.
Don’t include the cost of meals and lodging if the rea-
son for being in the home is personal. Y ou can, however, 
include in medical expenses the part of the cost that is for 
medical or nursing care.
Nursing Services
Y ou can include in medical expenses wages and other 
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need 
not be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of 
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv-
ices connected with caring for the patient’s condition, such 
as giving medication or changing dressings, as well as 
bathing and grooming the patient. These services can be 
provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is 
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal 
and household services, amounts paid to the attendant 
must be divided between the time spent performing 
household and personal services and the time spent for 
nursing services. For example, because of your medical 
condition, you pay a visiting nurse $300 per week for med-
ical and household services. T en percent of the nurse’s 
time is spent doing household services such as washing 
dishes and laundry. Y ou can include only $270 per week 
as medical expenses. The $30 (10% × $300) allocated to 
household services can’t be included. However, certain 
maintenance or personal care services provided for quali-
fied long-term care can be included in medical expenses. 
See Maintenance and personal care services  under 
Long-T erm Care, earlier. Additionally, certain expenses for 
household services or for the care of a qualifying individ-
ual incurred to allow you to work may qualify for the child 
and dependent care credit. See Pub. 503.
Y ou can also include in medical expenses part of the 
amount you pay for that attendant’s meals. Divide the food 
expense among the household members to find the cost 
of the attendant’s food. Then divide that cost in the same 
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to pay 
additional amounts for household upkeep because of the 
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with your 
medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities you 
pay because you moved to a larger apartment to provide 
space for the attendant.
Publication 502 (2025) 11

Page 12 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employment taxes.  Y ou can include as a medical ex-
pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state 
employment taxes you pay for an attendant who provides 
medical care. If the attendant also provides personal and 
household services, you can include as a medical ex-
pense only the amount of employment taxes paid for med-
ical services, as explained earlier. For information on em-
ployment tax responsibilities of household employers, see 
Pub. 926.
Operations
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
legal operations that aren’t for cosmetic surgery. See Cos-
metic Surgery  under What Expenses Aren’t Includible , 
later.
Optometrist
See Eyeglasses, earlier.
Organ Donors
See T ransplants, later.
Osteopath
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
an osteopath for medical care.
Oxygen
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathing prob-
lems caused by a medical condition.
Physical Examination
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for an annual physical examination and diagnostic tests by 
a physician. Y ou don’t have to be ill at the time of the ex-
amination.
Pregnancy Test Kit
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
to purchase a pregnancy test kit to determine if you are 
pregnant.
Premium Tax Credit
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the amount of 
health insurance premiums paid by or through the pre-
mium tax credit. Y ou also can’t include in medical expen-
ses any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit made that you did not have to pay back. However, 
any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit that you did have to pay back can be included in 
medical expenses.
Example 1. Y ou are under age 65 and unmarried. The 
cost of your health insurance premiums in 2025 is $8,700. 
Advance payments of the premium tax credit of $4,200 
are made to the insurance company and you pay premi-
ums of $4,500. On your 2025 tax return, you are allowed a 
premium tax credit of $3,600 and must repay $600 excess 
advance credit payments (which is less than the repay-
ment limitation). Y ou are treated as paying $5,100 ($8,700 
less the allowed premium tax credit of $3,600) for health 
insurance premiums in 2025. Y ou will enter $5,100 on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 1.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except you are allowed a premium tax credit of $4,900 on 
your tax return and receive a net premium tax credit of 
$700. Y ou are treated as paying $3,800 ($8,700 less the 
allowed premium tax credit of $4,900) for health insurance 
premiums in 2025. Y ou will enter $3,800 on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 1.
Prosthesis
See Artificial Limb  and Breast Reconstruction Surgery , 
earlier.
Psychiatric Care
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting a 
mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical 
center where the dependent receives medical care. See 
Psychoanalysis next and T ransportation, later.
Psychoanalysis
Y ou can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
choanalysis. However, you can’t include payments for psy-
choanalysis that is part of required training to be a psycho-
analyst.
Psychologist
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
a psychologist for medical care.
Special Education
Y ou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a 
doctor’s recommendation for a child’s tutoring by a 
teacher who is specially trained and qualified to work with 
children who have learning disabilities caused by mental 
or physical impairments, including nervous system disor-
ders.
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition, 
meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes 
special education to help a child to overcome learning dis-
abilities. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be the 
primary reason for attending the school, and any ordinary 
12 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 13 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
education received must be incidental to the special edu-
cation provided. Special education includes:
• T eaching Braille to a visually impaired person,
• T eaching lip reading to a hearing disabled person, or
• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-
tion caused by a birth defect.
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of send-
ing a child with behavioral problems to a school where the 
course of study and the disciplinary methods have a ben-
eficial effect on the child’s attitude if the availability of med-
ical care in the school isn’t a principal reason for sending 
the student there.
Sterilization
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal 
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per-
son unable to have children). Also see Vasectomy, later.
Stop-Smoking Programs
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
a program to stop smoking. However, you can’t include in 
medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that don’t 
require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches, 
that are designed to help stop smoking.
Surgery
See Operations, earlier.
Telephone
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of special 
telephone equipment that lets a person who is deaf, hard 
of hearing, or has a speech disability communicate over a 
regular telephone. This includes teletypewriter (TTY) and 
telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) equipment. 
Y ou can also include the cost of repairing the equipment.
Therapy
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
therapy received as medical treatment.
Transplants
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
medical care you receive because you are a donor or a 
possible donor of a kidney or other organ. This includes 
the cost of medical care for the donor, in connection with 
the donation of an organ to you, your spouse, or depend-
ent. This also includes transportation expenses.
Transportation
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts paid for 
transportation primarily for and essential to medical care.
You can include: 
• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service;
• T ransportation expenses of a parent who must go with 
a child who needs medical care;
• T ransportation expenses of a nurse or other person 
who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
ment required by a patient who is traveling to get med-
ical care and is unable to travel alone; and
• T ransportation expenses for regular visits to see a 
mentally ill dependent, if these visits are recommen-
ded as a part of treatment.
Car expenses. Y ou can include out-of-pocket expenses, 
such as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car for 
medical reasons. Y ou can’t include depreciation, insur-
ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.
If you don’t want to use your actual expenses for 2025, 
you can use the standard medical mileage rate of 21 cents 
a mile.
Y ou can also include parking fees and tolls. Y ou can 
add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses 
whether you use actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate.
Example. In 2025, you drove 2,800 miles for medical 
reasons. Y ou spent $400 for gas, $30 for oil, and $100 for 
tolls and parking. Y ou want to figure the amount to include 
in medical expenses both ways to see which gives the 
greater deduction.
Y ou figure the actual expenses first. Y ou add the $400 
for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for tolls and parking 
for a total of $530.
Y ou then figure the standard mileage amount. Y ou mul-
tiply 2,800 miles by 21 cents a mile for a total of $588. 
Then you add the $100 tolls and parking and mileage for a 
total of $688 (588 + 100).
Y ou include the $688 of car expenses with the other 
medical expenses for the year because the $688 is more 
than the $530 figured using actual expenses.
Transportation expenses you can’t include.  Y ou can’t 
include in medical expenses the cost of transportation in 
the following situations.
• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-
quires an unusual means of transportation.
• T ravel for purely personal reasons to another city for 
an operation or other medical care.
• T ravel that is merely for the general improvement of 
one’s health.
• The costs of operating a specially equipped car for 
other than medical reasons.
Trips
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for and 
essential to receiving medical services. Y ou may be able 
to include up to $50 for each night for each person. Y ou 
Publication 502 (2025) 13

Page 14 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can include lodging for a person traveling with the person 
receiving the medical care. For example, if a parent is trav-
eling with a sick child, up to $100 per night can be inclu-
ded as a medical expense for lodging. Meals aren’t inclu-
ded. See Lodging, earlier.
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses a trip or vacation 
taken merely for a change in environment, improvement of 
morale, or general improvement of health, even if the trip 
is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see Medical 
Conferences, earlier.
Tuition
Under special circumstances, you can include charges for 
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.
A lump-sum fee which includes education, board, and 
medical care—without distinguishing which part of the fee 
results from medical care —is not considered an amount 
payable for medical care. However, you can include 
charges for a health plan included in a lump -sum tuition 
fee if the charges are separately stated or can easily be 
obtained from the school.
Vasectomy
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for a vasectomy.
Vision Correction Surgery
See Eye Surgery, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to 
lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or 
heart disease). This includes fees you pay for member-
ship in a weight reduction group as well as fees for attend-
ance at periodic meetings. Y ou can’t include membership 
dues in a gym, health club, or spa as medical expenses, 
but you can include separate fees charged there for 
weight loss activities.
Y ou can’t include the cost of diet food or beverages in 
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages 
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
tional needs. Y ou can include the cost of special food in 
medical expenses only if:
1. The food doesn’t satisfy normal nutritional needs,
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, and
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physician.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is limi-
ted to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss 
Program under What Expenses Aren’t Includible, later.
Wheelchair
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay 
for a wheelchair used for the relief of a sickness or disabil-
ity. The cost of operating and maintaining the wheelchair 
is also a medical expense.
Wig
Y ou can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig pur-
chased upon the advice of a physician for the mental 
health of a patient who has lost all of their hair from dis-
ease.
X-ray
Y ou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for 
X-rays for medical reasons.
What Expenses Aren’t 
Includible?
Following is a list of some items that you can’t include in 
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are 
listed in alphabetical order.
Baby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing 
Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you, 
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental 
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit 
can’t be treated as an expense paid for medical care.
Controlled Substances
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for controlled substances (such as marijuana) that aren’t 
legal under federal law, even if such substances are legal-
ized by state law.
Cosmetic Surgery
Generally, you can’t include in medical expenses the 
amount you pay for cosmetic surgery. This includes any 
procedure that is directed at improving the patient’s ap-
pearance and doesn’t meaningfully promote the proper 
function of the body or prevent or treat illness or disease. 
Y ou generally can’t include in medical expenses the 
amount you pay for procedures such as face lifts, hair 
transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and liposuction.
Y ou can include in medical expenses the amount you 
pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a de-
formity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital ab-
normality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or 
trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
14 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 15 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. An individual undergoes surgery that re-
moves a breast as part of treatment for cancer. The indi-
vidual pays a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The sur-
gery to reconstruct the breast corrects a deformity directly 
related to the disease. The cost of the surgery is includible 
in the individual’s medical expenses.
Dancing Lessons
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of dancing 
lessons, swimming lessons, etc., even if they are recom-
mended by a doctor, if they are only for the improvement 
of general health.
Diaper Service
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the amount you pay 
for diapers or diaper services, unless they are needed to 
relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Electrolysis or Hair Removal
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Flexible Spending Arrangement
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts for which 
you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending ar-
rangement if you contribute a part of your income on a 
pre-tax basis to pay for the qualified benefit.
Funeral Expenses
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for funerals.
Future Medical Care
Generally, you can’t include in medical expenses current 
payments for medical care (including medical insurance) 
to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year. 
This rule doesn’t apply in situations where the future care 
is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care, as 
explained under Lifetime Care —Advance Payments , or 
qualified long-term care insurance contracts, as explained 
under Long-T erm Care, earlier.
Hair Transplant
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Health Club Dues
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses health club dues or 
amounts paid to improve one’s general health or to relieve 
physical or mental discomfort not related to a particular 
medical condition.
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of mem-
bership in any club organized for business, pleasure, rec-
reation, or other social purpose.
Health Savings Accounts
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you con-
tribute to a health savings account. Y ou can’t include ex-
penses you pay for with a tax -free distribution from your 
health savings account. Y ou also can’t use other funds 
equal to the amount of the distribution and include the ex-
penses. For more information, see Pub. 969.
Household Help
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor. 
This is a personal expense that isn’t deductible. However, 
you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a per-
son providing nursing-type services. For more information, 
see Nursing Services, earlier, under What Medical Expen-
ses Are Includible . Also, certain maintenance or personal 
care services provided for qualified long -term care can be 
included in medical expenses. For more information, see 
Long-T erm Care, earlier, under What Medical Expenses 
Are Includible.
Illegal Operations and Treatments
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances 
whether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed 
practitioners.
Insurance Premiums
See Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses 
Are Includible, earlier.
Maternity Clothes
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you pay 
for maternity clothes.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts you con-
tribute to an Archer MSA. Y ou can’t include expenses you 
pay for with a tax -free distribution from your Archer MSA. 
Y ou also can’t use other funds equal to the amount of the 
distribution and include the expenses. For more informa-
tion on Archer MSAs, see Pub. 969.
Medicines and Drugs From Other 
Countries
In general, you can’t include in your medical expenses the 
cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered and ship-
ped) from another country. Y ou can only include the cost 
of a drug that was imported legally. For example, you can 
include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food and Drug 
Administration announces can be legally imported by indi-
viduals.
Publication 502 (2025) 15

Page 16 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou can include the cost of a prescribed drug you pur-
chase and consume in another country if the drug is legal 
in both the other country and the United States.
Nonprescription Drugs and Medicines
Except for insulin, you can’t include in medical expenses 
amounts you pay for a drug that isn’t prescribed. A prescri-
bed drug is one that requires a prescription by a doctor for 
its use by an individual.
Example. Y our doctor recommends that you take as-
pirin. Because aspirin is a drug that doesn’t require a 
physician’s prescription for its use by an individual, you 
can’t include its cost in your medical expenses.
Nutritional Supplements
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-
tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, “natural 
medicines,” etc., unless they are recommended by a med-
ical practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi-
tion diagnosed by a physician. These items are taken to 
maintain your ordinary good health and aren’t for medical 
care.
Personal Use Items
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of an item 
ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposes un-
less it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physical or 
mental disability or illness. For example, the cost of a 
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personal ex-
pense.
In order to accommodate an individual with a physical 
disability, you may have to purchase an item ordinarily 
used as a personal, living, or family item in a special form. 
Y ou can include the excess of the cost of the item in a spe-
cial form over the cost of the item in normal form as a 
medical expense. See Braille Books and Magazines  un-
der What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
Premium Tax Credit
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the amount of 
health insurance premiums paid by or through the pre-
mium tax credit. Y ou also can’t include in medical expen-
ses any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit made that you did not have to pay back. However, 
any amount of advance payments of the premium tax 
credit that you did have to pay back can be included in 
medical expenses.
Surrogacy Expenses
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the amounts you 
pay for the identification, retention, compensation, and 
medical care of a gestational surrogate because they are 
paid for an unrelated party who is not you, your spouse, or 
your dependent.
Swimming Lessons
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Teeth Whitening
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses amounts paid to 
whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.
Veterinary Fees
Y ou generally can’t include veterinary fees in your medical 
expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Service Animal un-
der What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.
Weight-Loss Program
Y ou can’t include in medical expenses the cost of a 
weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is 
the improvement of appearance, general health, or sense 
of well-being. Y ou can’t include amounts you pay to lose 
weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific 
disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper-
tension, or heart disease). If the weight -loss treatment 
isn’t for a specific disease diagnosed by a physician, you 
can’t include either the fees you pay for membership in a 
weight-reduction group or fees for attendance at periodic 
meetings. Also, you can’t include membership dues in a 
gym, health club, or spa.
Y ou can’t include the cost of diet food or beverages in 
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages 
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
tional needs.
See Weight-Loss Program under What Medical Expen-
ses Are Includible, earlier.
How Do You Treat 
Reimbursements?
Y ou can include in medical expenses only those amounts 
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
ance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
Y ou must reduce your total medical expenses for the year 
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. 
This includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain 
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you re-
ceive from that policy to reduce your total medical expen-
ses, including those it doesn’t reimburse.
Example. Y ou have insurance policies that cover your 
hospital and doctors’ bills but not your nursing bills. The 
insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors’ bills is 
16 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 17 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more than their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spent for medi-
cal care by the total amount of insurance you received, 
even if the policies don’t cover some of your medical ex-
penses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).  An HRA 
is an employer-funded plan that reimburses employees for 
medical care expenses and allows unused amounts to be 
carried forward. An HRA is funded solely by the employer 
and the reimbursements for medical expenses, up to a 
maximum dollar amount for a coverage period, aren’t in-
cluded in your income.
Other reimbursements.  Generally, you don’t reduce 
medical expenses by payments you receive for:
• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or function 
of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or disfig-
urement to the extent the payment is based on the na-
ture of the injury without regard to the amount of time 
lost from work, or
• Loss of earnings.
Y ou must, however, reduce your medical expenses by 
any part of these payments that is designated for medical 
costs. See How Do Y ou Figure and Report the Deduction 
on Y our T ax Return, later.
For how to treat damages received for personal injury 
or sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later.
What if Your Insurance Reimbursement Is 
More Than Your Medical Expenses?
If you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses, 
you may have to include the excess in income. Y ou may 
want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your reim-
bursement is taxable.
Premiums paid by you.  If you pay either the entire pre-
mium for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan 
similar to medical insurance and your insurance payments 
or other reimbursements are more than your total medical 
expenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement. 
Generally, you don’t include the excess reimbursement in 
your gross income. However, gross income does include 
total payments in excess of $420 a day ($153,300 for 
2025) for qualified long-term care services.
Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both you 
and your employer contribute to your medical insurance 
plan and your employer’s contributions aren’t included in 
your gross income, you must include in your gross income 
the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your 
employer’s contribution.
If you aren’t covered by more than one policy, you can 
figure the amount of the excess reimbursement you must 
include in gross income using Worksheet B. If you are cov-
ered under more than one policy, see More than one pol-
icy, later.
Premiums paid by your employer.  If your employer or 
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical 
insurance plan and your employer’s contributions aren’t in-
cluded in your income, you must report all of your excess 
reimbursement as other income.
More than one policy.  If you are covered under more 
than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid by 
both you and your employer, you must first divide the med-
ical expenses among the policies to figure the excess re-
imbursement from each policy. Then divide the policy 
costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that 
is from your employer’s contribution. Any excess reim-
bursement that is due to your employer’s contributions is 
includible in your income.
Y ou can figure the part of the excess reimbursement 
that is from your employer’s contribution by using Work-
sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your em-
ployer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If you 
had more than one policy but you didn’t share in the cost 
of at least one policy, don’t use Worksheet C.
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
Publication 502 (2025) 17

Page 18 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have Only 
One Policy
Worksheet B.
Keep for Y our Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your 
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer’s 
contributions aren’t included in your gross income.
1. Enter the amount contributed to your 
medical insurance for the year by your 
employer ........................ 1.  
2. Enter the total annual cost of the 
policy ............................ 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............... 3.  
4. Enter the amount of excess 
reimbursement .................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the 
amount of the excess reimburse-
ment you must include as other income 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR ........... 5.  
Excess Reimbursement 
Includible in Income 
When You Have More 
Than One Policy
Worksheet C.
Keep for Y our Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 
reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when 
(a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, 
(b) at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, 
and (c) your employer’s contributions aren’t included in your gross 
income. If you and your employer didn’t share in the cost of at least 
one policy, don’t use this worksheet.
1. Enter the reimbursement from your 
employer’s policy .................... 1.  
2. Enter the reimbursement from your own 
policy .............................. 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................... 3.  
4. Divide line 1 by line 3 ................ 4.  
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid 
during the year. If this amount is at least as 
much as the amount on line 3, stop here 
because there is no excess 
reimbursement ..................... 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............... 6.  
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............. 7.  
8. Enter employer’s contribution to the annual 
cost of the employer’s policy ........... 8.  
9. Enter total annual cost of the employer’s 
policy .............................. 9.  
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the 
percentage of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income ............................ 10.  
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the 
amount of your total excess 
reimbursement you must report as other 
income on Form 1040 or 1040-SR ...... 11.  
What if You Receive Insurance 
Reimbursement in a Later Year?
If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses 
you deducted in an earlier year, you must generally report 
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ-
ously deducted as medical expenses.
However, don’t report as income the amount of reim-
bursement you received up to the amount of your medical 
deductions that didn’t reduce your tax for the earlier year.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Pub. 525.
What if You Are Reimbursed for Medical 
Expenses You Didn’t Deduct?
If you didn’t deduct a medical expense in the year you 
paid it because your medical expenses weren’t more than 
7.5% of your AGI or because you didn’t itemize deduc-
tions, don’t include the reimbursement, up to the amount 
of the expense, in income. However, if the reimbursement 
is more than the expense, see What if Y our Insurance Re-
imbursement Is More Than Y our Medical Expenses, ear-
lier. 
How Do You Figure and Report 
the Deduction on Your Tax 
Return?
Once you have determined which medical expenses you 
can include, figure and report the deduction on your tax 
return.
What Tax Form Do You Use?
Y ou report your medical expense deduction on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). See the Instructions for Schedule A 
(Form 1040) for more detailed information on figuring your 
medical and dental expense deduction.
18 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 19 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Adjusted Basis of 
Medical Equipment or 
Property Sold
Worksheet D.
Keep for Y our Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical 
equipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or 
property in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted 
basis of the equipment or property you sold.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or 
property ....................... 1.  
2. Enter your total includible medical 
expenses for the year you included 
the cost in your medical 
expenses ...................... 2.  
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............ 3.  
4. Enter 7.5% or 10% of your AGI 
(whichever applies) for the year the 
cost was included in your medical 
expenses ..................... 4.  
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your 
allowable itemized deductions for the 
year you purchased the equipment 
or property weren’t more than your 
AGI for that year, stop here. This is 
the adjusted basis of the equipment 
or property. If your allowable itemized 
deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, complete lines 6 through 
11 ............................ 5.  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ........ 6.  
7. Enter your total allowable itemized 
deductions for the year the cost was 
included in your medical 
expenses ...................... 7.  
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ............ 8.  
9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost 
was included in your medical 
expenses ...................... 9.  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ........ 10.  
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10 ......... 11.  
12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your allowable 
itemized deductions for the year you 
purchased the equipment or property 
were more than your AGI for that 
year, this is the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property ........... 12.  
Recordkeeping. Y ou should keep records of your 
medical and dental expenses to support your de-
duction. Don’t send these records with your paper 
return.
RECORDS
Sale of Medical Equipment or 
Property
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in 
one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxable 
gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price 
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or 
property.
The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of the 
equipment or property that you couldn’t deduct because 
of the 7.5% or 10% AGI limit used to figure your medical 
deduction. Refer to your Schedule A (Form 1040) for the 
year the cost was included to determine which limit ap-
plied to you. Use Worksheet D to figure the adjusted basis 
of the equipment or property.
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on 
the sale of the medical equipment or property.
Gain or Loss on the 
Sale of Medical 
Equipment or Property
Worksheet E.
Keep for Y our Records
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain or 
loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that you 
deducted in an earlier year.
1. Enter the amount that the medical 
equipment or property sold for ...... 1.  
2. Enter your selling expenses ......... 2.  
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........... 3.  
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the 
equipment or property from Worksheet 
D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable ...... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the 
total gain or loss from the sale of the 
medical equipment or property ...... 5.  
If you have a loss, it isn’t deductible. If you have a gain, 
it’s includible in your income. The part of the gain that is a 
recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxable 
as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
Any part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an 
amount you previously deducted is taxable as a capital 
gain. Enter it on Form 8949, Sales and Other Dispositions 
of Capital Assets, and Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital 
Gains and Losses.
For more information about the recovery of an amount 
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier 
year, see Recoveries in Pub. 525.
Publication 502 (2025) 19

Page 20 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Damages for Personal Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury 
suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses that 
you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must include 
that part in your income in the year you receive it to the ex-
tent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year. See 
What if Y ou Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later 
Y ear, discussed earlier under How Do Y ou T reat Reim-
bursements.
Example. Y ou sued this year for injuries you suffered 
in an accident last year. Y ou sought $10,000 for your inju-
ries and didn’t itemize your damages. Last year, you paid 
$500 for medical expenses for your injuries. Y ou deducted 
those expenses on last year’s tax return. This year you 
settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Y our settlement didn’t item-
ize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first presumed 
to be for the medical expenses that you deducted. The 
$500 is includible in your income this year because you 
deducted the entire $500 as a medical expense deduction 
last year.
Future medical expenses.  If you receive an amount in 
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part of 
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, you 
must reduce any future medical expenses for these inju-
ries until the amount you received has been completely 
used.
Example. Y ou were injured in an accident. Y ou sued 
and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. Y ou 
settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that 
$10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses 
for your injuries. Y ou can’t include the first $10,000 that 
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries.
Workers’ compensation. If you received workers’ com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to 
that injury, you must include the workers’ compensation in 
income up to the amount you deducted. If you received 
workers’ compensation but didn’t deduct medical expen-
ses related to that injury, don’t include the workers’ com-
pensation in your income.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you are a person with disabilities, you can take a busi-
ness deduction for expenses that are necessary for you to 
be able to work. If you take a business deduction for these 
impairment-related work expenses, they aren’t subject to 
the 7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses.
Y ou have a disability if you have:
• A physical or mental disability (for example, blindness 
or deafness) that functionally limits your being em-
ployed; or
• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a sight 
or hearing impairment) that substantially limits one or 
more of your major life activities, such as performing 
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, learning, 
or working.
Impairment-related expenses defined.  Impairment-re-
lated expenses are those ordinary and necessary busi-
ness expenses that are:
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily;
• For goods and services not required or used, other 
than incidentally, in your personal activities; and
• Not specifically covered under other income tax laws.
Where to report.  If you are self -employed, deduct the 
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, 
E, or F) used to report your business income and expen-
ses.
If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Em-
ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 
1040) that part of the amount on Form 2106 that is related 
to your impairment.
Example. Y ou are blind. Y ou must use a reader to do 
your work. Y ou use the reader both during your regular 
working hours at your place of work and outside your reg-
ular working hours away from your place of work. The 
reader’s services are only for your work. Y ou can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
Health Insurance Costs for 
Self-Employed Persons
If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year, 
you may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income, 
amounts paid for health insurance (which includes medi-
cal, dental, and vision insurance and qualified long -term 
care insurance) on behalf of yourself, your spouse, your 
dependents, and your children who were under age 27 at 
the end of 2025. For this purpose, you were self-employed 
if you were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving 
guaranteed payments) or you received wages from an S 
corporation in which you were more than a 2% share-
holder. The insurance plan must be established under 
your trade or business and the deduction can’t be more 
than your earned income from that trade or business.
Y ou can’t deduct payments for health insurance for any 
month in which you were eligible to participate in a health 
plan subsidized by your employer, your spouse’s em-
ployer, or an employer of your dependent, or your child un-
der age 27, at the end of 2025. Y ou can’t deduct payments 
for a qualified long -term care insurance contract for any 
month in which you were eligible to participate in a 
long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your em-
ployer or your spouse’s employer.
If you qualify to take the deduction, use the Self -Em-
ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the 
Instructions for Form 1040 to figure the amount you can 
20 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 21 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct. But if any of the following applies, don’t use that 
worksheet.
• Y ou had more than one source of income subject to 
self-employment tax.
• Y ou file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
• Y ou are using amounts paid for qualified long-term 
care insurance to figure the deduction.
If you can’t use the worksheet in the Instructions for Form 
1040, use Form 7206, Self -Employed Health Deduction, 
to figure your deduction.
Use Pub. 974, Premium T ax Credit, instead of the work-
sheet in the 2025 Instructions for Form 1040 if the insur-
ance plan established or considered to be established un-
der your business was obtained through the Health 
Insurance Marketplace and you are claiming the premium 
tax credit.
When figuring the amount you can deduct for insurance 
premiums, don’t include amounts paid for health insur-
ance coverage with retirement plan distributions that were 
tax free because you are a retired public safety officer.
Where to report.  Y ou take this deduction on Form 1040 
or 1040-SR. If you itemize your deductions and don’t claim 
100% of your self -employed health insurance costs on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, include any remaining premiums 
with all other medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 
1040) subject to the 7.5% limit.
Child under age 27.  If the insurance policy covers your 
nondependent child who was under age 27 at the end of 
2025, you can claim the premiums for that coverage on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you can’t claim 100% of your 
self-employed health insurance costs on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, any excess amounts attributable to that child 
aren’t eligible to be claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Generally, family health insurance premiums don’t in-
crease if coverage for an additional child is added. If this is 
the situation, no allocation would be necessary. If the pre-
miums did increase (such as where coverage was expan-
ded from single to family to add the nondependent child), 
you can allocate the amount on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to 
the nondependent child and any excess amounts not at-
tributable to that child would be eligible to be claimed on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Example 1. Y ou were self-employed in 2025 and had 
self-only coverage for health insurance. Y our premium for 
that coverage was $5,000 for the year. Y ou change to fam-
ily coverage only to add your 26 -year-old nondependent 
child to the plan. Y our health insurance premium increases 
to $10,000 for the year. After completing the Self -Em-
ployed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in the In-
structions for Form 1040, you can only deduct $4,000 on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. The $4,000 is allocable to the 
nondependent child. Y ou can only claim the $5,000 allo-
cable to your coverage on Schedule A (Form 1040). The 
$1,000 excess premiums allocable to the nondependent 
child can’t be claimed by you.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except that you had family coverage when you added your 
26-year-old nondependent child to the policy. There was 
no increase in the $10,000 premium. In this case, you 
could claim $4,000 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR and $6,000 
on Schedule A (Form 1040).
More information.  For more information, see Instruc-
tions for Form 7206, Self -Employed Health Insurance De-
duction.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need help prepar-
ing your tax return; or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Tax reform.  T ax reform legislation impacting federal 
taxes, credits, and deductions was enacted in P .L. 119-21, 
commonly known as the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, on July 
4, 2025. Go to IRS.gov/OBBB for more information and 
updates on how this legislation affects your taxes.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Forms W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our options for pre-
paring and filing your return online or in your local com-
munity, if you qualify, include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using soft-
ware or Free File Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online 
federal tax preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or 
payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Publication 502 (2025) 21

Page 22 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or download the free IRS2Go app 
for information on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and quali-
fied veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service of-
fered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then e -filed regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EITC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN) at no 
cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to estimate the federal income 
tax you want your employer to withhold from your pay-
check. This is tax withholding. See how your withhold-
ing affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesT ax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions.  On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions and, based on your input, pro-
vide answers on a number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Y ou will find details on the most recent tax 
changes and interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including enrolled 
agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), accountants, 
and many others who don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, 
choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you’re ultimately responsible for providing all the 
information required for the preparer to accurately 
prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item re-
ported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns 
for others should have a thorough understanding of tax 
matters. For more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
W-2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement; and Form W -2c, Corrected Wage and T ax 
Statement.
Business tax account.  If you are a sole proprietor, a 
partnership, an S corporation, a C corporation, or a sin-
gle-member limited liability company (LLC), you can view 
your tax information on record with the IRS and do more 
with a business tax account. Go to IRS.gov/
BusinessAccount for more information.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our 
highest priority. We use these tools to share public infor-
mation with you. Don’t post your social security number 
(SSN) or other confidential information on social media 
sites. Always protect your identity when using any social 
networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English 
and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service. The IRS of-
fers the OPI Service to taxpayers needing language inter-
pretation. The OPI Service is available at T axpayer Assis-
tance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and every 
VITA/TCE tax return site. This service is available in Span-
ish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Korean, Vietnamese, Russian, 
and Haitian Creole.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with 
disabilities. T axpayers who need information about ac-
cessibility services can call 833 -690-0598. The Accessi-
bility Helpline can answer questions related to current and 
future accessibility products and services available in al-
ternative media formats (for example, braille -ready, large 
print, audio, etc.). The Accessibility Helpline does not 
have access to your IRS account. For help with tax law, re-
funds, or account -related issues, go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp.
Alternative media preference.  Form 9000, Alternative 
Media Preference, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
CAUTION
!
22 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 23 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive certain types of written correspondence in the fol-
lowing formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille-Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to review the 
available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. Or you can go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Mobile-friendly forms.  Y ou’ll need an IRS Online Ac-
count (OLA) to complete mobile-friendly forms that require 
signatures. Y ou’ll have the option to submit your form(s) 
online or download a copy for mailing. Y ou’ll need scans of 
your documents to support your submission. Go to 
IRS.gov/MobileFriendlyForms for more information.
Getting tax publications and instructions in eBook 
format. Download and view most tax publications and in-
structions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple’s iBooks for 
iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated 
eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate 
as intended.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax 
year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a new payment 
plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history 
and any pending or scheduled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key data from your 
most recent tax return, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests from tax pro-
fessionals.
Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, 
you can access a variety of information to help you during 
the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your 
most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross 
income. Create or access your online account at IRS.gov/
Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax professional 
submit an authorization request to access your individual 
taxpayer IRS OLA. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to e-file and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If 
you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/
DirectDeposit for more information on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an account online.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages (including shortened links), tele-
phone calls, or social media channels to request or 
verify personal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification numbers (PINs), 
passwords, or similar information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to taxpayers to help pre-
vent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal in-
come tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 
for returns that claimed the EITC or the additional 
child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire 
refund, not just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS recommends paying 
electronically whenever possible. Options to pay electroni-
cally are included in the list below. Payments of U.S. tax 
must be remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets 
are not accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information 
CAUTION
!
Publication 502 (2025) 23

Page 24 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on how to make a payment using any of the following op-
tions.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay taxes from your bank account. It’s 
free and secure, and no sign-in is required. Y ou can 
change or cancel within 2 days of scheduled payment.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: Choose an 
approved payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a payment 
when filing your federal taxes using tax return prepara-
tion software or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: This is the 
best option for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and time frames.
Note: The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to 
ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by 
phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are 
safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick and easy.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/1040X for in-
formation and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed 
your amended return for it to show up in our sys-
tem, and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
IRS Document Upload Tool.  Y ou may be able to use 
the Document Upload T ool to respond digitally to eligible 
IRS notices and letters by securely uploading required 
documents online through IRS.gov. For more information, 
go to IRS.gov/DUT.
CAUTION
!
Schedule LEP . Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), 
Request for Change in Language Preference, to state a 
preference to receive notices, letters, or other written com-
munications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou 
may not immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment to LEP 
taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline that began pro-
viding translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive 
communications, including notices and letters, in English 
until they are translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, many ques-
tions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. 
Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about 
most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs 
now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need without long 
wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TAC to find the 
nearest TAC and to check hours, available services, and 
appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under the 
Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option and 
click on “Local Offices.”
————————————————————————
Below is a message to you from the T axpayer Advocate 
Service, an independent organization established by Con-
gress.
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is the Taxpayer Advocate Service?
The T axpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent 
organization within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
TAS helps taxpayers resolve problems with the IRS, 
makes administrative and legislative recommendations to 
prevent or correct the problems, and protects taxpayer 
rights. We work to ensure that every taxpayer is treated 
fairly and that you know and understand your rights under 
the T axpayer Bill of Rights. We are Y our Voice at the IRS.
How Can TAS Help Me?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you haven’t been 
able to resolve with the IRS on your own. Always try to re-
solve your problem with the IRS first, but if you can’t, then 
come to TAS. Our services are free.
• TAS helps all taxpayers (and their representatives), in-
cluding individuals, businesses, and exempt organiza-
tions. Y ou may be eligible for TAS help if your IRS 
problem is causing financial difficulty, if you’ve tried 
and been unable to resolve your issue with the IRS, or 
if you believe an IRS system, process, or procedure 
just isn’t working as it should.
• T o get help any time with general tax topics, visit 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov. The site can help 
you with common tax issues and situations, such as 
what to do if you make a mistake on your return or if 
you get a notice from the IRS.
24 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 25 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• TAS works to resolve large-scale (systemic) problems 
that affect many taxpayers. Y ou can report systemic is-
sues at www.IRS.gov/SAMS. (Be sure not to include 
any personal identifiable information.)
How Do I Contact TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico. T o find your local advocate’s number:
• Go to www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us,
• Check your local directory, or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
What Are My Rights as a Taxpayer?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes ten basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/T axpayer-Rights for 
more information about the rights, what they mean to you, 
and how they apply to specific situations you may encoun-
ter with the IRS. TAS strives to protect taxpayer rights and 
ensure the IRS is administering the tax law in a fair and 
equitable way.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Abortion 5
Acupuncture 5
Adopted child's medical 
expenses 3
AGI limitation 1, 2
Alcoholism 5
Ambulances 5
Archer MSAs:
Medical expenses paid for decedent 
from 4
Artificial limbs 5
Artificial teeth 5
Aspirin 16
Assistance (See T ax help)
Assisted living homes 11
Athletic club dues 15
Automobiles (See Cars)
B
Baby sitting 14
Bandages 5
Basis:
Medical equipment or property 
(Worksheet D) 19
Birth control pills 5
Body scan 5
Braille books and magazines 5
Breast pumps and supplies 5
Breast reconstruction surgery 5
C
Calculation of deduction 18
Capital expenses 5
Improvements to rented property 6
Operation and upkeep 6
Worksheet A 6
Cars 6
Out-of-pocket expenses 13
Standard medical mileage rates 13
Child care 14
Children's medical expenses:
Adopted child 3
Dependents 3
Chiropractor 6
Christian Scientist practitioner 6
Chronically ill persons 10
Community property states 2
Contact lenses 6
Controlled substances 14
Cosmetic surgery 14
Crutches 6
D
Dancing lessons 15
Decedent's medical expenses 4
Deductible amount 2
Deductible expenses 3-14
Definition of medical expenses:
Doctor 2
Physician 2
Dental treatment 7
Artificial teeth 5
T eeth whitening16
Dentures 5
Dependent's medical expenses:
Adopted child 3
Multiple support agreement 4
Qualifying child 3
Qualifying relative 3
Dependents:
Disabled dependent care 7, 10
Diagnostic devices 7
Diaper services 15
Disabilities, persons with:
Dependent care expenses 7, 10
Improvements to rented property 6
Special education 12
Divorced taxpayers:
Medical expenses of child 3
Drug addiction 7
Drugs (See Medicines)
Dues:
Health club 15
E
Education, special 12
Electrolysis 14
Employer-sponsored health 
insurance plans 8
Employment taxes 12
Excluded expenses:
Insurance premiums 9
Eye exam 7
Eye surgery 7
Eyeglasses 7
F
Fertility enhancement:
Eggs, temporary storage of 7
Fertility 7
In vitro fertilization 7
Figuring the deduction 18
Final return for decedent:
Medical expenses paid 4
Flexible spending arrangement 15
Food (See Weight-loss programs)
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 20
Form 1040-X:
Amended return 2
Deceased taxpayer 4
Form 1040, Schedule A:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Medical and dental expenses 1, 18
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 20
Form 1040, Schedule C:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Form 1040, Schedule E:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Form 1040, Schedule F:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Form 2106:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Form 2555:
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 20
Publication 502 (2025) 25

Page 26 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Founder's fee (See Lifetime care, 
advance payments)
Funeral expenses 15
Future medical care 10, 15
G
Glasses 7
Guide dog or other animal 7
H
Hair:
Removal 14
T ransplants14
Wigs 14
Health club dues 15
Health institutes 7
Health insurance:
Employer-sponsored plan 8
Pension Benefit Guaranty 
Corporation (PBGC) recipient 20
Premiums:
Deductible 8
Nondeductible 9
Paid by employer 17
Paid by employer and you 17
Paid by you 17
Prepaid 8
Unused sick leave used to pay 9
Reimbursements 
(See Reimbursements)
Self-employed persons 20
Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs) 7
Health reimbursement 
arrangements (HRAs) 17
Health savings accounts (HSAs):
Payments from 15
Hearing aids 8
Hearing-impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for 7
HMOs (Health maintenance 
organizations) 7
Home care (See Nursing services)
Home improvements (See Capital 
expenses:)
Hospital services 8
Hotels 10
Household help 15
HRAs (Health reimbursement 
arrangements) 17
I
Illegal operations and 
treatments 15
Illegal substances 14
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Reporting of 20
Insulin 16
Insurance (See Health insurance)
Intellectually and developmentally 
disabled persons:
Mentally disabled 9
Special homes for 9
L
Laboratory fees 9
Lactation expenses (See Breast 
pumps and supplies)
Laser eye surgery 7
Lead-based paint removal 9
Learning disabilities 12
Legal fees 9
Lessons, dancing and 
swimming 15
Lifetime care:
Advance payments for 10
Lodging 10, 13
(See also T rips)
Long-term care 10
Chronically ill individuals 10
Maintenance and personal care 
services 10
Qualified insurance contracts 10
Qualified services 10
M
Maintenance and personal care 
services 10
Maternity clothes 15
Meals 11, 14
(See also Weight-loss programs)
Medical conferences 11
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 19
Medical expense records 19
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 15
Medicare:
Medicare Part A, deductible 
expense 8
Medicare Part B, deductible 
expense 8
Medicare Part D, deductible 
expense 8
Medicines 11
Imported 11, 15
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines 16
Missing children, photographs of in 
IRS publications 1
Multiple support agreement 4
N
Nondeductible expenses 14-16
Nonprescription drugs and 
medicines 16
Nursing homes 11
Nursing services 11, 14
Chronically ill individuals 10
Nutritional supplements:
Natural medicines 16
O
Operations 12
Cosmetic surgery 14
Illegal operations and 
treatments 15
Optometrist 12
Organ donors 13
Osteopath 12
Oxygen 12
P
Parking fees and tolls 13
Personal injury damages 20
Personal protective equipment 8
Personal use items 16
Physical examination 12
Physical therapy 13
Plastic surgery 14
Pregnancy test kit 12
Premium Tax Credit 12
Premiums (See Health insurance)
Prepaid insurance premiums 8
Prosthesis 5
Psychiatric care 12
Psychoanalysis 12
Psychologists 12
Publications (See T ax help)
R
Radial keratotomy 7
Recordkeeping 19
Rehabilitation facilities 11
Reimbursements 16-18
Excess includible in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 17
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Excess may be taxable (Figure 
1) 17
Health Reimbursement 
Arrangement (HRA) 17
Insurance 16, 17
Medical expenses not deducted 18
More than one policy 17
Received in later year 18
Rental property:
Improvements to 6
Reporting:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 20
Medical and dental expenses 18
Medical deduction (See Form 1040, 
Schedule A)
Self-employed persons, health 
insurance costs 20
S
Sale of medical equipment or 
property 19
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 19
26 Publication 502 (2025)

Page 27 of 27  Fileid: … cation-502/2025/a/xml/cycle03/source 8:55 - 5-Feb-2026
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedules (See Form 1040 or 1040-
SR)
Seeing-eye dogs 7
Self-employed persons:
Health insurance costs 20
Senior housing 11
Separate returns:
Community property states 2
Medical and dental expenses 2
Separated taxpayers:
Medical expenses of child 3
Service animals 7
Sick leave:
Used to pay health insurance 
premiums 9
Special education 12
Spouse's medical expenses 3
Deceased spouse 4
Sterilization 13
Stop-smoking programs 13
Surgery (See Operations)
Surrogacy expenses 16
Swimming lessons 15
T
Tables and figures:
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 19
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 17
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Reimbursements, excess may be 
taxable (Figure 1) 17
Tax help 21
Teeth:
Artificial 5
Dental treatment 7
Whitening 16
Telephone 13
Therapy 13
Transplants 13
Travel and transportation 
expenses 13
Car expenses 13
Includible expenses 13
Parking fees and tolls 13
Trips 13
Tuition 14
V
Vasectomy 14
Veterinary fees 16
Vision correction surgery 7
Visually impaired persons:
Guide dog or other animal for 7
Vitamins or minerals 16
W
Weight-loss programs 14, 16
Wheelchairs 14
Wigs 14
Work expenses:
Disabled dependent care 7
Impairment-related 20
Workers' compensation 20
Worksheets:
Capital expenses (Worksheet A) 6
Medical equipment or property:
Adjusted basis (Worksheet D) 19
Reimbursements, excess includible 
in income:
More than one policy (Worksheet 
C) 17
One policy (Worksheet B) 18
Publication 502 (2025) 27