Contents
Future Developments ............ 1
Reminders ................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Employee Compensation .......... 3
Special Rules for Certain 
Employees ............... 14
Business and Investment Income .... 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ....... 17
Miscellaneous Income ........... 19
Repayments ................. 34
How To Get Tax Help ........... 35
Index ..................... 37
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Publication 525, such as legislation 
enacted after it was published, go to 
www.irs.gov/pub525.
What's New
Health flexible spending arrangements 
(health FSAs) under cafeteria plans.  For 
plan years beginning after 2012, health FSAs 
are subject to a $2,500 limit on salary reduction 
contributions. For plan years beginning after 
2013, the $2,500 limit is subject to an inflation 
adjustment.
Itemized deduction for medical expenses. 
Beginning in 2013, an itemized deduction is 
generally allowed for uncompensated medical 
expenses that exceed 10% of adjusted gross 
income (AGI). If an individual or an individual’s 
spouse was born before January 2, 1949, the 
deduction is allowed for expenses that exceed 
7.5% of AGI.
Additional Medicare Tax.  Beginning in 2013, 
a 0.9% Additional Medicare Tax applies to 
Medicare wages, railroad retirement (RRTA) 
compensation, and self-employment income 
that are more than:
$125,000 if married filing separately,
$250,000 if married filing jointly, or
$200,000 if single, head of household, or 
qualifying widow(er).
For more information, see Form 8959 and its in-
structions.
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  Begin-
ning in 2013, the NIIT applies at a rate of 3.8% 
to certain net investment income of individuals, 
estates and trusts that have income above the 
threshold amounts. Individuals will owe the tax 
if they have net investment income and also 
have modified adjusted gross income over the 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 525
Cat. No. 15047D
Taxable and
Nontaxable
Income
For use in preparing
2013 Returns
Get forms and other Information
faster and easier by
Internet at IRS.gov
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 40  15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dec 31, 2013

following thresholds for their filing status: Mar-
ried filing jointly, $250,000; Married filing sepa-
rately, $125,000; Single, $200,000; Head of 
household (with qualifying person), $200,000; 
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, 
$250,000. For more information, see Form 
8960 and its instructions.
Reminders
Terrorist attacks.  You can exclude from in-
come certain disaster assistance, disability, and 
death payments received as a result of a terro-
rist or military action. For more information, see 
Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-
rorist Attacks.
Gulf oil spill.  You are required to include in 
your gross income payments you received for 
lost wages, lost business income, or lost profits. 
See Gulf oil spill under Other Income, later.
Qualified settlement income.  If you are a 
qualified taxpayer, you can contribute all or part 
of your qualified settlement income, up to 
$100,000, to an eligible retirement plan, includ-
ing an IRA. Contributions to eligible retirement 
plans, other than a Roth IRA or a designated 
Roth contribution, reduce the qualified settle-
ment income that you must include in income. 
See Exxon Valdez settlement income  under 
Other Income, later.
Foreign income.  If you are a U.S. citizen or 
resident alien, you must report income from 
sources outside the United States (foreign in-
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by 
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside 
or outside the United States and whether or not 
you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This 
applies to earned income (such as wages and 
tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-
est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, 
and royalties).
If you reside outside the United States, you 
may be able to exclude part or all of your for-
eign source earned income. For details, see 
Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and 
Resident Aliens Abroad.
Disaster mitigation payments.  You can ex-
clude from income grants you use to mitigate 
(reduce the severity of) potential damage from 
future natural disasters that are paid to you 
through state and local governments. For more 
information, see Disaster mitigation payments 
under Welfare and Other Public Assistance 
Benefits, later.
Qualified joint venture.  A qualified joint ven-
ture conducted by you and your spouse may 
not be treated as a partnership if you file a joint 
return for the tax year. See Partnership Income 
under Business and Investment Income, later.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected 
by the Center may appear in this publication on 
pages that otherwise would be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
You can receive income in the form of money, 
property, or services. This publication dis-
cusses many kinds of income and explains 
whether they are taxable or nontaxable. It in-
cludes discussions on employee wages and 
fringe benefits, and income from bartering, part-
nerships, S corporations, and royalties. It also 
includes information on disability pensions, life 
insurance proceeds, and welfare and other 
public assistance benefits. Check the index for 
the location of a specific subject.
In most cases, an amount included in your 
income is taxable unless it is specifically ex-
empted by law. Income that is taxable must be 
reported on your return and is subject to tax. In-
come that is nontaxable may have to be shown 
on your tax return but is not taxable.
Constructively received income.  You are 
generally taxed on income that is available to 
you, regardless of whether it is actually in your 
possession.
A valid check that you received or that was 
made available to you before the end of the tax 
year is considered income constructively re-
ceived in that year, even if you do not cash the 
check or deposit it to your account until the next 
year. For example, if the postal service tries to 
deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax 
year but you are not at home to receive it, you 
must include the amount in your income for that 
tax year. If the check was mailed so that it could 
not possibly reach you until after the end of the 
tax year, and you otherwise could not get the 
funds before the end of the year, you include 
the amount in your income for the next tax year.
Assignment of income.  Income received 
by an agent for you is income you constructively 
received in the year the agent received it. If you 
agree by contract that a third party is to receive 
income for you, you must include the amount in 
your income when the third party receives it.
Example. You and your employer agree 
that part of your salary is to be paid directly to 
one of your creditors. You must include that 
amount in your income when your creditor re-
ceives it.
Prepaid income.  In most cases, prepaid in-
come, such as compensation for future serv-
ices, is included in your income in the year you 
receive it. However, if you use an accrual 
method of accounting, you can defer prepaid in-
come you receive for services to be performed 
before the end of the next tax year. In this case, 
you include the payment in your income as you 
earn it by performing the services.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications Division
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. 
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including 
the area code, in your correspondence.
You can send your comments from 
www.irs.gov/formspubs/. Click on “More Infor-
mation” and then on “Comment on Tax Forms 
and Publications.”
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
www.irs.gov/formspubs/ to download forms and 
publications, call 1-800-TAX-FORM 
(1-800-829-3676), or write to the address below 
and receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, 
check the information available on IRS.gov or 
call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax 
questions sent to either of the above ad-
dresses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Tax Guide for Small Business
Selling Your Home
Residential Rental Property
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Investment Income and Expenses
Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
Pension and Annuity Income
Social Security and Equivalent 
Railroad Retirement Benefits
Tax Benefits for Education
Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, 
Repossessions, and Abandonments
Form (and Instructions)
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
U.S. Nonresident Alien Income 
Tax Return
Distributions From Pensions, 
Annuities, Retirement or 
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance 
Contracts, etc.
Wage and Tax Statement
  334
  523
  527
  541
  544
  550
  559
  575
  915
  970
  4681
  1040
  1040A
  1040EZ
  1040NR
  1099-R
  W-2
Page 2 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 525 (2013)

See How To Get Tax Help , near the end of this 
publication, for information about getting these 
publications.
Employee 
Compensation
In most cases, you must include in gross in-
come everything you receive in payment for 
personal services. In addition to wages, salar-
ies, commissions, fees, and tips, this includes 
other forms of compensation such as fringe 
benefits and stock options.
You should receive a Form W-2 from your 
employer or former employer showing the pay 
you received for your services. Include all your 
pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on 
line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-
ceive Form W-2, or you receive a Form W-2 
that does not include all pay that should be in-
cluded on the Form W-2.
If you performed services, other than as an 
independent contractor, and your employer did 
not withhold social security and Medicare taxes 
from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol-
lected Social Security and Medicare Tax on 
Wages, with your Form 1040. These wages 
must be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See 
Form 8919 for more information.
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, 
either in the child's home or in your home or 
other place of business, the pay you receive 
must be included in your income. If you are not 
an employee, you are probably self-employed 
and must include payments for your services on 
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net 
Profit From Business. You generally are not an 
employee unless you are subject to the will and 
control of the person who employs you as to 
what you are to do and how you are to do it.
Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or 
neighborhood children, whether on a regular 
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare 
providers apply to you.
Bankruptcy.  If you filed for bankruptcy under 
Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you must 
allocate your wages and withheld income tax. 
Your W-2 will show your total wages and with-
held income tax for the year. On your tax return, 
you report the wages and withheld income tax 
for the period before you filed for bankruptcy. 
Your bankruptcy estate reports the wages and 
withheld income tax for the period after you filed 
for bankruptcy. If you receive other information 
returns (such as Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and 
Distributions, or 1099-INT, Interest Income) that 
report gross income to you, rather than to the 
bankruptcy estate, you must allocate that in-
come.
The only exception is for purposes of figur-
ing your self-employment tax, if you are 
self-employed. For that purpose, you must take 
into account all your self-employment income 
for the year from services performed both be-
fore and after the beginning of the case.
You must file a statement with your income 
tax return stating you filed a Chapter 11 
bankruptcy case. The statement must show the 
allocation and describe the method used to 
make the allocation. For a sample of this state-
ment and other information, see Notice 
2006-83, 2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2006-40_IRB/ar12.html.
Miscellaneous 
Compensation
This section discusses many types of employee 
compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-
phabetical order.
Advance commissions and other earnings. 
If you receive advance commissions or other 
amounts for services to be performed in the fu-
ture and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you 
must include these amounts in your income in 
the year you receive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or other 
amounts in the same year you receive them, re-
duce the amount included in your income by the 
repayment. If you repay them in a later tax year, 
you can deduct the repayment as an itemized 
deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040), 
Itemized Deductions, or you may be able to 
take a credit for that year. See Repayments, 
later.
Allowances and reimbursements.  If you re-
ceive travel, transportation, or other business 
expense allowances or reimbursements from 
your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En-
tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are 
reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-
tion 521, Moving Expenses.
Back pay awards. Include in income amounts 
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for 
back pay. These include payments made to you 
for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums, 
and unpaid health insurance premiums. They 
should be reported to you by your employer on 
Form W-2.
Bonuses and awards.  Bonuses or awards 
you receive for outstanding work are included in 
your income and should be shown on your 
Form W-2. These include prizes such as vaca-
tion trips for meeting sales goals. If the prize or 
award you receive is goods or services, you 
must include the fair market value of the goods 
or services in your income. However, if your 
employer merely promises to pay you a bonus 
or award at some future time, it is not taxable 
until you receive it or it is made available to you.
Employee achievement award.  If you re-
ceive tangible personal property (other than 
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as 
an award for length of service or safety achieve-
ment, you generally can exclude its value from 
your income. However, the amount you can ex-
clude is limited to your employer's cost and can-
not be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards that 
are not qualified plan awards) for all such 
awards you receive during the year. Your em-
ployer can tell you whether your award is a 
qualified plan award. Your employer must make 
the award as part of a meaningful presentation, 
under conditions and circumstances that do not 
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
guised pay.
However, the exclusion does not apply to 
the following awards.
A length-of-service award if you received it 
for less than 5 years of service or if you re-
ceived another length-of-service award 
during the year or the previous 4 years. 
A safety achievement award if you are a 
manager, administrator, clerical employee, 
or other professional employee or if more 
than 10% of eligible employees previously 
received safety achievement awards dur-
ing the year. 
Example. Ben Green received three em-
ployee achievement awards during the year: a 
nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at 
$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo 
valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued 
at $500. Assuming that the requirements for 
qualified plan awards are otherwise satisfied, 
each award by itself would be excluded from in-
come. However, because the $1,750 total value 
of the awards is more than $1,600, Ben must in-
clude $150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.
Differential wage payments. This is any pay-
ment made by an employer to an individual for 
any period during which the individual is, for a 
period of more than 30 days, an active duty 
member of the uniformed services and repre-
sents all or a portion of the wages the individual 
would have received from the employer for that 
period. These payments are treated as wages 
and are subject to income tax withholding, but 
not FICA or FUTA taxes. The payments are re-
ported as wages on Form W-2.
Government cost-of-living allowances.
Most payments received by U.S. Government 
civilian employees for working abroad are taxa-
ble. However, certain cost-of-living allowances 
are tax free. Publication 516, U.S. Government 
Civilian Employees Stationed Abroad, explains 
the tax treatment of allowances, differentials, 
and other special pay you receive for employ-
ment abroad.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.
Your employer will report to you the total 
amount of deferrals for the year under a non-
qualified deferred compensation plan. This 
amount is shown on Form W-2, box 12, using 
code Y. This amount is not included in your in-
come.
However, if at any time during the tax year, 
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is 
not operated under those requirements, all 
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax 
year and all preceding tax years are included in 
your income for the current year. This amount is 
included in your wages shown on Form W-2, 
box 1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, 
using code Z.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans 
of nonqualified entities.  In most cases, any 
compensation deferred under a nonqualified 
deferred compensation plan of a nonqualified 
entity is included in gross income when there is 
no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to 
such compensation. For this purpose, a non-
qualified entity is:
Page 3 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 3

1. A foreign corporation unless substantially 
all of its income is:
a. Effectively connected with the con-
duct of a trade or business in the Uni-
ted States, or
b. Subject to a comprehensive foreign 
income tax.
2. A partnership unless substantially all of its 
income is allocated to persons other than:
a. Foreign persons for whom the income 
is not subject to a comprehensive for-
eign income tax, and
b. Tax-exempt organizations.
Note received for services.  If your employer 
gives you a secured note as payment for your 
services, you must include the fair market value 
(usually the discount value) of the note in your 
income for the year you receive it. When you 
later receive payments on the note, a propor-
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of 
the fair market value that you previously inclu-
ded in your income. Do not include that part 
again in your income. Include the rest of the 
payment in your income in the year of payment.
If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable 
unsecured note as payment for your services, 
payments on the note that are credited toward 
the principal amount of the note are compensa-
tion income when you receive them.
Severance pay.  You must include in income 
amounts you receive as severance pay and any 
payment for the cancellation of your employ-
ment contract.
Accrued leave payment.  If you are a fed-
eral employee and receive a lump-sum pay-
ment for accrued annual leave when you retire 
or resign, this amount will be included as wages 
on your Form W-2.
If you resign from one agency and are reem-
ployed by another agency, you may have to re-
pay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
ment to the second agency. You can reduce 
gross wages by the amount you repaid in the 
same tax year in which you received it. Attach 
to your tax return a copy of the receipt or state-
ment given to you by the agency you repaid to 
explain the difference between the wages on 
your return and the wages on your Forms W-2.
Outplacement services.  If you choose to 
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 
that you can receive outplacement services 
(such as training in résumé writing and inter-
view techniques), you must include the unre-
duced amount of the severance pay in income.
However, you can deduct the value of these 
outplacement services (up to the difference be-
tween the severance pay included in income 
and the amount actually received) as a miscel-
laneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer 
while you are sick or injured is part of your sal-
ary or wages. In addition, you must include in 
your income sick pay benefits received from 
any of the following payers.
A welfare fund.
A state sickness or disability fund.
An association of employers or employees.
An insurance company, if your employer 
paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you 
receive under the policy are not taxable. For 
more information, see Other Sickness and In-
jury Benefits  under Sickness and Injury Bene-
fits, later.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid by 
employer. If you and your employer have an 
agreement that your employer pays your social 
security and Medicare taxes without deducting 
them from your gross wages, you must report 
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages 
on your tax return. The payment is also treated 
as wages for figuring your social security and 
Medicare taxes and your social security and 
Medicare benefits. However, these payments 
are not treated as social security and Medicare 
wages if you are a household worker or a farm 
worker.
Stock appreciation rights.  Do not include a 
stock appreciation right granted by your em-
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the 
right. When you use the right, you are entitled to 
a cash payment equal to the fair market value of 
the corporation's stock on the date of use minus 
the fair market value on the date the right was 
granted. You include the cash payment in in-
come in the year you use the right.
Fringe Benefits
Fringe benefits received in connection with the 
performance of your services are included in 
your income as compensation unless you pay 
fair market value for them or they are specifi-
cally excluded by law. Abstaining from the per-
formance of services (for example, under a cov-
enant not to compete) is treated as the 
performance of services for purposes of these 
rules.
See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this 
discussion, for information on how to determine 
the amount to include in income.
Recipient of fringe benefit. You are the recip-
ient of a fringe benefit if you perform the serv-
ices for which the fringe benefit is provided. You 
are considered to be the recipient even if it is 
given to another person, such as a member of 
your family. An example is a car your employer 
gives to your spouse for services you perform. 
The car is considered to have been provided to 
you and not to your spouse.
You do not have to be an employee of the 
provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If 
you are a partner, director, or independent con-
tractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringe 
benefit.
Provider of benefit. Your employer or another 
person for whom you perform services is the 
provider of a fringe benefit regardless of 
whether that person actually provides the fringe 
benefit to you. The provider can be a client or 
customer of an independent contractor.
Accounting period.  You must use the same 
accounting period your employer uses to report 
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-
ployer has the option to report taxable noncash 
fringe benefits by using either of the following 
rules.
The general rule: benefits are reported for 
a full calendar year (January 1–December 
31).
The special accounting period rule: bene-
fits provided during the last 2 months of the 
calendar year (or any shorter period) are 
treated as paid during the following calen-
dar year. For example, each year your em-
ployer reports the value of benefits provi-
ded during the last 2 months of the prior 
year and the first 10 months of the current 
year.
Your employer does not have to use the same 
accounting period for each fringe benefit, but 
must use the same period for all employees 
who receive a particular benefit.
You must use the same accounting period 
that you use to report the benefit to claim an 
employee business deduction (for use of a car, 
for example).
Form W-2. Your employer must include all tax-
able fringe benefits in box 1 of Form W-2 as wa-
ges, tips and other compensation and, if appli-
cable, in boxes 3 and 5 as social security and 
Medicare wages. Although not required, your 
employer may include the total value of fringe 
benefits in box 14 (or on a separate statement). 
However, if your employer provided you with a 
vehicle and included 100% of its annual lease 
value in your income, the employer must sepa-
rately report this value to you in box 14 (or on a 
separate statement).
Accident or Health Plan
In most cases, the value of accident or health 
plan coverage provided to you by your em-
ployer is not included in your income. Benefits 
you receive from the plan may be taxable, as 
explained, later, under Sickness and Injury Ben-
efits.
For information on the items covered in this 
section, other than Long-term care coverage , 
see Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts 
and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.
Long-term care coverage.  Contributions by 
your employer to provide coverage for 
long-term care services generally are not inclu-
ded in your income. However, contributions 
made through a flexible spending or similar ar-
rangement (such as a cafeteria plan) must be 
included in your income. This amount will be re-
ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by 
your employer to your Archer MSA generally 
are not included in your income. Their total will 
be reported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code 
R. You must report this amount on Form 8853, 
Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance 
Contracts. File the form with your return.
Health flexible spending arrangement 
(health FSA).  If your employer provides a 
Page 4 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4 Publication 525 (2013)

health FSA that qualifies as an accident or 
health plan, the amount of your salary reduc-
tion, and reimbursements of your medical care 
expenses, in most cases, are not included in 
your income.
Health FSAs are subject to a $2,500 limit on 
salary reduction contributions for plan years be-
ginning after 2012. The $2,500 limit is subject to 
an inflation adjustment for plan years beginning 
after 2013. For more information, see Notice 
2012-40, 2012-26 I.R.B. 1046, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2012-26 IRB/ar09.html.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies 
as an accident or health plan, coverage and re-
imbursements of your medical care expenses 
generally are not included in your income.
Health savings accounts (HSA).  If you are 
an eligible individual, you and any other person, 
including your employer or a family member, 
can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-
tions, other than employer contributions, are de-
ductible on your return whether or not you item-
ize deductions. Contributions made by your 
employer are not included in your income. Dis-
tributions from your HSA that are used to pay 
qualified medical expenses are not included in 
your income. Distributions not used for qualified 
medical expenses are included in your income. 
See Publication 969 for the requirements of an 
HSA.
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide 
partner's HSA are not contributions by an em-
ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
bution of money and are not included in the 
partner's gross income. Contributions by a part-
nership to a partner's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments that 
are includible in the partner's gross income. In 
both situations, the partner can deduct the con-
tribution made to the partner's HSA.
Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% 
shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments and 
are includible in the shareholder-employee's 
gross income. The shareholder-employee can 
deduct the contribution made to the share-
holder-employee's HSA.
Qualified HSA funding distribution.  You 
can make a one-time distribution from your indi-
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and 
you generally will not include any of the distribu-
tion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi-
vidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for the 
requirements for these qualified HSA funding 
distributions.
Failure to maintain eligibility.  If your 
HSA received qualified HSA distributions from a 
health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a 
qualified HSA funding distribution, you must be 
an eligible individual for HSA purposes for the 
period beginning with the month in which the 
qualified distribution was made and ending on 
the last day of the 12th month following that 
month. If you fail to be an eligible individual dur-
ing this period, other than because of death or 
disability, you must include the distribution in 
your income for the tax year in which you be-
come ineligible. This income is also subject to 
an additional 10% tax.
Adoption Assistance
You may be able to exclude from your income 
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child. 
See Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
tion Expenses, for more information.
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They 
also are included as social security and Medi-
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they 
are not included as wages in box 1. To deter-
mine the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you 
must complete Part III of Form 8839. File the 
form with your return.
Athletic Facilities
If your employer provides you with the free or 
low-cost use of an employer-operated gym or 
other athletic club on your employer's premises, 
the value is not included in your compensation. 
The gym must be used primarily by employees, 
their spouses, and their dependent children.
If your employer pays for a fitness program 
provided to you at an off-site resort hotel or ath-
letic club, the value of the program is included 
in your compensation.
De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it is so small that it would 
be unreasonable for the employer to account 
for it, the value is not included in your income. In 
most cases, the value of benefits such as dis-
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home 
when working overtime, and company picnics 
are not included in your income. Also see Em-
ployee Discounts, later.
Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a tur-
key, ham, or other item of nominal value at 
Christmas or other holidays, do not include the 
value of the gift in your income. However, if your 
employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or a 
similar item that you can easily exchange for 
cash, you include the value of that gift as extra 
salary or wages regardless of the amount in-
volved.
Dependent Care Benefits
If your employer provides dependent care ben-
efits under a qualified plan, you may be able to 
exclude these benefits from your income. De-
pendent care benefits include:
Amounts your employer pays directly to ei-
ther you or your care provider for the care 
of your qualifying person while you work, 
and
The fair market value of care in a daycare 
facility provided or sponsored by your em-
ployer.
The amount you can exclude is limited to the 
lesser of:
The total amount of dependent care bene-
fits you received during the year,
The total amount of qualified expenses you 
incurred during the year,
Your earned income,
Your spouse's earned income, or
$5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).
Your employer must show the total amount 
of dependent care benefits provided to you dur-
ing the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of 
your Form W-2. Your employer also will include 
any dependent care benefits over $5,000 in 
your wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.
To claim the exclusion, you must complete 
Part III of Form 2441, Child and Dependent 
Care Expenses. See the Instructions for Form 
2441 for more information.
Educational Assistance
You can exclude from your income up to $5,250 
of qualified employer-provided educational as-
sistance. For more information, see Publication 
970.
Employee Discounts
If your employer sells you property or services 
at a discount, you may be able to exclude the 
amount of the discount from your income. The 
exclusion applies to discounts on property or 
services offered to customers in the ordinary 
course of the line of business in which you 
work. However, it does not apply to discounts 
on real property or property commonly held for 
investment (such as stocks or bonds).
The exclusion is limited to the price charged 
nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-
lowing percentage.
For a discount on property, your employ-
er's gross profit percentage (gross profit 
divided by gross sales) on all property sold 
during the employer's previous tax year. 
(Ask your employer for this percentage.)
For a discount on services, 20%.
Financial Counseling Fees
Financial counseling fees paid for you by your 
employer are included in your income and must 
be reported as part of wages. If the fees are for 
tax or investment counseling, they can be de-
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-
laneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-AGI 
limit).
Qualified retirement planning services paid 
for you by your employer may be excluded from 
your income. For more information, see Retire-
ment Planning Services, later.
Group-Term Life Insurance
In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of 
group-term life insurance coverage provided to 
you by your employer (or former employer) is 
not included in your income. However, you 
must include in income the cost of em-
ployer-provided insurance that is more than the 
cost of $50,000 of coverage reduced by any 
Page 5 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 5

amount you pay toward the purchase of the 
insurance.
For exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost 
excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than 
$50,000 of coverage, the amount included in 
your income is reported as part of your wages in 
box 1 of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown sepa-
rately in box 12 with code C.
Group-term life insurance.  This insurance is 
term life insurance protection (insurance for a 
fixed period of time) that:
Provides a general death benefit,
Is provided to a group of employees,
Is provided under a policy carried by the 
employer, and
Provides an amount of insurance to each 
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection.
Permanent benefits. If your group-term life 
insurance policy includes permanent benefits, 
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you 
must include in your income, as wages, the cost 
of the permanent benefits minus the amount 
you pay for them. Your employer should be able 
to tell you the amount to include in your income.
Accidental death benefits.  Insurance that 
provides accidental or other death benefits but 
does not provide general death benefits (travel 
insurance, for example) is not group-term life in-
surance.
Former employer.  If your former employer 
provided more than $50,000 of group-term life 
insurance coverage during the year, the amount 
included in your income is reported as wages in 
box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately 
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the 
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-
care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 
M and N. You must pay these taxes with your 
income tax return. Include them on line 60, 
Form 1040, and follow the instructions for-
line 60. For more information, see the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040.
Two or more employers.  Your exclusion for 
employer-provided group-term life insurance 
coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of 
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by 
a single employer or multiple employers. If two 
or more employers provide insurance coverage 
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be 
correct. You must figure how much to include in 
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 
any amount reported with code C in box 12 of 
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages re-
ported in box 1, and report the total on your re-
turn.
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the following 
worksheet to figure the amount to include in 
your income.
If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-
ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for 
dollar, the amount you otherwise would include 
in your income. However, you cannot reduce 
the amount to include in your income by:
Payments for coverage in a different tax 
year,
Payments for coverage through a cafeteria 
plan, unless the payments are after-tax 
contributions, or
Payments for coverage not taxed to you 
because of the exceptions discussed later 
under Entire cost excluded.
Worksheet 1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ........... 1.  
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage ............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................ 3.  
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................ 4.  
5. Go to Table 1. Using your 
age on the last day of the 
tax year, find your age 
group in the left column, 
and enter the cost from the 
column on the right for your 
age group ............ 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................ 6.  
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost ................. 7.  
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................ 8.  
9. Enter the 
premiums you 
paid per 
month ....... 9.  
10. Enter the 
number of 
months you paid 
the 
premium
s ........... 10.  
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10. .............. 11.  
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages .............. 12.  
Page 6 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6 Publication 525 (2013)

Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of 
Group-Term Life Insurance for 
One Month
Age Cost
Under 25 ................. $ .05
25 through 29 ..............  .06
30 through 34 .............. .08
35 through 39 .............. .09
40 through 44 .............. .10
45 through 49 .............. .15
50 through 54 .............. .23
55 through 59 .............. .43
60 through 64 .............. .66
65 through 69 .............. 1.27
70 and older ............... 2.06
Example. You are 51 years old and work 
for employers A and B. Both employers provide 
group-term life insurance coverage for you for 
the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with 
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to 
include in your income as follows.
Worksheet 1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income—Illustrated
Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3. 30,000
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4. 30.0
5. Go to Table 1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5. .23
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6. 6.90
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost. ................. 7. 12
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8. 82.80
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9. 4.15
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10. 12
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10. ............... 11. 49.80
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12. 33.00
The total amount to include in income for the 
cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33. 
Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-
ance coverage, so the wages shown on your 
Forms W-2 do not include any part of that $33. 
You must add it to the wages shown on your 
Forms W-2 and include the total on your return.
Entire cost excluded.  You are not taxed on 
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of 
the following circumstances apply.
1. You are permanently and totally disabled 
and have ended your employment.
2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the 
policy for the entire period the insurance is 
in force during the tax year.
3. A charitable organization to which contri-
butions are deductible is the only benefi-
ciary of the policy for the entire period the 
insurance is in force during the tax year. 
(You are not entitled to a deduction for a 
charitable contribution for naming a chari-
table organization as the beneficiary of 
your policy.)
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, 
and were covered by the plan when 
you retired, or
b. You reached age 55 before January 
2, 1984, and were employed by the 
employer or its predecessor in 1983.
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire 
cost of group-term life insurance if either of the 
following circumstances apply.
The insurance is provided by your em-
ployer through a qualified employees' trust, 
such as a pension trust or a qualified annu-
ity plan.
You are a key employee and your employ-
er's plan discriminates in favor of key em-
ployees.
Meals and Lodging
You do not include in your income the value of 
meals and lodging provided to you and your 
family by your employer at no charge if the fol-
lowing conditions are met.
1. The meals are:
a. Furnished on the business premises 
of your employer, and
b. Furnished for the convenience of your 
employer.
2. The lodging is:
a. Furnished on the business premises 
of your employer,
b. Furnished for the convenience of your 
employer, and
c. A condition of your employment. (You 
must accept it in order to be able to 
properly perform your duties.)
You also do not include in your income the 
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a 
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-
mal) Benefits, earlier.
Faculty lodging. If you are an employee of an 
educational institution or an academic health 
center and you are provided with lodging that 
does not meet the three conditions given ear-
lier, you still may not have to include the value 
of the lodging in income. However, the lodging 
must be qualified campus lodging, and you 
must pay an adequate rent.
Academic health center. This is an organ-
ization that meets the following conditions.
Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
vide medical or hospital care or medical 
education or research.
It receives payments for graduate medical 
education under the Social Security Act.
One of its principal purposes or functions is 
to provide and teach basic and clinical 
medical science and research using its 
own faculty.
Page 7 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 7

Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam-
pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your 
spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on 
behalf of, the institution or center for use as a 
home. The lodging must be located on or near a 
campus of the educational institution or aca-
demic health center.
Adequate rent.  The amount of rent you 
pay for the year for qualified campus lodging is 
considered adequate if it is at least equal to the 
lesser of:
5% of the appraised value of the lodging, 
or
The average of rentals paid by individuals 
(other than employees or students) for 
comparable lodging held for rent by the ed-
ucational institution.
If the amount you pay is less than the lesser of 
these amounts, you must include the difference 
in your income.
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must be 
reviewed on an annual basis.
Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology pro-
fessor for State University, rents a home from 
the university that is qualified campus lodging. 
The house is appraised at $200,000. The aver-
age rent paid for comparable university lodging 
by persons other than employees or students is 
$14,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of 
$11,000. Carl does not include in his income 
any rental value because the rent he pays 
equals at least 5% of the appraised value of the 
house (5% × $200,000 = $10,000). If Carl paid 
annual rent of only $8,000, he would have to in-
clude $2,000 in his income ($10,000 − $8,000).
Moving Expense Reimbursements
In most cases, if your employer pays for your 
moving expenses (either directly or indirectly) 
and the expenses would have been deductible 
if you paid them yourself, the value is not inclu-
ded in your income. See Publication 521 for 
more information.
No-Additional-Cost Services
The value of services you receive from your em-
ployer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price is 
not included in your income if your employer:
Offers the same service for sale to custom-
ers in the ordinary course of the line of 
business in which you work, and
Does not have a substantial additional cost 
(including any sales income given up) to 
provide you with the service (regardless of 
what you paid for the service).
In most cases, no-additional-cost services 
are excess capacity services, such as airline, 
bus, or train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone 
services.
Example. You are employed as a flight at-
tendant for a company that owns both an airline 
and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you to 
take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied 
seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there 
is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The 
value of the personal flight is not included in 
your income. However, the value of the hotel 
room is included in your income because you 
do not work in the hotel business.
Retirement Planning Services
If your employer has a qualified retirement plan, 
qualified retirement planning services provided 
to you (and your spouse) by your employer are 
not included in your income. Qualified services 
include retirement planning advice, information 
about your employer's retirement plan, and in-
formation about how the plan may fit into your 
overall individual retirement income plan. You 
cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation, 
accounting, legal, or brokerage services provi-
ded by your employer. Also, see Financial 
Counseling Fees, earlier.
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qualified 
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded 
from your income, up to certain limits. A quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit is:
Transportation in a commuter highway ve-
hicle (such as a van) between your home 
and work place,
A transit pass,
Qualified parking, or
Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse-
ment. 
Cash reimbursement by your employer for 
these expenses under a bona fide  reimburse-
ment arrangement is also excludable. However, 
cash reimbursement for a transit pass is exclud-
able only if a voucher or similar item that can be 
exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily 
available for direct distribution to you.
Exclusion limit.  The exclusion for commuter 
vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe 
benefits cannot be more than $245 a month.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe 
benefit cannot be more than $245 a month.
The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut-
ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by the 
number of qualified bicycle commuting months 
that year.
If the benefits have a value that is more than 
these limits, the excess must be included in 
your income. You are not entitled to these ex-
clusions if the reimbursements are made under 
a compensation reduction agreement.
Commuter highway vehicle.  This is a high-
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not in-
cluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehicle's 
mileage must reasonably be expected to be:
For transporting employees between their 
homes and work place, and
On trips during which employees occupy at 
least half of the vehicle's adult seating ca-
pacity (not including the driver).
Transit pass.  This is any pass, token, fare-
card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person 
to ride mass transit (whether public or private) 
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a com-
muter highway vehicle operated by a person in 
the business of transporting persons for com-
pensation.
Qualified parking. This is parking provided to 
an employee at or near the employer's place of 
business. It also includes parking provided on 
or near a location from which the employee 
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com-
muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does 
not include parking at or near the employee's 
home.
Qualified bicycle commuting.  This is reim-
bursement based on the number of qualified bi-
cycle commuting months for the year. A quali-
fied bicycle commuting month is any month you 
use the bicycle regularly for a substantial por-
tion of the travel between your home and place 
of employment and you do not receive any of 
the other qualified transportation fringe benefits. 
The reimbursement can be for expenses you in-
curred during the year for the purchase of a bi-
cycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and 
storage.
Tuition Reduction
You can exclude a qualified tuition reduction 
from your income. This is the amount of a re-
duction in tuition:
For education (below graduate level) fur-
nished by an educational institution to an 
employee, former employee who retired or 
became disabled, or his or her spouse and 
dependent children.
For education furnished to a graduate stu-
dent at an educational institution if the 
graduate student is engaged in teaching or 
research activities for that institution.
Representing payment for teaching, re-
search, or other services if you receive the 
amount under the National Health Service 
Corps Scholarship Program or the Armed 
Forces Health Professions Scholarship 
and Financial Assistance program. 
For more information, see Publication 970.
Working Condition Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it would have been al-
lowable as a business or depreciation deduc-
tion if you paid for it yourself, the cost is not in-
cluded in your income.
Example. You work as an engineer and 
your employer provides you with a subscription 
to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of 
the subscription is not included in your income 
because the cost would have been allowable to 
you as a business deduction if you had paid for 
the subscription yourself.
Valuation of Fringe Benefits
If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the 
amount included is generally its value deter-
mined under the general valuation rule or under 
the special valuation rules. For an exception, 
see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.
General valuation rule.  You must include in 
your income the amount by which the fair mar-
ket value of the fringe benefit is more than the 
sum of:
Page 8 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8 Publication 525 (2013)

1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-
fit, plus
2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded 
from your income by law.
If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, 
no amount is included in your income.
Fair market value. The fair market value of 
a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts 
and circumstances. It is the amount you would 
have to pay a third party to buy or lease the 
benefit. This is determined without regard to:
Your perceived value of the benefit, or
The amount your employer paid for the 
benefit.
Employer-provided vehicles.  If your em-
ployer provides a car (or other highway motor 
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is 
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.
Under the general valuation rules, the value 
of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount 
you would have to pay a third party to lease the 
same or a similar vehicle on the same or com-
parable terms in the same geographic area 
where you use the vehicle. An example of a 
comparable lease term is the amount of time 
the vehicle is available for your use, such as a 
1-year period. The value cannot be determined 
by multiplying a cents-per-mile rate times the 
number of miles driven unless you prove the ve-
hicle could have been leased on a 
cents-per-mile basis.
Flights on employer-provided aircraft.
Under the general valuation rules, if your flight 
on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
marily personal and you control the use of the 
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount it 
would cost to charter the flight from a third 
party.
If there is more than one employee on the 
flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must be 
divided among those employees. The division 
must be based on all the facts, including which 
employee or employees control the use of the 
aircraft.
Special valuation rules.  You generally can 
use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit 
only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-
ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannot 
use a different special rule to value that benefit. 
You always can use the general valuation rule 
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
stances, even if your employer uses a special 
rule.
If you and your employer use a special valu-
ation rule, you must include in your income the 
amount your employer determines under the 
special rule minus the sum of:
1. Any amount you repaid your employer, 
plus
2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-
come by law.
The special valuation rules are the following.
The automobile lease rule.
The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.
The commuting rule.
The unsafe conditions commuting rule.
The employer-operated eating-facility rule. 
For more information on these rules, see 
Publication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to 
Fringe Benefits.
For information on the non-commercial flight 
and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-
tions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-
tions.
Retirement Plan 
Contributions
Your employer's contributions to a qualified re-
tirement plan for you are not included in income 
at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell 
you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) 
However, the cost of life insurance coverage in-
cluded in the plan may have to be included. See 
Group-Term Life Insurance , earlier, under 
Fringe Benefits.
If your employer pays into a nonqualified 
plan for you, you generally must include the 
contributions in your income as wages for the 
tax year in which the contributions are made. 
However, if your interest in the plan is not trans-
ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of for-
feiture (you have a good chance of losing it) at 
the time of the contribution, you do not have to 
include the value of your interest in your income 
until it is transferable or is no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture.
For information on distributions from 
retirement plans, see Publication 575 
(or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S. 
Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a 
federal employee or retiree).
Elective Deferrals
If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement 
plans, you can choose to have part of your 
compensation contributed by your employer to 
a retirement fund, rather than have it paid to 
you. The amount you set aside (called an elec-
tive deferral) is treated as an employer contribu-
tion to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, 
other than a designated Roth contribution (dis-
cussed later), is not included in wages subject 
to income tax at the time contributed. However, 
it is included in wages subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.
Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
tions to the following retirement plans.
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section 
401(k) plans).
2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal em-
ployees.
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
sion plans (SARSEP).
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-
ees (SIMPLE plans).
5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) 
plans).
6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-
porting by employer, later.)
7. Section 457 plans.
TIP
Qualified automatic contribution arrange-
ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you 
as having elected to have a part of your com-
pensation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. 
You are to receive written notice of your rights 
and obligations under the qualified automatic 
contribution arrangement. The notice must ex-
plain:
Your rights to elect not to have elective 
contributions made, or to have contribu-
tions made at a different percentage, and
How contributions made will be invested in 
the absence of any investment decision by 
you.
You must be given a reasonable period of 
time after receipt of the notice and before the 
first elective contribution is made to make an 
election with respect to the contributions.
Overall limit on deferrals.  For 2013, in most 
cases, you should not have deferred more than 
a total of $17,500 of contributions to the plans 
listed in (1) through (3), earlier. The specific 
plan limits for the plans listed in (4) through (7), 
earlier, are discussed later. Amounts deferred 
under specific plan limits are part of the overall 
limit on deferrals.
Your employer or plan administrator should 
apply the proper annual limit when figuring your 
plan contributions. However, you are responsi-
ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure 
that the deferrals are not more than the overall 
limit.
Catch-up contributions. You may be allowed 
catch-up contributions (additional elective de-
ferrals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of 
your tax year. For more information about 
catch-up contributions to 403(b) plans, see 
chapter 6 of Publication 571, Tax Sheltered An-
nuity Plans.
For more information about additional elec-
tive deferrals to:
SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction 
Simplified Employee Pension in chapter 2 
of Publication 560, Retirement Plans for 
Small Business.
SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be 
Contributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3 
of Publication 590.
Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals 
under section 457 plans, later.
Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans.  If 
you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you 
generally should not have deferred more than 
$12,000 in 2013. Amounts you defer under a 
SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit 
($17,500 for 2013) and may affect the amount 
you can defer under other elective deferral 
plans.
Limit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a 
participant in a tax-sheltered annuity plan 
(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for 
2013 generally is $17,500. However, if you 
have at least 15 years of service with a public 
school system, a hospital, a home health serv-
ice agency, a health and welfare service 
agency, a church, or a convention or associa-
tion of churches (or associated organization), 
Page 9 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 9

the limit on elective deferrals is increased by the 
least of the following amounts.
1. $3,000,
2. $15,000, reduced by the sum of:
a. The additional pre-tax elective defer-
rals made in earlier years because of 
this rule, plus
b. The aggregate amount of designated 
Roth contributions permitted for prior 
tax years because of this rule, or
3. $5,000 times the number of your years of 
service for the organization, minus the to-
tal elective deferrals made by your em-
ployer on your behalf for earlier years.
If you qualify for the 15-year rule, your elec-
tive deferrals under this limit can be as high as 
$20,500 for 2013.
For more information, see Publication 571.
Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18) 
plans.  If you are a participant in a section 
501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25, 
1959, funded only by employee contributions), 
you should have deferred no more than the 
lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation. 
Amounts you defer under a section 501(c)(18) 
plan count toward the overall limit ($17,500 in 
2013) and may affect the amount you can defer 
under other elective deferral plans.
Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.
If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a 
deferred compensation plan for employees of 
state or local governments or tax-exempt or-
ganizations), you should have deferred no more 
than the lesser of your includible compensation 
or $17,500 in 2013. However, if you are within 3 
years of normal retirement age, you may be al-
lowed an increased limit if the plan allows it. 
See Increased limit, later.
Includible compensation.  This is the pay 
you received for the year from the employer 
who maintained the section 457 plan. In most 
cases, it includes all the following payments.
1. Wages and salaries.
2. Fees for professional services.
3. The value of any employer-provided quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit (defined 
under Transportation, earlier) that is not in-
cluded in your income.
4. Other amounts received (cash or non-
cash) for personal services you per-
formed, including, but not limited to, the 
following items.
a. Commissions and tips.
b. Fringe benefits.
c. Bonuses.
5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals) 
to:
a. The section 457 plan.
b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-
ments (section 401(k) plans) that are 
not included in your income.
c. A salary reduction simplified em-
ployee pension (SARSEP).
d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 
403(b) plan).
e. A savings incentive match plan for 
employees (SIMPLE plan).
f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.
Instead of using the amounts listed earlier to 
determine your includible compensation, your 
employer can use any of the following amounts.
Your wages as defined for income tax with-
holding purposes.
Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form 
W-2.
Your wages that are subject to social se-
curity withholding (including elective defer-
rals).
Increased limit.  During any, or all, of the 
last 3 years ending before you reach normal re-
tirement age under the plan, your plan may pro-
vide that your limit is the lesser of:
1. Twice the annual limit ($35,000 for 2013), 
or
2. The basic annual limit plus the amount of 
the basic limit not used in prior years (only 
allowed if not using age 50 or over 
catch-up contributions).
Catch-up contributions.  You generally 
can have additional elective deferrals made to 
your governmental section 457 plan if:
You reached age 50 by the end of the 
year, and
No other elective deferrals can be made 
for you to the plan for the year because of 
limits or restrictions.
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your 
includible compensation or $17,500, plus 
$5,500. However, if you are within 3 years of re-
tirement age and your plan provides the in-
creased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may 
be higher.
Designated Roth contributions.  Employers 
with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans 
can create qualified Roth contribution programs 
so that you may elect to have part or all of your 
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth 
contributions are treated as elective deferrals, 
except that they are included in income. Your 
retirement plan must maintain separate ac-
counts and recordkeeping for the designated 
Roth contributions.
Qualified distributions from a Roth plan are 
not included in income. In most cases, a distri-
bution made before the end of the 5-tax-year 
period beginning with the first tax year for which 
you made a designated Roth contribution to the 
plan is not a qualified distribution.
Reporting by employer.  Your employer gen-
erally should not include elective deferrals in 
your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, your 
employer should mark the Retirement plan 
checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount 
deferred in box 12.
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.
Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 
should not have been reduced for contributions 
you made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement 
plan. The amount you contributed should be 
identified with code “H” in box 12. You may de-
duct the amount deferred subject to the limits 
that apply. Include your deduction in the total on 
Form 1040, line 36. Enter the amount and 
“501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to 
line 36.
Designated Roth contributions.  These 
contributions are elective deferrals but are in-
cluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. 
Designated Roth contributions to a section 
401(k) plan are reported using code AA in 
box 12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in 
box 12.
Excess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed the 
limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-
quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-
cess amount will be distributed to you. If you 
participate in more than one plan, you can have 
the excess paid out of any of the plans that per-
mit these distributions. You must notify each 
plan by the date required by that plan of the 
amount to be paid from that particular plan. The 
plan then must pay you the amount of the ex-
cess, along with any income earned on that 
amount, by April 15 of the following year.
You must include the excess deferral in your 
income for the year of the deferral unless you 
have an excess deferral of a designated Roth 
contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excess 
deferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do not 
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-
cess deferral amounts.
Excess not distributed.  If you do not take 
out the excess amount, you cannot include it in 
the cost of the contract even though you inclu-
ded it in your income. Therefore, you are taxed 
twice on the excess deferral left in the 
plan—once when you contribute it, and again 
when you receive it as a distribution.
Excess distributed to you.  If you take out 
the excess after the year of the deferral and you 
receive the corrective distribution by April 15 of 
the following year, do not include it in income 
again in the year you receive it. If you receive it 
later, you must include it in income in both the 
year of the deferral and the year you receive it. 
Any income on the excess deferral taken out is 
taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. If 
you take out part of the excess deferral and the 
income on it, allocate the distribution propor-
tionately between the excess deferral and the 
income.
You should receive a Form 1099-R for the 
year in which the excess deferral is distributed 
to you. Use the following rules to report a cor-
rective distribution shown on Form 1099-R for 
2013.
If the distribution was for a 2013 excess 
deferral, your Form 1099-R should have 
the code “8” in box 7. Add the excess de-
ferral amount to your wages on your 2013 
tax return.
If the distribution was for a 2013 excess 
deferral to a designated Roth account, 
your Form 1099-R should have code “B” in 
box 7. Do not add this amount to your wa-
ges on your 2013 return.
If the distribution was for a 2012 excess 
deferral, your Form 1099-R should have 
the code “P” in box 7. If you did not add the 
excess deferral amount to your wages on 
Page 10 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10 Publication 525 (2013)

your 2012 tax return, you must file an 
amended return on Form 1040X, Amended 
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If you 
did not receive the distribution by April 15, 
2013, you also must add it to your wages 
on your 2013 tax return.
If the distribution was for the income 
earned on an excess deferral, your Form 
1099-R should have the code “8” in box 7. 
Add the income amount to your wages on 
your 2013 income tax return, regardless of 
when the excess deferral was made.
Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an 
excess deferral in the year the excess amount 
(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-
clude the loss as a negative amount on Form 
1040, line 21 and identify it as “Loss on Excess 
Deferral Distribution.”
Even though a corrective distribution 
of excess deferrals is reported on 
Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise trea-
ted as a distribution from the plan. It cannot be 
rolled over into another plan, and it is not sub-
ject to the additional tax on early distributions.
Excess Contributions
If you are a highly compensated employee, the 
total of your elective deferrals and other contri-
butions made for you for any year under a sec-
tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a per-
centage of pay, no more than 125% of the 
average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligi-
ble non-highly compensated employees.
If the total contributed to the plan is more 
than the amount allowed under the ADP test, 
the excess contributions must be either distrib-
uted to you or recharacterized as after-tax em-
ployee contributions by treating them as distrib-
uted to you and then contributed by you to the 
plan. You must include the excess contributions 
in your income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. 
You cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ 
to report excess contribution amounts.
If you receive a corrective distribution of ex-
cess contributions (and allocable income), it is 
included in your income in the year of the distri-
bution. The allocable income is the amount of 
gain or loss through the end of the plan year for 
which the contribution was made that is alloca-
ble to the excess contributions. You should re-
ceive a Form 1099-R for the year the excess 
contributions are distributed to you. Add the dis-
tribution to your wages for that year.
Even though a corrective distribution 
of excess contributions is reported on 
Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise trea-
ted as a distribution from the plan. It cannot be 
rolled over into another plan, and it is not sub-
ject to the additional tax on early distributions.
Excess Annual Additions
The amount contributed in 2013 to a defined 
contribution plan is generally limited to the 
lesser of 100% of your compensation or 
$51,000. Under certain circumstances, contri-
butions that exceed these limits (excess annual 
additions) may be corrected by a distribution of 
TIP
TIP
your elective deferrals or a return of your af-
ter-tax contributions and earnings from these 
contributions.
A corrective payment of excess annual addi-
tions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings 
from your after-tax contributions is fully taxable 
in the year paid. A corrective payment consist-
ing of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.
If you received a corrective payment of ex-
cess annual additions, you should receive a 
separate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay-
ment with the code “E” in box 7. Report the total 
payment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on 
line 16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 
1040A. Report the taxable amount shown in 
box 2a of Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 
1040 or line 12b of Form 1040A.
Even though a corrective distribution 
of excess annual additions is reported 
on Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise 
treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot 
be rolled over into another plan, and it is not 
subject to the additional tax on early distribu-
tions.
Stock Options
If you receive an option to buy or sell stock or 
other property as payment for your services, 
you may have income when you receive the op-
tion (the grant), when you exercise the option 
(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property), 
or when you sell or otherwise dispose of the op-
tion or property acquired through exercise of 
the option. The timing, type, and amount of in-
come inclusion depend on whether you receive 
a nonstatutory stock option or a statutory stock 
option. Your employer can tell you which kind of 
option you hold.
Nonstatutory Stock Options
Grant of option. If you are granted a nonstatu-
tory stock option, you may have income when 
you receive the option. The amount of income 
to include and the time to include it depend on 
whether the fair market value of the option can 
be readily determined. The fair market value of 
an option can be readily determined if it is ac-
tively traded on an established market.
The fair market value of an option that is not 
traded on an established market can be readily 
determined only if all of the following conditions 
exist.
You can transfer the option.
You can exercise the option immediately in 
full.
The option or the property subject to the 
option is not subject to any condition or re-
striction (other than a condition to secure 
payment of the purchase price) that has a 
significant effect on the fair market value of 
the option.
The fair market value of the option privilege 
can be readily determined.
The option privilege for an option to buy is the 
opportunity to benefit during the option's exer-
cise period from any increase in the value of 
property subject to the option without risking 
TIP
any capital. For example, if during the exercise 
period the fair market value of stock subject to 
an option is greater than the option's exercise 
price, a profit may be realized by exercising the 
option and immediately selling the stock at its 
higher value. The option privilege for an option 
to sell is the opportunity to benefit during the ex-
ercise period from a decrease in the value of 
the property subject to the option.
If you or a member of your family is an 
officer, director, or more-than-10% 
owner of an expatriated corporation, 
you may owe an excise tax on the value of non-
statutory options and other stock-based com-
pensation from that corporation. For more infor-
mation on the excise tax, see Internal Revenue 
Code section 4985.
Option with readily determinable value. 
If you receive a nonstatutory stock option that 
has a readily determinable fair market value at 
the time it is granted to you, the option is treated 
like other property received as compensation. 
See Restricted Property, later, for rules on how 
much income to include and when to include it. 
However, the rule described in that discussion 
for choosing to include the value of property in 
your income for the year of the transfer does not 
apply to a nonstatutory option.
Option without readily determinable 
value. If the fair market value of the option is 
not readily determinable at the time it is granted 
to you (even if it is determined later), you do not 
have income until you exercise or transfer the 
option.
 
Exercise or transfer of option. When you ex-
ercise a nonstatutory stock option, the amount 
to include in your income depends on whether 
the option had a readily determinable value.
Option with readily determinable value. 
When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option 
that had a readily determinable value at the time 
the option was granted, you do not have to in-
clude any amount in income.
Option without readily determinable 
value.  When you exercise a nonstatutory 
stock option that did not have a readily determi-
nable value at the time the option was granted, 
the restricted property rules apply to the prop-
erty received. The amount to include in your in-
come is the difference between the amount you 
pay for the property and its fair market value 
when it becomes substantially vested. If it is not 
substantially vested at the time you exercise 
this nonstatutory stock option (so that you may 
have to give the stock back), you do not have to 
include any amount in income. You include the 
difference in income when the option becomes 
substantially vested. For more information on 
restricted property, see Restricted Property , 
later.
Transfer in arm's-length transaction.  If 
you transfer a nonstatutory stock option without 
a readily determinable value in an arm's-length 
transaction to an unrelated person, you must in-
clude in your income the money or other prop-
erty you received for the transfer, as if you had 
exercised the option.
CAUTION
!
Page 11 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 11

Transfer in non-arm's-length transac-
tion. If you transfer a nonstatutory stock option 
without a readily determinable value in a 
non-arm's-length transaction (for example, a 
gift), the option is not treated as exercised or 
closed at that time. You must include in your in-
come, as compensation, any money or property 
received. When the transferee exercises the 
option, you must include in your income, as 
compensation, the excess of the fair market 
value of the stock acquired by the transferee 
over the sum of the exercise price paid and any 
amount you included in income at the time you 
transferred the option. At the time of the exer-
cise, the transferee recognizes no income and 
has a basis in the stock acquired equal to the 
fair market value of the stock.
Any transfer of this kind of option to a rela-
ted person is treated as a non-arm's-length 
transaction. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for 
the definition of a related person.
Recourse note in satisfaction of the ex-
ercise price of an option.  If you are an em-
ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your 
employer in satisfaction of the exercise price of 
an option to acquire your employer's stock, and 
your employer and you subsequently agree to 
reduce the stated principal amount of the note, 
you generally recognize compensation income 
at the time and in the amount of the reduction.
Tax form.  If you receive compensation from 
employer-provided nonstatutory stock options, 
it is reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also is re-
ported in box 12 using code “V.”
If you are a nonemployee spouse and you 
exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-
ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-
ported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellane-
ous Income, in box 3.
Sale of the stock.  There are no special in-
come rules for the sale of stock acquired 
through the exercise of a nonstatutory stock op-
tion. Report the sale as explained in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital 
Gains and Losses, for the year of the sale. You 
may receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From 
Broker and Barter Sale Transactions, reporting 
the sales proceeds.
Your basis in the property you acquire under 
the option is the amount you pay for it plus any 
amount you included in income upon grant or 
exercise of the option.
Your holding period begins as of the date 
you acquired the option, if it had a readily deter-
minable value, or as of the date you exercised 
or transferred the option, if it had no readily de-
terminable value.
Statutory Stock Options
There are two kinds of statutory stock options.
Incentive stock options (ISOs), and
Options granted under employee stock 
purchase plans.
For either kind of option, you must be an 
employee of the company granting the option, 
or a related company, at all times during the pe-
riod beginning on the date the option is granted 
and ending 3 months before the date you 
exercise the option (for an incentive stock op-
tion, 1 year before if you are disabled). Also, the 
option must be nontransferable except at death.
If you do not meet the employment require-
ments, or you receive a transferable option, 
your option is a nonstatutory stock option.
Grant of option.  If you receive a statutory 
stock option, do not include any amount in your 
income when the option is granted.
Exercise of option.  If you exercise a statutory 
stock option, do not include any amount in in-
come when you exercise the option.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).  For the 
AMT, you must treat stock acquired through the 
exercise of an ISO as if no special treatment ap-
plied. This means that, when your rights in the 
stock are transferable or no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include 
as an adjustment in figuring alternative mini-
mum taxable income the amount by which the 
fair market value of the stock exceeds the op-
tion price. Enter this adjustment on line 14 of 
Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individu-
als. Increase your AMT basis in any stock you 
acquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of 
the adjustment. However, no adjustment is re-
quired if you dispose of the stock in the same 
year you exercise the option.
See Restricted Property , later, for more in-
formation.
Your AMT basis in stock acquired 
through an ISO is likely to differ from 
your regular tax basis. Therefore, keep 
adequate records for both the AMT and regular 
tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or 
loss.
Example. Your employer, M Company, 
granted you an incentive stock option on April 
7, 2011, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 
a share, its fair market value at the time. You 
exercised the option on January 6, 2012, when 
the stock was selling on the open market for 
$14 a share. On January 25, 2013, when the 
stock was selling on the open market for $16 a 
share, your rights to the stock first became 
transferable. You include $700 ($1,600 value 
when your rights first became transferable mi-
nus $900 option price) as an adjustment on 
Form 6251, line 14.
If you exercise an ISO during 2013, 
you should receive Form 3921, Exer-
cise of an Incentive Stock Option Un-
der Section 422(b), or a statement, from the 
corporation for each transfer made during 2013. 
The corporation must send or provide you with 
the form by January 31, 2014. Keep this infor-
mation for your records.
Sale of the stock.  You have taxable income 
or a deductible loss when you sell the stock that 
you bought by exercising the option. Your in-
come or loss is the difference between the 
amount you paid for the stock (the option price) 
and the amount you receive when you sell it. 
You generally treat this amount as capital gain 
or loss and report it as explained in the Instruc-
RECORDS
TIP
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for the year of 
the sale.
However, you may have ordinary income for 
the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of 
the stock in either of the following situations.
You do not satisfy the holding period re-
quirement.
You satisfy the conditions described under 
Option granted at a discount, under Em-
ployee stock purchase plan, later.
Your employer or former employer should re-
port the ordinary income to you as wages in 
box 1 of Form W-2, and you must report this or-
dinary income amount on Form 1040, line 7. If 
your employer or former employer does not pro-
vide you with a Form W-2, or if the form W-2 
does not include the ordinary income in box 1, 
you still must report the ordinary income as wa-
ges on Form 1040, line 7, for the year of the 
sale or other disposition of the stock. 
Holding period requirement.  You satisfy 
the holding period requirement if you do not sell 
the stock until the end of the later of the 1-year 
period after the stock was transferred to you or 
the 2-year period after the option was granted. 
However, you are considered to satisfy the 
holding period requirement if you sold the stock 
to comply with conflict-of-interest requirements.
Incentive stock options (ISOs).  If you sell 
stock acquired by exercising an ISO, you need 
to determine if you satisfied the holding period 
requirement.
Holding period requirement satisfied.  If 
you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO 
and satisfy the holding period requirement, your 
gain or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. 
Report the sale as explained in the Instructions 
for Schedule D (Form 1040). The basis of your 
stock is the amount you paid for the stock.
Holding period requirement not satis-
fied.  If you sell stock acquired by exercising 
an ISO, do not satisfy the holding period re-
quirement, and have a gain from the sale, the 
gain is ordinary income up to the amount by 
which the stock's fair market value when you 
exercised the option exceeded the option price. 
Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have a 
loss from the sale, it is a capital loss and you do 
not have any ordinary income.
Your employer or former employer should 
report the ordinary income to you as wages in 
box 1 of Form W-2, and you must report this or-
dinary income amount on Form 1040, line 7. If 
your employer or former employer does not pro-
vide you with a Form W-2, or if the Form W-2 
does not include the ordinary income in box 1, 
you still must report the ordinary income as wa-
ges on Form 1040, line 7, for the year of the 
sale or other disposition of the stock. Report the 
capital gain or loss as explained in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040). In determin-
ing capital gain or loss, your basis is the amount 
you paid when you exercised the option plus 
the amount reported as wages.
Example. Your employer, X Corporation, 
granted you an ISO on March 11, 2011, to buy 
100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a 
share, its fair market value at the time. You ex-
ercised the option on January 6, 2012, when 
Page 12 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12 Publication 525 (2013)

the stock was selling on the open market for 
$12 a share. On January 25, 2013, you sold the 
stock for $15 a share. Although you held the 
stock for more than a year, less than 2 years 
had passed from the time you were granted the 
option. In 2013, you must report the difference 
between the option price ($10) and the value of 
the stock when you exercised the option ($12) 
as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, 
figured as follows:
Selling price ($15 × 100 shares) ......... $ 1,500 
Purchase price ($10 × 100 shares) ....... −1,000 
Gain ............................ $ 500 
Amount reported as wages
[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000] .......... − 200 
Amount reported as capital gain $ 300 
Employee stock purchase plan.  If you sold 
stock acquired by exercising an option granted 
under an employee stock purchase plan, you 
need to determine if you satisfied the holding 
period requirement.
Holding period requirement satisfied.  If 
you sold stock acquired by exercising an option 
granted under an employee stock purchase 
plan, and you satisfy the holding period require-
ment, determine your ordinary income as fol-
lows.
Your basis is equal to the option price at the 
time you exercised your option and acquired 
the stock. The timing and amount of pay period 
deductions do not affect your basis.
Your holding period for the property you ac-
quire when you exercise an option begins on 
the day after you exercise the option.
Example.  XYZ Company has an employee 
stock purchase plan. The option price is the 
lower of the stock price at the time the option is 
granted or at the time the option is exercised. 
The value of the stock when the option was 
granted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A's pay 
every week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 × 
48)). The value of the stock when the option is 
exercised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ 
stock ($240 ÷ $20). A's holding period for all 12 
shares begins the day after the option is exer-
cised, even though the money used to pur-
chase the shares was deducted from A's pay on 
48 separate days. A's basis in each share is 
$20.
Option granted at a discount.  If, at the 
time the option was granted, the option price 
per share was less than 100% (but not less than 
85%) of the fair market value of the share, and 
you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-
ing period requirement, or you die while owning 
the share, you must include in your income as 
compensation, the lesser of:
The excess of the fair market value of the 
share at the time the option was granted 
over the option price, or
The excess of the fair market value of the 
share at the time of the disposition or death 
over the amount paid for the share under 
the option.
For this purpose, if the option price was not 
fixed or determinable at the time the option was 
granted, the option price is figured as if the op-
tion had been exercised at the time it was gran-
ted.
Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have 
a loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you 
do not have any ordinary income.
Example. Your employer, Y Corporation, 
granted you an option under its employee stock 
purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Y 
Corporation for $20 a share at a time when the 
stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteen 
months later, when the value of the stock was 
$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14 
months after that you sold your stock for $30 a 
share. In the year of sale, you must report as 
wages the difference between the option price 
($20) and the value at the time the option was 
granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 per 
share) is capital gain, figured as follows:
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ......... $ 3,000 
Purchase price (option price) 
($20 × 100 shares) .................. −2,000 
Gain ............................ $ 1,000 
Amount reported as wages
[($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ........... − 200 
Amount reported as capital gain $ 800 
Holding period requirement not satis-
fied. If you do not satisfy the holding period re-
quirement, your ordinary income is the amount 
by which the stock's fair market value when you 
exercised the option exceeded the option price. 
This ordinary income is not limited to your gain 
from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis 
in the stock by the amount of this ordinary in-
come. The difference between your increased 
basis and the selling price of the stock is a capi-
tal gain or loss.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example, except that you sold the 
stock only 6 months after you exercised the op-
tion. You did not satisfy the holding period re-
quirement, so you must report $300 as wages 
and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows:
Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) ......... $3,000 
Purchase price (option price) 
($20 × 100 shares) .................. −2,000 
Gain ............................ $1,000 
Amount reported as wages
[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ........... − 300 
Amount reported as capital gain
 [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700 
If you sold stock in 2013 that you ac-
quired by exercising an option granted 
at a discount under an employee stock 
purchase plan, you should receive Form 3922, 
Transfer of Stock Acquired Through an Em-
ployee Stock Purchase Plan Under Section 
423(c), from the corporation. The corporation 
must send or provide you with the form by Janu-
ary 31, 2014. Keep this information for your re-
cords.
Restricted Property
In most cases, if you receive property for your 
services, you must include its fair market value 
in your income in the year you receive the 
TIP
property. However, if you receive stock or other 
property that has certain restrictions that affect 
its value, you do not include the value of the 
property in your income until it has been sub-
stantially vested. (You can choose to include 
the value of the property in your income in the 
year it is transferred to you, as discussed later, 
rather than the year it is substantially vested.)
Until the property becomes substantially 
vested, it is owned by the person who makes 
the transfer to you, usually your employer. How-
ever, any income from the property, or the right 
to use the property, is included in your income 
as additional compensation in the year you re-
ceive the income or have the right to use the 
property.
When the property becomes substantially 
vested, you must include its fair market value, 
minus any amount you paid for it, in your in-
come for that year. Your holding period for this 
property begins when the property becomes 
substantially vested.
Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo-
ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a 
share. At the time of the sale the fair market 
value of the stock is $100 a share. Under the 
terms of the sale, the stock is under a substan-
tial risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of 
losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not 
substantially vested when it is transferred, so 
you do not include any amount in your income 
in the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year 
period, the fair market value of the stock is $200 
a share. You must include $19,000 in your in-
come [100 shares × ($200 fair market value − 
$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-
poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxa-
ble to you as additional compensation during 
the period the stock can be forfeited.
Substantially vested. Property is substantially 
vested when:
It is transferable, or
It is not subject to a substantial risk of for-
feiture. (You do not have a good chance of 
losing it.)
Transferable property.  Property is trans-
ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge your in-
terest in the property to any person (other than 
the transferor), and if the person receiving your 
interest in the property is not required to give up 
the property, or its value, if the substantial risk 
of forfeiture occurs.
Substantial risk of forfeiture.  A substan-
tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in the 
property transferred depend on performing (or 
not performing) substantial services, or on a 
condition related to the transfer, and the possi-
bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is 
not satisfied.
Example. The Spin Corporation transfers 
to you as compensation for services 100 shares 
of its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under 
the terms of the transfer, you must resell the 
stock to the corporation at $100 a share if you 
leave your job for any reason within 3 years 
from the date of transfer. You must perform 
substantial services over a period of time and 
you must resell the stock to the corporation at 
Page 13 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 13

$100 a share (regardless of its value) if you do 
not perform the services, so your rights to the 
stock are subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
ture.
Choosing to include in income for year of 
transfer. You can choose to include the value 
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-
nus any amount you paid for the property) in 
your income for the year it is transferred. If you 
make this choice, the substantial vesting rules 
do not apply and, generally, any later apprecia-
tion in value is not included in your compensa-
tion when the property becomes substantially 
vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when 
you sell the property is the amount you paid for 
it plus the amount you included in income as 
compensation.
If you make this choice, you cannot re-
voke it without the consent of the Inter-
nal Revenue Service. Consent will be 
given only if you were under a mistake of fact as 
to the underlying transaction.
If you forfeit the property after you have in-
cluded its value in income, your loss is the 
amount you paid for the property minus any 
amount you realized on the forfeiture.
You cannot make this choice for a 
nonstatutory stock option.
How to make the choice.  You make the 
choice by filing a written statement with the In-
ternal Revenue Service Center where you file 
your return. You must file this statement no later 
than 30 days after the date the property was 
transferred. Mail your statement to the address 
listed for your state under “Are not including a 
check or money order...” given in Where Do 
You File  in the Instructions for Form 1040 and 
the Instructions for Form 1040A. Where to file 
information also can be found by clicking on 
your state at www.irs.gov/file/content/
0,,id=105690,00.html. A copy of the statement 
must be attached to your tax return for the year 
the property was transferred. You also must 
give a copy of this statement to the person for 
whom you performed the services and, if some-
one other than you received the property, to 
that person.
You must sign the statement and indicate on 
it that you are making the choice under section 
83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-
ment must contain all of the following informa-
tion.
Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
cation number.
A description of each property for which 
you are making the choice.
The date or dates on which the property 
was transferred and the tax year for which 
you are making the choice.
The nature of any restrictions on the prop-
erty.
The fair market value at the time of transfer 
(ignoring restrictions except those that will 
never lapse) of each property for which 
you are making the choice.
Any amount that you paid for the property.
A statement that you have provided copies 
to the appropriate persons.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Dividends received on restricted stock.
Dividends you receive on restricted stock are 
treated as compensation and not as dividend 
income. Your employer should include these 
payments on your Form W-2. If they also are re-
ported on a Form 1099-DIV, you should list 
them on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), In-
terest and Ordinary Dividends, with a statement 
that you have included them as wages. Do not 
include them in the total dividends received.
Stock you chose to include in your in-
come. Dividends you receive on restricted 
stock you chose to include in your income in the 
year transferred are treated the same as any 
other dividends. You should receive a Form 
1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-
clude the dividends in your wages on your re-
turn. Report them as dividends.
Sale of property not substantially vested. 
These rules apply to the sale or other disposi-
tion of property that you did not choose to in-
clude in your income in the year transferred and 
that is not substantially vested.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-
erty in an arm's-length transaction, include in 
your income as compensation for the year of 
sale the amount realized minus the amount you 
paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-
erty in an arm's-length transaction for other 
property that is not substantially vested, treat 
the new property as if it were substituted for the 
exchanged property.
The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
tory stock option to a related person is not con-
sidered an arm's-length transaction. See Regu-
lations section 1.83-7 for the definition of a 
related person.
If you sell the property in a transaction that is 
not at arm's length, include in your income as 
compensation for the year of sale the total of 
any money you received and the fair market 
value of any substantially vested property you 
received on the sale. In addition, you will have 
to report income when the original property be-
comes substantially vested, as if you still held it. 
Report as compensation its fair market value 
minus the total of the amount you paid for the 
property and the amount included in your in-
come from the earlier sale.
Example. In 2010, you paid your employer 
$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market 
value of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until 
2013. In 2012, you sold the stock to your 
spouse for $10 in a transaction not at arm's 
length. You had compensation of $10 from this 
transaction. In 2013, when the stock had a fair 
market value of $120, it became substantially 
vested. For 2013, you must report additional 
compensation of $60, figured as follows:
Fair market value of stock at time of 
substantial vesting .............. $120 
Minus: Amount paid for stock ....... $50 
Minus: Compensation previously 
included in income from sale to 
spouse ...................... 10 −60 
Additional income $60 
Inherited property not substantially vested. 
If you inherit property not substantially vested at 
the time of the decedent's death, any income 
you receive from the property is considered in-
come in respect of a decedent and is taxed ac-
cording to the rules for restricted property re-
ceived for services. For information about 
income in respect of a decedent, see Publica-
tion 559.
Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This part of the publication deals with special 
rules for people in certain types of employment: 
members of the clergy, members of religious or-
ders, people working for foreign employers, 
military personnel, and volunteers.
Clergy
If you are a member of the clergy, you must in-
clude in your income offerings and fees you re-
ceive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, 
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the of-
fering is made to the religious institution, it is not 
taxable to you.
If you are a member of a religious organiza-
tion and you give your outside earnings to the 
organization, you still must include the earnings 
in your income. However, you may be entitled 
to a charitable contribution deduction for the 
amount paid to the organization. See Publica-
tion 526, Charitable Contributions. Also, see 
Members of Religious Orders, later.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a 
member of the clergy usually is treated as any 
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on 
lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a 
and 12b of Form 1040A.
Housing
Special rules for housing apply to members of 
the clergy. Under these rules, you do not in-
clude in your income the rental value of a home 
(including utilities) or a designated housing al-
lowance provided to you as part of your pay. 
However, the exclusion cannot be more than 
the reasonable pay for your service. If you pay 
for the utilities, you can exclude any allowance 
designated for utility cost, up to your actual 
cost. The home or allowance must be provided 
as compensation for your services as an or-
dained, licensed, or commissioned minister. 
However, you must include the rental value of 
the home or the housing allowance as earnings 
from self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 
1040), Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject 
to the self-employment tax. For more informa-
tion, see Publication 517, Social Security and 
Other Information for Members of the Clergy 
and Religious Workers.
Members of Religious 
Orders
If you are a member of a religious order who 
has taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earn-
ings that you renounce and turn over to the or-
der depends on whether your services are per-
formed for the order.
Page 14 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14 Publication 525 (2013)

Services performed for the order.  If you are 
performing the services as an agent of the order 
in the exercise of duties required by the order, 
do not include in your income the amounts 
turned over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform services 
for another agency of the supervising church or 
an associated institution, you are considered to 
be performing the services as an agent of the 
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an 
order that you turn over to the order are not in-
cluded in your income.
Example. You are a member of a church 
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You re-
nounce any claims to your earnings and turn 
over to the order any salaries or wages you 
earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order 
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an as-
sociated institution of the church. However, you 
remain under the general direction and control 
of the order. You are considered to be an agent 
of the order and any wages you earn at the hos-
pital that you turn over to your order are not in-
cluded in your income.
Services performed outside the order.  If 
you are directed to work outside the order, your 
services are not an exercise of duties required 
by the order unless they meet both of the fol-
lowing requirements.
They are the kind of services that are ordi-
narily the duties of members of the order.
They are part of the duties that you must 
exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious 
order as its agent.
If you are an employee of a third party, the serv-
ices you perform for the third party will not be 
considered directed or required of you by the 
order. Amounts you receive for these services 
are included in your income, even if you have 
taken a vow of poverty.
Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a 
religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. 
He renounces all claims to his earnings and 
turns over his earnings to the order.
Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed 
by the superiors of the order to get a job with a 
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an 
employee of the school, and, at his request, the 
school made the salary payments directly to the 
order.
Because Mark is an employee of the school, 
he is performing services for the school rather 
than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark 
earns working for the school are included in his 
income.
Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of a 
religious order who, as a condition of member-
ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience. 
All claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene 
received permission from the order to establish 
a private practice as a psychologist and coun-
sels members of religious orders as well as 
nonmembers. Although the order reviews 
Gene's budget annually, Gene controls not only 
the details of his practice but also the means by 
which his work as a psychologist is accom-
plished.
Gene's private practice as a psychologist 
does not make him an agent of the religious 
order. The psychological services provided by 
Gene are not the type of services that are provi-
ded by the order. The income Gene earns as a 
psychologist is earned in his individual capacity. 
Gene must include in his income the earnings 
from his private practice.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign em-
ployer.
U.S. citizen.  If you are a U.S. citizen who 
works in the United States for a foreign govern-
ment, an international organization, a foreign 
embassy, or any foreign employer, you must in-
clude your salary in your income.
Social security and Medicare taxes.  You 
are exempt from social security and Medicare 
employee taxes if you are employed in the Uni-
ted States by an international organization or a 
foreign government. However, you must pay 
self-employment tax on your earnings from 
services performed in the United States, even 
though you are not self-employed. This rule 
also applies if you are an employee of a qualify-
ing wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign 
government.
Employees of international organizations or 
foreign governments. Your compensation for 
official services to an international organization 
is exempt from federal income tax if you are not 
a citizen of the United States or you are a citi-
zen of the Philippines (whether or not you are a 
citizen of the United States).
Your compensation for official services to a 
foreign government is exempt from federal in-
come tax if all of the following are true.
You are not a citizen of the United States 
or you are a citizen of the Philippines 
(whether or not you are a citizen of the Uni-
ted States).
Your work is like the work done by employ-
ees of the United States in foreign coun-
tries.
The foreign government gives an equal ex-
emption to employees of the United States 
in its country.
Waiver of alien status.  If you are an alien 
who works for a foreign government or interna-
tional organization and you file a waiver under 
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary 
you receive after the date you file the waiver is 
not exempt under this rule. However, it may be 
exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi-
cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more 
information about treaties.
Nonwage income. This exemption applies 
only to employees' wages, salaries, and fees. 
Pensions and other income, such as investment 
income, do not qualify for this exemption.
Employment abroad.  For information on the 
tax treatment of income earned abroad, see 
Publication 54.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a military 
service generally are taxed as wages except for 
retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Al-
lowances generally are not taxed. For more in-
formation on the tax treatment of military allow-
ances and benefits, see Publication 3, Armed 
Forces' Tax Guide.
Differential wage payments.  Any payments 
made to you by an employer during the time 
you are performing service in the uniformed 
services are treated as compensation. These 
wages are subject to income tax withholding 
and are reported on Form W-2. See the discus-
sion under Miscellaneous Compensation , ear-
lier.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement pay 
is based on age or length of service, it is taxable 
and must be included in your income as a pen-
sion on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on 
lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not in-
clude in your income the amount of any reduc-
tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a 
survivor annuity for your spouse or children un-
der the Retired Serviceman's Family Protection 
Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For a more detailed discussion of survivor 
annuities, see Publication 575.
Disability. If you are retired on disability, 
see Military and Government Disability Pen-
sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
Qualified reservist distribution (QRD). If you 
received a QRD of all or part of the balance in 
your health flexible spending account because 
you are a reservist and you have been ordered 
or called to active duty for a period of 180 days 
or more, the QRD is treated as wages and is re-
portable on Form W-2.
Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-
come any veterans' benefits paid under any 
law, regulation, or administrative practice ad-
ministered by the Department of Veterans Af-
fairs (VA). The following amounts paid to veter-
ans or their families are not taxable.
Education, training, and subsistence allow-
ances.
Disability compensation and pension pay-
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
ans or their families.
Grants for homes designed for wheelchair 
living.
Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who 
lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
dends paid either to veterans or their bene-
ficiaries, including the proceeds of a veter-
an's endowment policy paid before death.
Interest on insurance dividends left on de-
posit with the VA.
Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
tance program.
The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a 
member of the Armed Forces who died af-
ter September 10, 2001.
Payments made under the compensated 
work therapy program.
Page 15 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 15

Any bonus payment by a state or political 
subdivision because of service in a combat 
zone.
Note. If, in a previous year, you received a 
bonus payment by a state or political subdivi-
sion because of service in a combat zone that 
you included in your income, you can file a 
claim for refund of the taxes on that income. 
Use Form 1040X to file the claim. File a sepa-
rate form for each tax year involved. In most ca-
ses, you must file your claim within 3 years after 
the date you filed your original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later. See the Instructions for Form 1040X for 
information on filing that form.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a 
volunteer is covered in the following discus-
sions.
Peace Corps.  Living allowances you receive 
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader 
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, 
and clothing are exempt from tax.
Taxable allowances.  The following allow-
ances must be included in your income and re-
ported as wages.
Allowances paid to your spouse and minor 
children while you are a volunteer leader 
training in the United States.
Living allowances designated by the Direc-
tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen-
sation. These are allowances for personal 
items such as domestic help, laundry and 
clothing maintenance, entertainment and 
recreation, transportation, and other mis-
cellaneous expenses.
Leave allowances.
Readjustment allowances or termination 
payments. These are considered received 
by you when credited to your account.
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps 
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment 
allowance during his period of service, to be 
paid to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour 
of duty. Although the allowance is not available 
to him until the end of his service, Gary must in-
clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is 
credited to his account.
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If 
you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include 
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in 
your income as wages.
National Senior Service Corps programs.
Do not include in your income amounts you re-
ceive for supportive services or reimburse-
ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-
lowing programs.
Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP).
Foster Grandparent Program.
Senior Companion Program. 
Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for suppor-
tive services or reimbursements for 
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not 
include these amounts in gross income.
Volunteer tax counseling.  Do not include in 
your income any reimbursements you receive 
for transportation, meals, and other expenses 
you have in training for, or actually providing, 
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the 
elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contribution 
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in 
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
tance (VITA) program.
Business and
Investment Income
This section provides information on the treat-
ment of income from certain rents and royalties, 
and from interests in partnerships and S corpo-
rations.
Note. Beginning in 2013, you may be sub-
ject to the Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT). 
The NIIT is a 3.8% tax on the lesser of net in-
vestment income or the excess of your modified 
adjusted gross income (MAGI) over a threshold 
amount. For details, see Form 8960, and its in-
structions.
Income from sales at auctions, includ-
ing online auctions, may be business 
income. For more information, see 
Publication 334.
Rents From Personal 
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
ment or vehicles, how you report your income 
and expenses is in most cases determined by:
Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
ness, and
Whether or not the rental activity is con-
ducted for profit.
In most cases, if your primary purpose is in-
come or profit and you are involved in the rental 
activity with continuity and regularity, your rental 
activity is a business. See Publication 535, 
Business Expenses, for details on deducting 
expenses for both business and not-for-profit 
activities.
Reporting business income and expenses.
If you are in the business of renting personal 
property, report your income and expenses on 
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). 
The form instructions have information on how 
to complete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income.  If you are 
not in the business of renting personal property, 
report your rental income on Form 1040, 
line 21. List the type and amount of the income 
on the dotted line next to line 21.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses.  If you 
rent personal property for profit, include your 
rental expenses in the total amount you enter 
on Form 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount 
and “PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36.
CAUTION
!
If you do not rent personal property for profit, 
your deductions are limited and you cannot re-
port a loss to offset other income. See Activity 
not for profit under Other Income, later.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, 
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary 
income.
In most cases you report royalties on 
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income 
and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, 
gas, or mineral interest or are in business as a 
self-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report 
your income and expenses on Schedule C or 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
Copyrights and patents.  Royalties from 
copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, 
and similar property, or from patents on inven-
tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to 
use your work over a specified period of time. 
Royalties generally are based on the number of 
units sold, such as the number of books, tickets 
to a performance, or machines sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.  Royalty income from 
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount 
you receive when natural resources are extrac-
ted from your property. The royalties are based 
on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and are 
paid to you by a person or company who leases 
the property from you.
Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas 
wells, you can recover your investment through 
the depletion allowance. For information on this 
subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.
Coal and iron ore.  Under certain circum-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive 
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather 
than as royalty income. For information about 
gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, 
see Publication 544.
Sale of property interest.  If you sell your 
complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, 
the amount you receive is considered payment 
for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty 
income. Under certain circumstances, the sale 
is subject to capital gain or loss treatment as 
explained in the Instructions for Schedule D 
(Form 1040). For more information on selling 
section 1231 property, see chapter 3 of Publica-
tion 544.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, 
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for 
the life of the property, you have made a lease 
or a sublease, and any cash you receive for the 
assignment of other interests in the property is 
ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
ance.
Part of future production sold. If you own 
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-
duction, in most cases you treat the money you 
receive from the buyer at the time of the sale as 
a loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your 
income or take depletion based on it.
Page 16 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16 Publication 525 (2013)

When production begins, you include all the 
proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that 
amount to arrive at your taxable income from 
the property.
Partnership Income
A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. 
The income, gains, losses, deductions, and 
credits of a partnership are passed through to 
the partners based on each partner's distribu-
tive share of these items. For more information, 
see Publication 541.
Partner's distributive share. Your distributive 
share of partnership income, gains, losses, de-
ductions, or credits generally is based on the 
partnership agreement. You must report your 
distributive share of these items on your return 
whether or not they actually are distributed to 
you. However, your distributive share of the 
partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-
sis of your partnership interest at the end of the 
partnership year in which the losses took place.
Partnership agreement.  The partnership 
agreement usually covers the distribution of 
profits, losses, and other items. However, if the 
agreement does not state how a specific item of 
gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation sta-
ted in the agreement does not have substantial 
economic effect, your distributive share is fig-
ured according to your interest in the partner-
ship.
Partnership return.  Although a partnership 
generally pays no tax, it must file an information 
return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partner-
ship Income. This shows the result of the part-
nership's operations for its tax year and the 
items that must be passed through to the part-
ners.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065).  You should 
receive from each partnership in which you are 
a member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), 
Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, 
etc., showing your share of income, deductions, 
credits, and tax preference items of the partner-
ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for 
your records. Do not attach it to your Form 
1040, unless you are specifically required to do 
so.
Partner's return.  You generally must report 
partnership items on your individual return the 
same way as they are reported on the partner-
ship return. That is, if the partnership had a cap-
ital gain, you report your share as explained in 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
You report your share of partnership ordinary 
income on Schedule E (Form 1040).
In many cases, Schedule K-1 (Form 
1065) will tell you where to report an 
item of income on your individual re-
turn.
Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only 
members of a jointly owned and operated busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
TIP
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
To make this election, you must divide all items 
of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-
tributable to the business between you and your 
spouse in accordance with your respective in-
terests in the venture. For further information on 
how to make the election and which sched-
ule(s) to file, see the instructions for your indi-
vidual tax return.
S Corporation Income
In most cases, an S corporation does not pay 
tax on its income. Instead, the income, losses, 
deductions, and credits of the corporation are 
passed through to the shareholders based on 
each shareholder's pro rata share. You must re-
port your share of these items on your return. In 
most cases, the items passed through to you 
will increase or decrease the basis of your S 
corporation stock as appropriate.
S corporation return.  An S corporation must 
file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax 
Return for an S Corporation. This shows the re-
sults of the corporation's operations for its tax 
year and the items of income, losses, deduc-
tions, or credits that affect the shareholders' in-
dividual income tax returns.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).  You should 
receive from the S corporation in which you are 
a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120S), showing your share of income, losses, 
deductions, and credits, of the S corporation for 
the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for your re-
cords. Do not attach it to your Form 1040, un-
less you are specifically required to do so.
Shareholder's return.  Your distributive share 
of the items of income, losses, deductions, or 
credits of the S corporation must be shown sep-
arately on your Form 1040. The character of 
these items generally is the same as if you had 
realized or incurred them personally.
In many cases, Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120S) will tell you where to report an 
item of income on your individual re-
turn.
Distributions. In most cases, S corporation 
distributions are a nontaxable return of your ba-
sis in the corporation stock. However, in certain 
cases, part of the distributions may be taxable 
as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term 
capital gain, or as both. The corporation's distri-
butions may be in the form of cash or property.
More information.  For more information, see 
the Instructions for Form 1120S.
Sickness and
Injury Benefits
In most cases, you must report as income any 
amount you receive for personal injury or sick-
ness through an accident or health plan that is 
paid for by your employer. If both you and your 
employer pay for the plan, only the amount you 
receive that is due to your employer's payments 
is reported as income. However, certain 
TIP
payments may not be taxable to you. For infor-
mation on nontaxable payments, see Military 
and Government Disability Pensions  and Other 
Sickness and Injury Benefits , later in this dis-
cussion.
Do not report as income any amounts 
paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
penses you incurred after the plan was 
established.
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of 
an accident or health plan, do not include any 
amounts you receive from the plan for personal 
injury or sickness as income on your tax return. 
If your plan reimbursed you for medical expen-
ses you deducted in an earlier year, you may 
have to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
ment in your income. See Recoveries under 
Miscellaneous Income, later.
Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you are cov-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan 
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the 
insurance premiums was not included in your 
income, you are not considered to have paid 
the premiums and you must include any bene-
fits you receive in your income. If the amount of 
the premiums was included in your income, you 
are considered to have paid the premiums and 
any benefits you receive are not taxable.
Disability Pensions
If you retired on disability, you must include in 
income any disability pension you receive under 
a plan that is paid for by your employer. You 
must report your taxable disability payments as 
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A 
until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-
mum retirement age generally is the age at 
which you can first receive a pension or annuity 
if you are not disabled.
You may be entitled to a tax credit if 
you were permanently and totally disa-
bled when you retired. For information 
on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for the 
Elderly or the Disabled.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay-
ments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on 
lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For more in-
formation on pensions and annuities, see Publi-
cation 575.
Retirement and profit-sharing plans.  If you 
receive payments from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan that does not provide for dis-
ability retirement, do not treat the payments as 
a disability pension. The payments must be re-
ported as a pension or annuity.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for 
accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The 
payment is not a disability payment. Include it in 
your income in the tax year you receive it.
TIP
TIP
Page 17 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 17

Military and Government
Disability Pensions
Certain military and government disability pen-
sions are not taxable.
Service-connected disability.  You may be 
able to exclude from income amounts you re-
ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allow-
ance for personal injury or sickness resulting 
from active service in one of the following gov-
ernment services.
The armed forces of any country.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.
The Public Health Service.
The Foreign Service.
Conditions for exclusion.  Do not include 
the disability payments in your income if any of 
the following conditions apply.
1. You were entitled to receive a disability 
payment before September 25, 1975.
2. You were a member of a listed govern-
ment service or its reserve component, or 
were under a binding written commitment 
to become a member, on September 24, 
1975.
3. You receive the disability payments for a 
combat-related injury. This is a personal 
injury or sickness that:
a. Results directly from armed conflict,
b. Takes place while you are engaged in 
extra-hazardous service,
c. Takes place under conditions simulat-
ing war, including training exercises 
such as maneuvers, or
d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.
4. You would be entitled to receive disability 
compensation from the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
tion for it. Your exclusion under this condi-
tion is equal to the amount you would be 
entitled to receive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service.  If you 
receive a disability pension based on years of 
service, in most cases you must include it in 
your income. However, if the pension qualifies 
for the exclusion for a service-connected disa-
bility (discussed earlier), do not include in in-
come the part of your pension that you would 
have received if the pension had been based 
on a percentage of disability. You must include 
the rest of your pension in your income.
Retroactive VA determination.  If you re-
tire from the armed services based on years of 
service and are later given a retroactive serv-
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your 
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
cluded from income up to the amount of VA dis-
ability benefits you would have been entitled to 
receive. You can claim a refund of any tax paid 
on the excludable amount (subject to the stat-
ute of limitations) by filing an amended return 
on Form 1040X for each previous year during 
the retroactive period. You must include with 
each Form 1040X a copy of the official VA 
Determination letter granting the retroactive 
benefit. The letter must show the amount with-
held and the effective date of the benefit.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disa-
bility benefits, exclude 100% of the severance 
benefit from your income. However, you must 
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-
ment or other nondisability severance payment 
you received on release from active duty, even 
if you are later given a retroactive disability rat-
ing by the VA.
Special statute of limitations. In most ca-
ses, under the statute of limitations a claim for 
credit or refund must be filed within 3 years 
from the time a return was filed. However, if you 
receive a retroactive service-connected disabil-
ity rating determination, the statute of limitations 
is extended by a 1-year period beginning on the 
date of the determination. This 1-year extended 
period applies to claims for credit or refund filed 
after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any 
tax year that began more than 5 years before 
the date of the determination.
Example. You retired in 2007 and receive a 
pension based on your years of service. On Au-
gust 1, 2013, you receive a determination of 
service-connected disability retroactive to 2007. 
Generally, you could claim a refund for the 
taxes paid on your pension for 2010, 2011, and 
2012. However, under the special limitation pe-
riod, you can also file a claim for 2009 as long 
as you file the claim by August 1, 2014. You 
cannot file a claim for 2007 and 2008 because 
those tax years began more than 5 years before 
the determination.
Terrorist attack or military action.  Do not in-
clude in your income disability payments you 
receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-
rorist or military action.
A terrorist action is one that is directed 
against the United States or any of its allies (in-
cluding a multinational force in which the United 
States is participating). A military action is one 
that involves the armed forces of the United 
States and is a result of actual or threatened vi-
olence or aggression against the United States 
or any of its allies, but does not include training 
exercises.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
In most cases, long-term care insurance con-
tracts are treated as accident and health insur-
ance contracts. Amounts you receive from them 
(other than policyholder dividends or premium 
refunds) are excludable in most cases from in-
come as amounts received for personal injury 
or sickness. To claim an exclusion for payments 
made on a per diem or other periodic basis un-
der a long-term care insurance contract, you 
must file Form 8853 with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is an in-
surance contract that only provides coverage 
for qualified long-term care services. The con-
tract must:
Be guaranteed renewable,
Not provide for a cash surrender value or 
other money that can be paid, assigned, 
pledged, or borrowed,
Provide that refunds, other than refunds on 
the death of the insured or complete sur-
render or cancellation of the contract, and 
dividends under the contract may be used 
only to reduce future premiums or increase 
future benefits, and
In most cases, not pay or reimburse ex-
penses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex-
penses.
Qualified long-term care services.  Qualified 
long-term care services are:
Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-
tative services, and maintenance and per-
sonal care services, and
Required by a chronically ill individual and 
provided pursuant to a plan of care prescri-
bed by a licensed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill indi-
vidual is one who has been certified by a li-
censed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months as one of the following.
An individual who, for at least 90 days, is 
unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
due to a loss of functional capacity. Activi-
ties of daily living are eating, toileting, 
transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-
nence.
An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to 
health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
Limit on exclusion.  The exclusion for pay-
ments made on a per diem or other periodic ba-
sis under a long-term care insurance contract is 
subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total of 
these payments and any accelerated death 
benefits made on a per diem  or other periodic 
basis under a life insurance contract because 
the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-
tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous In-
come, later.)
Under this limit, the excludable amount for 
any period is figured by subtracting any reim-
bursement received (through insurance or oth-
erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care 
services during the period from the larger of the 
following amounts.
The cost of qualified long-term care serv-
ices during the period.
The dollar amount for the period ($320 per 
day for any period in 2013).
See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructions 
for more information.
Workers' Compensation
Amounts you receive as workers' compensation 
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully 
exempt from tax if they are paid under a work-
ers' compensation act or a statute in the nature 
of a workers' compensation act. The exemption 
also applies to your survivors. The exemption, 
however, does not apply to retirement plan 
Page 18 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18 Publication 525 (2013)

benefits you receive based on your age, length 
of service, or prior contributions to the plan, 
even if you retired because of an occupational 
sickness or injury.
If part of your workers' compensation 
reduces your social security or equiva-
lent railroad retirement benefits re-
ceived, that part is considered social security 
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and 
may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxabil-
ity of these benefits, see Other Income  under 
Miscellaneous Income, later.
Return to work.  If you return to work after 
qualifying for workers' compensation, salary 
payments you receive for performing light du-
ties are taxable as wages.
Disability pension. If your disability pension is 
paid under a statute that provides benefits only 
to employees with service-connected disabili-
ties, part of it may be workers' compensation. 
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of your 
pension, based on years of service, is taxable 
as pension or annuity income. If you die, the 
part of your survivors' benefit that is a continua-
tion of the workers' compensation is exempt 
from tax.
Other Sickness
and Injury Benefits
In addition to disability pensions and annuities, 
you may receive other payments for sickness or 
injury.
Railroad sick pay.  Payments you receive as 
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
surance Act are taxable and you must include 
them in your income. However, do not include 
them in your income if they are for an on-the-job 
injury.
Black lung benefit payments.  These pay-
ments are similar to workers' compensation and 
are not taxable in most cases.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act 
(FECA). Payments received under this Act for 
personal injury or sickness, including payments 
to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxa-
ble. However, you are taxed on amounts you 
receive under this Act as continuation of pay for 
up to 45 days while a claim is being decided. 
Report this income on line 7 of Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, 
pay for sick leave while a claim is being pro-
cessed is taxable and must be included in your 
income as wages.
If part of the payments you receive un-
der FECA reduces your social security 
or equivalent railroad retirement bene-
fits received, that part is considered social se-
curity (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits 
and may be taxable. For a discussion of the tax-
ability of these benefits, see Other Income  un-
der Miscellaneous Income, later.
You can deduct the amount you spend to 
buy back sick leave for an earlier year to be eli-
gible for nontaxable FECA benefits for that 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject 
to the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 
1040). If you buy back sick leave in the same 
year you used it, the amount reduces your taxa-
ble sick leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.
Qualified Indian health care benefit.  For 
benefits and coverage provided after March 23, 
2010, the value of any qualified Indian health 
care benefit is not taxable. These benefits in-
clude any health service or benefits provided by 
the Indian Health Service, amounts to reim-
burse medical care expenses provided by an 
Indian tribe, coverage under accident or health 
insurance, and any other medical care provided 
by an Indian tribe.
Other compensation.  Many other amounts 
you receive as compensation for sickness or in-
jury are not taxable. These include the following 
amounts.
Compensatory damages you receive for 
physical injury or physical sickness, 
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic 
payments. See Court awards and dam-
ages under Other Income, later.
Benefits you receive under an accident or 
health insurance policy on which either you 
paid the premiums or your employer paid 
the premiums but you had to include them 
in your income.
Disability benefits you receive for loss of 
income or earning capacity as a result of 
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-
icy. 
Compensation you receive for permanent 
loss or loss of use of a part or function of 
your body, or for your permanent disfigure-
ment. This compensation must be based 
only on the injury and not on the period of 
your absence from work. These benefits 
are not taxable even if your employer pays 
for the accident and health plan that pro-
vides these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care.  A reim-
bursement for medical care generally is not tax-
able. However, it may reduce your medical ex-
pense deduction. If you receive reimbursement 
for an expense you deducted in an earlier year, 
see Recoveries, later.
If you receive an “advance reimbursement” 
or “loan” for future medical expenses from your 
employer without regard to whether you suf-
fered a personal injury or sickness or incurred 
medical expenses, that amount is included in 
your income, whether or not you incur unin-
sured medical expenses during the year.
Reimbursements received under your em-
ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the 
plan was established are included in income.
Amounts you receive under a reimburse-
ment plan that provides for the payment of un-
used reimbursement amounts in cash or other 
benefits are included in your income. However, 
a qualified HSA distribution from a health flexi-
ble spending account or health reimbursement 
account can be made to a health savings ac-
count. For details, see Publication 969.
Miscellaneous Income
This section discusses various types of income. 
You may have taxable income from certain 
transactions even if no money changes hands. 
For example, you may have taxable income if 
you lend money at a below-market interest rate 
or have a debt you owe canceled.
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or serv-
ices. You must include in your income, at the 
time received, the fair market value of property 
or services you receive in bartering. If you ex-
change services with another person and you 
both have agreed ahead of time on the value of 
the services, that value will be accepted as fair 
market value unless the value can be shown to 
be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on Sched-
ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However, 
if the barter involves an exchange of something 
other than services, such as in Example 4, later, 
you may have to use another form or schedule 
instead.
Example 1. You are a self-employed attor-
ney who performs legal services for a client, a 
small corporation. The corporation gives you 
shares of its stock as payment for your serv-
ices. You must include the fair market value of 
the shares in your income on Schedule C or 
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you re-
ceive them.
Example 2.  You are a self-employed ac-
countant. You and a house painter are mem-
bers of a barter club. Members get in touch with 
each other directly and bargain for the value of 
the services to be performed. In return for ac-
counting services you provided, the house 
painter painted your home. You must report as 
your income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040) the fair market value of the house 
painting services you received. The house 
painter must include in income the fair market 
value of the accounting services you provided.
Example 3.  You are self-employed and a 
member of a barter club. The club uses credit 
units as a means of exchange. It adds credit 
units to your account for goods or services you 
provide to members, which you can use to pur-
chase goods or services offered by other mem-
bers of the barter club. The club subtracts credit 
units from your account when you receive 
goods or services from other members. You 
must include in your income the value of the 
credit units that are added to your account, 
even though you may not actually receive 
goods or services from other members until a 
later tax year.
Example 4.  You own a small apartment 
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of 
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art 
she created. You must report as rental income 
on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market 
value of the artwork, and the artist must report 
as income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
Page 19 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 19

(Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart-
ment.
Form 1099-B from barter exchange.  If you 
exchanged property or services through a bar-
ter exchange, Form 1099-B, or a similar state-
ment from the barter exchange should be sent 
to you by February 18, 2014. It should show the 
value of cash, property, services, credits, or 
scrip you received from exchanges during 
2013. The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 
1099-B.
Backup withholding.  In most cases the in-
come you receive from bartering is not subject 
to regular income tax withholding. However, 
backup withholding will apply in certain circum-
stances to ensure that income tax is collected 
on this income.
Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
change must withhold, as income tax, 28% of 
the income if:
You do not give the barter exchange your 
taxpayer identification number (generally a 
social security number or an employer 
identification number), or
The IRS notifies the barter exchange that 
you gave it an incorrect identification num-
ber. 
If you join a barter exchange, you must certify 
under penalties of perjury that your taxpayer 
identification number is correct and that you are 
not subject to backup withholding. If you do not 
make this certification, backup withholding may 
begin immediately. The barter exchange will 
give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayer 
Identification Number and Certification, or a 
similar form, for you to make this certification. 
The barter exchange will withhold tax only up to 
the amount of any cash paid to you or depos-
ited in your account and any scrip or credit is-
sued to you (and converted to cash).
If tax is withheld from your barter in-
come, the barter exchange will report 
the amount of tax withheld on Form 
1099-B, or similar statement.
Canceled Debts
In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled or 
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you 
must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. You have no income from the canceled 
debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt in-
cludes any indebtedness for which you are lia-
ble or which attaches to property you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the 
canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a 
business debt, report the amount on Sched-
ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on 
Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Farming, if the debt is farm debt and you are a 
farmer).
You may be able to elect to recognize a can-
celed business debt in income over a 5-tax-year 
period if the income is realized in a reacquisition 
in 2009 or 2010. For information on this elec-
tion, see Revenue Procedure 2009-37 available 
at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-36_IRB/ar07.html.
TIP
Form 1099-C.  If a Federal Government 
agency, financial institution, or credit union can-
cels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or 
more, you may receive a Form 1099-C, Cancel-
lation of Debt. Form 1099-C, box 2 shows the 
amount of debt either actually or deemed dis-
charged. If you do not agree with the amount re-
ported in box 2, contact your creditor.
Interest included in canceled debt. If any 
interest is forgiven and included in the amount 
of canceled debt in box 2, the amount of inter-
est also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not 
you must include the interest portion of the can-
celed debt in your income depends on whether 
the interest would be deductible if you paid it. 
See Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.
If the interest would not be deductible (such 
as interest on a personal loan), include in your 
income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If 
the interest would be deductible (such as on a 
business loan), include in your income the net 
amount of the canceled debt (the amount 
shown in box 2 less the interest amount shown 
in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.  If your financial 
institution offers a discount for the early pay-
ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of the 
discount is canceled debt. You must include the 
canceled amount in your income.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage 
(recourse debt), and you are relieved of the 
mortgage when you dispose of the property, 
you may realize gain or loss up to the fair mar-
ket value of the property. To the extent the 
mortgage discharge exceeds the fair market 
value of the property, it is income from dis-
charge of indebtedness unless it qualifies for 
exclusion under Excluded debt , later. Report 
any income from discharge of indebtedness on 
nonbusiness debt that does not qualify for ex-
clusion as other income on Form 1040, line 21.
You may be able to exclude part of the 
mortgage relief on your principal resi-
dence. See Excluded debt, later.
If you are not personally liable for a mort-
gage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved 
of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-
erty (such as through foreclosure), that relief is 
included in the amount you realize. You may 
have a taxable gain if the amount you realize 
exceeds your adjusted basis in the property. 
Report any gain on nonbusiness property as a 
capital gain.
See Publication 4681 for more information.
Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in 
a corporation and the corporation cancels or 
forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a 
constructive distribution that is generally divi-
dend income to you. For more information, see 
Publication 542, Corporations.
If you are a stockholder in a corporation and 
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
tion, you generally do not realize income. This 
is because the canceled debt is considered as 
a contribution to the capital of the corporation 
equal to the amount of debt principal that you 
canceled.
TIP
Repayment of canceled debt. If you included 
a canceled amount in your income and later pay 
the debt, you may be able to file a claim for re-
fund for the year the amount was included in in-
come. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if the 
statute of limitations for filing a claim is still 
open. The statute of limitations generally does 
not end until 3 years after the due date of your 
original return.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclusion of 
canceled debt in income. These are explained 
next.
Student loans.  Certain student loans contain 
a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to 
attend the qualified educational institution will 
be canceled if you work for a certain period of 
time in certain professions for any of a broad 
class of employers.
You do not have income if your student loan 
is canceled after you agreed to this provision 
and then performed the services required. To 
qualify, the loan must have been made by:
1. The Federal Government, a state or local 
government, or an instrumentality, agency, 
or subdivision thereof,
2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation 
that has assumed control of a state, 
county, or municipal hospital, and whose 
employees are considered public employ-
ees under state law, or
3. An educational institution:
a. Under an agreement with an entity de-
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the 
funds to the institution to make the 
loan, or
b. As part of a program of the institution 
designed to encourage students to 
serve in occupations or areas with un-
met needs and under which the serv-
ices provided are for or under the di-
rection of a governmental unit or a 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organi-
zation (defined later).
A loan to refinance a qualified student loan 
also will qualify if it was made by an educational 
institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organ-
ization under its program designed as descri-
bed in (3)(b) earlier.
An educational institution is an organization 
with a regular faculty and curriculum and a reg-
ularly enrolled body of students in attendance at 
the place where the educational activities are 
carried on.
A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor-
poration, community chest, fund, or foundation 
organized and operated exclusively for one or 
more of the following purposes.
Charitable.
Educational.
Fostering national or international amateur 
sports competition (but only if none of the 
organization's activities involve providing 
athletic facilities or equipment).
Literary.
Preventing cruelty to children or animals.
Page 20 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20 Publication 525 (2013)

Religious.
Scientific.
Testing for public safety.
Exception. You do have income if your stu-
dent loan was made by an educational institu-
tion and is canceled because of services you 
performed for the institution or other organiza-
tion that provided the funds.
Education loan repayment assistance. 
Education loan repayments made to you by the 
National Health Service Corps Loan Repay-
ment Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Pro-
gram), a state education loan repayment pro-
gram eligible for funds under the Public Health 
Service Act, or any other state loan repayment 
or loan forgiveness program that is intended to 
provide for the increased availability of health 
services in underserved or health professional 
shortage areas are not taxable.
Deductible debt.  You do not have income 
from the cancellation of a debt if your payment 
of the debt would be deductible. This exception 
applies only if you use the cash method of ac-
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 
of Publication 334.
Price reduced after purchase.  In most ca-
ses, if the seller reduces the amount of debt you 
owe for property you purchased, you do not 
have income from the reduction. The reduction 
of the debt is treated as a purchase price ad-
justment and reduces your basis in the prop-
erty.
Excluded debt.  Do not include a canceled 
debt in your gross income in the following situa-
tions.
The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case 
under Title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-
cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. 
The debt is canceled when you are insol-
vent. However, you cannot exclude any 
amount of canceled debt that is more than 
the amount by which you are insolvent. 
See Publication 908.
The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 
of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. 
The debt is qualified real property business 
debt. See chapter 5 of Publication 334.
The cancellation is intended as a gift.
The debt is qualified principal residence in-
debtedness, discussed next.
Qualified principal residence indebted-
ness (QPRI).  This is debt secured by your 
principal residence that you took out to buy, 
build, or substantially improve your principal 
residence. QPRI cannot be more than the cost 
of your principal residence plus improvements.
You must reduce the basis of your principal 
residence by the amount excluded from gross 
income. To claim the exclusion, you must file 
Form 982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to 
Discharge of Indebtedness (and Section1082 
Basis Adjustment), with your tax return.
Principal residence.  Your principal resi-
dence is the home where you ordinarily live 
most of the time. You can have only one princi-
pal residence at any one time.
Amount eligible for exclusion.  The maxi-
mum amount you can treat as QPRI is $2 mil-
lion ($1 million if married filing separately). You 
cannot exclude debt canceled because of serv-
ices performed for the lender or on account of 
any other factor not directly related to a decline 
in the value of your residence or to your finan-
cial condition.
Limitation. If only part of a loan is QPRI, 
the exclusion applies only to the extent the can-
celed amount is more than the amount of the 
loan immediately before the cancellation that is 
not QPRI.
Example.  Your principal residence is se-
cured by a debt of $1 million, of which $800,000 
is QPRI. Your residence is sold for $700,000 
and $300,000 of debt is canceled. Only 
$100,000 of the canceled debt may be exclu-
ded from income (the $300,000 that was dis-
charged minus the $200,000 of nonqualified 
debt).
Host or Hostess
If you host a party or event at which sales are 
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving 
the event is a payment for helping a direct seller 
make sales. You must report this item as in-
come at its fair market value.
Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment 
expenses. These expenses are deductible as 
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to 
the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
but only up to the amount of income you receive 
for giving the party.
For more information about the 50% limit for 
meal and entertainment expenses, see 50% 
Limit in Publication 463.
Life Insurance Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of 
the death of the insured person are not taxable 
unless the policy was turned over to you for a 
price. This is true even if the proceeds were 
paid under an accident or health insurance pol-
icy or an endowment contract. However, inter-
est income received as a result of life insurance 
proceeds may be taxable.
Proceeds not received in installments.  If 
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or 
other than at regular intervals, include in your 
income only the benefits that are more than the 
amount payable to you at the time of the in-
sured person's death. If the benefit payable at 
death is not specified, you include in your in-
come the benefit payments that are more than 
the present value of the payments at the time of 
death.
Proceeds received in installments. If you re-
ceive life insurance proceeds in installments, 
you can exclude part of each installment from 
your income.
To determine the excluded part, divide the 
amount held by the insurance company (gener-
ally the total lump sum payable at the death of 
the insured person) by the number of install-
ments to be paid. Include anything over this ex-
cluded part in your income as interest.
Example. The face amount of the policy is 
$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-
ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. 
The excluded part of each installment is $625 
($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year. 
The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or 
$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to 
you.
Installments for life.  If, as the beneficiary 
under an insurance contract, you are entitled to 
receive the proceeds in installments for the rest 
of your life without a refund or period-certain 
guarantee, you figure the excluded part of each 
installment by dividing the amount held by the 
insurance company by your life expectancy. If 
there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, 
the amount held by the insurance company for 
this purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of 
the guarantee.
Surviving spouse. If your spouse died be-
fore October 23, 1986, and insurance proceeds 
paid to you because of the death of your 
spouse are received in installments, you can 
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you 
can continue to take the exclusion.
Employer-owned life insurance contract.  If 
you are the policyholder of an employer-owned 
life insurance contract, you must include in in-
come any life insurance proceeds received that 
are more than the premiums and any other 
amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject 
to this rule if you have a trade or business, you 
own a life insurance contract on the life of your 
employee, and you (or a related person) are a 
beneficiary under the contract.
However, you may exclude the full amount 
of the life insurance proceeds if the following 
apply.
1. Before the policy is issued, you provide 
written notice about the insurance to the 
employee and the employee provides writ-
ten consent to be insured.
2. Either:
a. The employee was your employee 
within the 12-month period before 
death, or, at the time the contract was 
issued, was a director or highly com-
pensated employee, or
b. The amount is paid to the family or 
designated beneficiary of the em-
ployee.
Interest option on insurance.  If an insurance 
company pays you interest only on proceeds 
from life insurance left on deposit, the interest 
you are paid is taxable.
If your spouse died before October 23, 
1986, and you chose to receive only the interest 
from your insurance proceeds, the $1,000 inter-
est exclusion for a surviving spouse does not 
apply. If you later decide to receive the pro-
ceeds from the policy in installments, you can 
take the interest exclusion from the time you be-
gin to receive the installments.
Page 21 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 21

Surrender of policy for cash.  If you surren-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you must in-
clude in income any proceeds that are more 
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In most 
cases, your cost (or investment in the contract) 
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life 
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, 
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were 
not included in your income.
You should receive a Form 1099-R showing 
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report 
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form 
1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
For information on when the proceeds 
are excluded from income, see Accel-
erated Death Benefits, later.
Split-dollar life insurance.  In most cases, a 
split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-
rangement between an owner and a non-owner 
of a life insurance contract under which either 
party to the arrangement pays all or part of the 
premiums, and one of the parties paying the 
premiums is entitled to recover all or part of 
those premiums from the proceeds of the con-
tract. There are two mutually exclusive regimes 
to tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.
1. Under the economic benefit regime, the 
owner of the life insurance contract is trea-
ted as providing current life insurance pro-
tection and other taxable economic bene-
fits to the non-owner of the contract.
2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner of 
the life insurance contract is treated as 
loaning premium payments to the owner of 
the contract.
Only one of these regimes applies to any one 
policy. For more information, see sections 
1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.
Endowment Contract Proceeds
An endowment contract is a policy under which 
you are paid a specified amount of money on a 
certain date unless you die before that date, in 
which case, the money is paid to your designa-
ted beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in a 
lump-sum to you at maturity are taxable only if 
the proceeds are more than the cost of the pol-
icy. To determine your cost, subtract any 
amount that you previously received under the 
contract and excluded from your income from 
the total premiums (or other consideration) paid 
for the contract. Include the part of the 
lump-sum payment that is more than your cost 
in your income.
Endowment proceeds that you choose to re-
ceive in installments instead of a lump-sum pay-
ment at the maturity of the policy are taxed as 
an annuity. This is explained in Publication 575. 
For this treatment to apply, you must choose to 
receive the proceeds in installments before re-
ceiving any part of the lump sum. This election 
must be made within 60 days after the 
lump-sum payment first becomes payable to 
you.
TIP
Accelerated Death Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death 
benefits under a life insurance contract or viati-
cal settlement before the insured's death are 
excluded from income if the insured is termi-
nally or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-
ment of any part of the death benefit under a life 
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person 
who regularly engages in the business of buy-
ing or taking assignment of life insurance con-
tracts on the lives of insured individuals who are 
terminally or chronically ill and who meets the 
requirements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.  Accelerated 
death benefits are fully excludable if the insured 
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who 
has been certified by a physician as having an 
illness or physical condition that can reasonably 
be expected to result in death within 24 months 
from the date of the certification.
Exclusion for chronic illness.  If the insured 
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminally 
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis 
of costs incurred for qualified long-term care 
services are fully excludable. Accelerated death 
benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic 
basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit ap-
plies to the total of the accelerated death bene-
fits and any periodic payments received from 
long-term care insurance contracts. For infor-
mation on the limit and the definitions of chroni-
cally ill individual, qualified long-term care serv-
ices, and long-term care insurance contracts, 
see Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts  un-
der Sickness and Injury Benefits, earlier.
Exception. The exclusion does not apply to 
any amount paid to a person (other than the in-
sured) who has an insurable interest in the life 
of the insured because the insured:
Is a director, officer, or employee of the 
person, or
Has a financial interest in the person's 
business.
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem  or 
other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 
with your return. You do not have to file Form 
8853 to exclude accelerated death benefits 
paid on the basis of actual expenses incurred.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you deduc-
ted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The 
most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc-
tions. You also may have recoveries of 
non-itemized deductions (such as payments on 
previously deducted bad debts) and recoveries 
of items for which you previously claimed a tax 
credit.
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recovery 
in your income in the year you receive it up to 
the amount by which the deduction or credit you 
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax 
in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
crease to an amount carried over to the current 
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is 
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year.
Federal income tax refund.  Refunds of fed-
eral income taxes are not included in your in-
come because they are never allowed as a de-
duction from income.
State tax refund. If you received a state or lo-
cal income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 
2013, you generally must include it in income if 
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The 
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-
ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2014. 
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form 
1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the work-
sheet in the 2013 Form 1040 instructions for 
line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to include in 
your income. See Itemized Deduction Recover-
ies, later, for when you must use Worksheet 2, 
later in this publication.
If you could choose to deduct for a tax year 
either:
State and local income taxes, or
State and local general sales taxes, then
the maximum refund that you may have to in-
clude in income is limited to the excess of the 
tax you chose to deduct for that year over the 
tax you did not choose to deduct for that year.
Example 1.  For 2012 you can choose an 
$11,000 state income tax deduction or a 
$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You 
choose to deduct the state income tax. In 2013 
you receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. 
The maximum refund that you may have to in-
clude in income is $1,000, since you could have 
deducted $10,000 in state general sales tax.
Example 2.  For 2012 you can choose an 
$11,500 state general sales tax deduction 
based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state 
income tax deduction. You choose to deduct 
the general sales tax deduction. In 2013 you re-
turn an item you had purchased and receive a 
$500 sales tax refund. In 2013 you also receive 
a $1,500 state income tax refund. The maxi-
mum refund that you may have to include in in-
come is $500, since it is less than the excess of 
the tax deducted ($11,500) over the tax you did 
not choose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = 
$9,700). Since you did not choose to deduct the 
state income tax, you do not include the state 
income tax refund in income.
Mortgage interest refund.  If you received a 
refund or credit in 2013 of mortgage interest 
paid in an earlier year, the amount should be 
shown in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage In-
terest Statement. Do not subtract the refund 
amount from the interest you paid in 2013. You 
may have to include it in your income under the 
rules explained in the following discussions.
Interest on recovery.  Interest on any of the 
amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
est income in the year received. For example, 
Page 22 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22 Publication 525 (2013)

report any interest you received on state or lo-
cal income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a or 
Form 1040NR, line 9a.
Recovery and expense in same year.  If the 
refund or other recovery and the expense occur 
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
duction or credit and is not reported as income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.  If you receive 
a refund or other recovery that is for amounts 
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must 
allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered 
amount between the years in which you paid it. 
This allocation is necessary to determine the 
amount of recovery from any earlier years and 
to determine the amount, if any, of your allowa-
ble deduction for this item for the current year.
Example. You paid 2012 estimated state 
income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments. 
You made your fourth payment in January 
2013. You had no state income tax withheld 
during 2012. In 2013, you received a $400 tax 
refund based on your 2012 state income tax re-
turn. You claimed itemized deductions each 
year on Schedule A (Form 1040).
You must allocate the $400 refund between 
2012 and 2013, the years in which you paid the 
tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75% 
($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2012, 
so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for 
amounts you paid in 2012 and is a recovery 
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery 
item, you will include $300 on Form 1040, 
line 10, for 2013, and attach a copy of your 
computation showing why that amount is less 
than the amount shown on the Form 1099-G 
you received from the state.
The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for 
your January 2013 estimated tax payment. 
When you figure your deduction for state and 
local income taxes paid during 2013, you will 
reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. 
Your deduction for state and local income taxes 
paid during 2013 will include the January net 
amount of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any esti-
mated state income taxes paid in 2013 for 
2013, and any state income tax withheld during 
2013.
Joint state or local income tax return.  If you 
filed a joint state or local income tax return in an 
earlier year and you are not filing a joint Form 
1040 with the same person for 2013, any refund 
of a deduction claimed on that state or local in-
come tax return must be allocated to the person 
that paid the expense. If both persons paid a 
portion of the expense, allocate the refund 
based on your individual portion. For example, 
if you paid 25% of the expense, then you would 
use 25% of the refund to figure if you must in-
clude any portion of the refund in your income.
Registered domestic partners (RDPs) domi-
ciled in community property states.  For the 
rules that apply to RDPs who are domiciled in 
community property states, see Publication 
555, Community Property, and Form 8958, Allo-
cation of Tax Amounts Between Certain Individ-
uals in Community Property States.
Deductions not itemized.  If you did not item-
ize deductions for the year for which you re-
ceived the recovery of an expense that was de-
ductible only if you itemized, do not include any 
of the recovery amount in your income.
Example. You claimed the standard deduc-
tion on your 2012 federal income tax return. In 
2013 you received a refund of your 2012 state 
income tax. Do not report any of the refund as 
income because you did not itemize deductions 
for 2012.
Itemized Deduction Recoveries
The following discussion explains how to deter-
mine the amount to include in your income from 
a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier 
year as an itemized deduction. However, you 
generally do not need to use this discussion if 
you file Form 1040 and the recovery is for state 
or local income taxes paid in 2012. Instead, use 
the worksheet in the 2013 Form 1040 instruc-
tions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) to 
include in your income.
You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet 
and must use this discussion if you are a non-
resident alien (discussed later) or any of the fol-
lowing statements are true.
1. You received a refund in 2013 that is for a 
tax year other than 2012.
2. You received a refund other than an in-
come tax refund, such as a general sales 
tax or real property tax refund, in 2013 of 
an amount deducted or credit claimed in 
an earlier year.
3. The amount on your 2012 Form 1040, 
line 42 was more than the amount on your 
2012 Form 1040, line 41.
4. You had taxable income on your 2012 
Form 1040, line 43, but no tax on your 
Form 1040, line 44, because of the 0% tax 
rate on net capital gain and qualified divi-
dends in certain situations. See Capital 
gains, later.
5. Your 2012 state and local income tax re-
fund is more than your 2012 state and lo-
cal income tax deduction minus the 
amount you could have deducted as your 
2012 state and local general sales taxes.
6. You made your last payment of 2012 esti-
mated state or local income tax in 2013.
7. You owed alternative minimum tax in 
2012.
8. You could not use the full amount of cred-
its you were entitled to in 2012 because 
the total credits were more than the 
amount shown on your 2012 Form 1040, 
line 46.
9. You could be claimed as a dependent by 
someone else in 2012.
10. You received a refund because of a 
jointly-filed state or local income tax re-
turn, but you are not filing a joint 2013 
Form 1040 with the same person.
If you also recovered an amount de-
ducted as a non-itemized deduction, 
figure the amount of that recovery to 
include in your income and add it to your adjus-
ted gross income before applying the rules ex-
plained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction Re-
coveries, later.
Nonresident aliens.  If you are a nonresident 
alien and file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you 
cannot claim the standard deduction. If you re-
cover an itemized deduction that you claimed in 
an earlier year, you generally must include the 
full amount of the recovery in your income in the 
year you receive it. However, if you had no tax-
able income in that earlier year (see Negative 
taxable income , later), you should complete 
Worksheet 2 to determine the amount you must 
include in income. If any other statement under 
Total recovery included in income  is not true, 
see the discussion referenced in the statement 
to determine the amount to include in income.
Capital gains.  If you determined your tax in 
the earlier year by using the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Cap-
ital Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
fund in 2013 of a deduction claimed in that year, 
you will have to recompute your tax for the ear-
lier year to determine if the recovery must be in-
cluded in your income. If inclusion of the recov-
ery does not change your total tax, you do not 
include the recovery in income. However, if 
your total tax increases by any amount, you 
must include the recovery in your income up to 
the amount of the deduction that reduced your 
tax in the earlier year.
Total recovery included in income. If you re-
cover any itemized deduction that you claimed 
in an earlier year, you generally must include 
the full amount of the recovery in your income in 
the year you receive it. This rule applies if, for 
the earlier year, all of the following statements 
are true.
1. Your itemized deductions exceeded the 
standard deduction by at least the amount 
of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-
tions did not exceed the standard deduc-
tion by at least the amount of the recovery, 
see Standard deduction limit, later.)
2. You had taxable income. (If you had no 
taxable income, see Negative taxable in-
come, later.)
3. Your deduction for the item recovered 
equals or exceeds the amount recovered. 
(If your deduction was less than the 
amount recovered, see Recovery limited 
to deduction, later.)
4. Your itemized deductions were not subject 
to the limit on itemized deductions. (If your 
deductions were limited, see Itemized de-
ductions limited, later.)
5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you had 
unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-
its, later.)
6. You were not subject to alternative mini-
mum tax. (If you were subject to alterna-
tive minimum tax, see Subject to alterna-
tive minimum tax, later.)
CAUTION
!
Page 23 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 23

If any of the earlier statements is not true, 
see Total recovery not included in income, later.
State tax refund.  In addition to the previ-
ous six items, you must include in your income 
the full amount of a refund of state or local in-
come tax or general sales tax if the excess of 
the tax you deducted over the tax you did not 
deduct is more than the refund of the tax deduc-
ted.
If the refund is more than the excess, see 
Total recovery not included in income, later.
Where to report.  Enter your state or local 
income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and 
the total of all other recoveries as other income 
on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 
1040A or Form 1040EZ.
If you file Form 1040NR, enter your state or 
local income tax refund on line 11 and the total 
of all other recoveries on line 21. If you file Form 
1040NR-EZ, enter your state or local income 
tax refund on line 4.
Example. For 2012, you filed a joint return 
on Form 1040. Your taxable income was 
$60,000 and you were not entitled to any tax 
credits. Your standard deduction was $11,900, 
and you had itemized deductions of $14,000. In 
2013, you received the following recoveries for 
amounts deducted on your 2012 return:
Medical expenses ................... $200 
State and local income tax refund ......... 400 
Refund of mortgage interest ............ 325 
Total recoveries ..................... $925 
None of the recoveries were more than the 
deductions taken for 2012. The difference be-
tween the state and local income tax you de-
ducted and your local general sales tax was 
more than $400.
Your total recoveries are less than the 
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-
ceeded the standard deduction ($14,000 − 
$11,900 = $2,100), so you must include your to-
tal recoveries in your income for 2013. Report 
the state and local income tax refund of $400 
on Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your 
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21.
Total recovery not included in income.  If 
one or more of the six statements listed in the 
preceding discussion  is not true, you may be 
able to exclude at least part of the recovery 
from your income. See the discussion refer-
enced in the statement. You may be able to use 
Worksheet 2, later, to determine the part of your 
recovery to include in your income. You also 
can use Worksheet 2 to determine the part of a 
state tax refund (discussed earlier) to include in 
income.
Allocating the included part.  If you are 
not required to include all of your recoveries in 
your income, and you have both a state income 
tax refund and other itemized deduction recov-
eries, you must allocate the taxable recoveries 
between the state income tax refund you report 
on Form 1040, line 10 (Form 1040NR, line 11), 
and the amount you report as other income on 
Form 1040, line 21 (Form 1040NR, line 21). If 
you do not use Worksheet 2, make the alloca-
tion as follows.
1. Divide your state income tax refund by the 
total of all your itemized deduction recov-
eries.
2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries 
by the percentage in (1). This is the 
amount you report as a state income tax 
refund.
3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the 
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the 
amount you report as other income.
Example. In 2013 you recovered $2,500 of 
your 2012 itemized deductions claimed on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), but the recoveries 
you must include in your 2013 income are only 
$1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 was 
due to your state income tax refund. Your state 
income tax was more than your state general 
sales tax by $600. The amount you report as a 
state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is $300 
[($500 ÷ $2,500) × $1,500]. The balance of the 
taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported as other 
income on Form 1040, line 21.
Standard deduction limit.  You generally are 
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you 
do not itemize your deductions. Only your item-
ized deductions that are more than your stand-
ard deduction are subject to the recovery rule 
(unless you are required to itemize your deduc-
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier 
year return were not more than your income for 
that year, include in your income this year the 
lesser of:
Your recoveries, or
The amount by which your itemized deduc-
tions exceeded the standard deduction.
Standard deduction for earlier years.  To 
determine if amounts recovered in 2013 must 
be included in your income, you must know the 
standard deduction for your filing status for the 
year the deduction was claimed. Look in the in-
structions for your tax return from prior years to 
locate the standard deduction for the filing sta-
tus for that prior year. If you filed Form 1040NR 
or 1040NR-EZ, you could not claim the stand-
ard deduction.
Example. You filed a joint return on Form 
1040 for 2012 with taxable income of $45,000. 
Your itemized deductions were $12,350. The 
standard deduction that you could have claimed 
was $11,900. In 2013, you recovered $2,100 of 
your 2012 itemized deductions. None of the re-
coveries were more than the actual deductions 
for 2012. Include $450 of the recoveries in your 
2013 income. This is the smaller of your recov-
eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your 
itemized deductions were more than the stand-
ard deduction ($12,350 − $11,900 = $450).
Negative taxable income.  If your taxable in-
come for the prior year ( Worksheet 2 , line 10) 
was a negative amount, the recovery you must 
include in income is reduced by that amount. 
You have a negative taxable income for 2012 if 
your:
Form 1040, line 42 was more than line 41,
Form 1040NR, line 40 was more than 
line 39, or
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than 
line 12.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example except line 42 was $200 
more than line 41 on your 2012 Form 1040 giv-
ing you a negative taxable income of $200. You 
must include $250 in your 2013 income, rather 
than $450.
Recovery limited to deduction.  You do not 
include in your income any amount of your re-
covery that is more than the amount you deduc-
ted in the earlier year. The amount you include 
in your income is limited to the smaller of:
The amount deducted, or
The amount recovered.
Example. During 2012, you paid $1,700 for 
medical expenses. From this amount you sub-
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjus-
ted gross income. Your actual medical expense 
deduction was $200. In 2013, you received a 
$500 reimbursement from your medical insur-
ance for your 2012 expenses. The only amount 
of the $500 reimbursement that must be inclu-
ded in your income for 2013 is $200—the 
amount actually deducted.
Itemized deductions limited.  You were sub-
ject to the limit on itemized deductions in the 
earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI) 
was more than a base amount. The amount of 
the limitation for 2009 was $166,800 ($83,400 if 
married filing separately). For 2012, 2011, and 
2010, there were no limits on itemized deduc-
tions.
If the itemized deduction limit applied in 
2009, your itemized deductions were reduced 
by the smaller of the following amounts.
3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
ceeded the base amount.
80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-
tions other than medical and dental expen-
ses, investment interest expense, nonbusi-
ness casualty and theft losses, and 
gambling losses.
In 2009, your itemized deductions were re-
duced by 13 of the smaller amount.
If the amount you recovered was deducted 
in a year in which your itemized deductions 
were limited, you must include it in income up to 
the difference between the amount of itemized 
deductions actually allowed that year and the 
amount you would have been allowed (the 
greater of your itemized deductions or your 
standard deduction) if you had figured your de-
ductions using only the net amount of the recov-
ery item.
To determine the part of the recovery you 
must include in income, follow the two steps be-
low.
1. Figure the greater of:
a. The standard deduction for the earlier 
year, or
b. The amount of itemized deductions 
you would have been allowed for the 
earlier year (after taking into account 
the limit on itemized deductions) if you 
had figured them using only the net 
amount of the recovery item. The net 
amount is the amount you actually 
paid reduced by the recovery amount.
Page 24 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24 Publication 525 (2013)

Note. If you were required to itemize 
your deductions in the earlier year, use 
step 1(b) and not step 1(a).
2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from the 
amount of itemized deductions actually al-
lowed in the earlier year after applying the 
limit on itemized deductions.
The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-
ery to include in your income for the year you 
receive the recovery. If your taxable income for 
the earlier year was a negative amount, reduce 
your recovery by the negative amount.
If you had unused tax credits in the earlier 
year, see Unused tax credits, later.
For more information on this computation, 
see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in Cu-
mulative Bulletin 1993-2.
Unused tax credits. If you recover an item de-
ducted in an earlier year in which you had un-
used tax credits, you must refigure the earlier 
year's tax to determine if you must include the 
recovery in your income. To do this, add the 
amount of the recovery to your earlier year's 
taxable income and refigure the tax and the 
credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-
computed tax, after application of the credits, is 
more than the actual tax in the earlier year, in-
clude the recovery in your income up to the 
amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in 
the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase 
to a credit carried over to the current year that 
resulted from deducting the recovered amount 
in the earlier year is considered to have re-
duced your tax in the earlier year. If the recov-
ery is for an itemized deduction claimed in a 
year in which the deductions were limited, see 
Itemized deductions limited, earlier.
If your tax, after application of the credits, 
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit 
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery 
in your income.
Example. In 2011, Jean Black filed as head 
of household and itemized her deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). Her taxable income 
was $5,260 and her tax was $528. She claimed 
a child care credit of $1,200. The credit reduced 
her tax to zero and she had an unused tax 
credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 2012, Jean 
recovered $1,000 of her itemized deductions. 
She reduces her 2011 itemized deductions by 
$1,000 and recomputes that year's tax on taxa-
ble income of $6,260. However, the child care 
credit exceeds the recomputed tax of $628. 
Jean's tax liability for 2011 is not changed by re-
ducing her deductions by the recovery. She did 
not have a tax benefit from the recovered de-
duction and does not include any of the recov-
ery in her income for 2012.
Subject to alternative minimum tax.  If you 
were subject to the alternative minimum tax in 
the year of the deduction, you will have to re-
compute your tax for the earlier year to deter-
mine if the recovery must be included in your in-
come. This will require a recomputation of your 
regular tax, as shown in the preceding example, 
and a recomputation of your alternative mini-
mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not 
change your total tax, you do not include the re-
covery in your income. However, if your total tax 
increases by any amount, you received a tax 
benefit from the deduction and you must in-
clude the recovery in your income up to the 
amount of the deduction that reduced your tax 
in the earlier year.
Non-Itemized Deduction 
Recoveries
This section discusses recovery of deductions 
other than itemized deductions.
Total recovery included in income. If you re-
cover an amount that you deducted in an earlier 
year when you were figuring your adjusted 
gross income, you generally must include the 
full amount of the recovery in your income in the 
year received.
Total recovery not included in income.  If 
any part of the deduction you took for the recov-
ered amount did not reduce your tax, you may 
be able to exclude at least part of the recovery 
from your income. You must include the recov-
ery in your income only up to the amount of the 
deduction that reduced your tax in the year of 
the deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.)
Negative taxable income.  If your taxable in-
come for the prior year was a negative amount, 
the recovery you must include in income is re-
duced by that amount. You have a negative tax-
able income for 2012 if your:
Form 1040, line 42 was more than line 41,
Form 1040NR, line 40 was more than 
line 39, or
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than 
line 12.
If you had a net operating loss (NOL) in a prior 
year, you will have to adjust your taxable in-
come for any NOL carryover. See Publication 
536 for more information.
Unused tax credits. If you recover an item de-
ducted in an earlier year in which you had un-
used tax credits, you must refigure the earlier 
year's tax to determine if you must include the 
recovery in your income. To do this, add the 
amount of the recovery to your earlier year's 
taxable income and refigure the tax and the 
credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-
computed tax, after application of the credits, is 
more than the actual tax in the earlier year, in-
clude the recovery in your income up to the 
amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in 
the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase 
to a credit carried over to the current year that 
resulted from deducting the recovered amount 
in the earlier year is considered to have re-
duced your tax in the earlier year.
If your tax, after application of the credits, 
does not change, you did not have a tax benefit 
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery 
in your income.
Capital gains.  If you determined your tax in 
the earlier year by using the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet, or the Qualified Dividends and Cap-
ital Gain Tax Worksheet, and you receive a re-
fund in 2013 of a deduction claimed in that year, 
you will have to recompute your tax for the ear-
lier year to determine if the recovery must be in-
cluded in your income. If inclusion of the recov-
ery does not change your total tax, you do not 
include the recovery in income. However, if 
your total tax increases by any amount, you 
must include the recovery in your income up to 
the amount of the deduction that reduced your 
tax in the earlier year.
Amounts Recovered for Credits
If you received a recovery in 2013 for an item 
for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier 
year, you must increase your 2013 tax by the 
amount of the recovery, up to the amount by 
which the credit reduced your tax in the earlier 
year. You had a recovery if there was a down-
ward price adjustment or similar adjustment on 
the item for which you claimed a credit.
This rule does not apply to the investment 
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of 
these credits are covered by other provisions of 
the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax 
Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture 
of Investment Credit, for details.
Survivor Benefits
In most cases, payments made by or for an em-
ployer because of an employee's death must be 
included in income. The following discussions 
explain the tax treatment of certain payments 
made to survivors. For additional information, 
see Publication 559.
Lump-sum payments.  Lump-sum payments 
you receive from a decedent's employer as the 
surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accrued 
salary payments; distributions from employee 
profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonus 
plans; or other items that should be treated sep-
arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment of 
these lump-sum payments depends on the type 
of payment.
Salary or wages.  Salary or wages re-
ceived after the death of the employee are usu-
ally ordinary income to you.
Qualified employee retirement plans. 
Lump-sum distributions from qualified em-
ployee retirement plans are subject to special 
tax treatment. For information on these distribu-
tions, see Publication 575 (or Publication 721, if 
you are the survivor of a federal employee or re-
tiree).
Public safety officer killed in the line of 
duty. If you are a survivor of a public safety of-
ficer who was killed in the line of duty, you may 
be able to exclude from income certain 
amounts you receive. For this purpose, the term 
public safety officer includes law enforcement 
officers, firefighters, chaplains, and rescue 
squad and ambulance crew members. For 
more information, see Publication 559.
Unemployment Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits 
you receive depends on the type of program 
paying the benefits.
Page 25 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 25

Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
Keep for Your Records
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your 2013 
tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax 
refund from 2012 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2011, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information 
from your tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the 
deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits 
and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that 
was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ................................................. 1.  
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 ............................................ 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................................................................... 3.  
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2012, 
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 29
Form 1040NR, Schedule A, line 15
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 11 ....................................... 4.  
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) ........................ 5.  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ....................................... 6.  
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. 3 If you filed Form 1040NR or 
1040NR-EZ, enter -0-. .......................................... 7.  
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable ............................................ 8.  
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 ..................................................... 9.  
10. Taxable income for prior year4 (2012 Form 1040, line 43; 2012 Form 
1040NR, line 41; 2012 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14) ................... 10.  
11. Amount to include in income for 2013:
If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero).5 ............................ ............................ 11.  
If line 11 equals line 3—
   Enter the amount from line 1 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11; Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
   Enter the amount from line 2 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
   If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11;
    Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
   If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the 
percentage .................................................. A.  
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11 ..................... B.  
C.Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21 ..................... C.  
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your 
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted. 
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes, 
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have 
deducted.
3 See the instructions for prior year forms at www.irs.gov for prior year standard deduction.
4 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable 
income. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses 
for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
5 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 26 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Publication 525 (2013)

Unemployment compensation. You must in-
clude in income all unemployment compensa-
tion you receive. You should receive a Form 
1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy-
ment compensation paid to you. In most cases, 
you enter unemployment compensation on 
line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or 
line 3 of Form 1040EZ.
Types of unemployment compensation. 
Unemployment compensation generally in-
cludes any amount received under an unem-
ployment compensation law of the United 
States or of a state. It includes the following 
benefits.
Benefits paid by a state or the District of 
Columbia from the Federal Unemployment 
Trust Fund.
State unemployment insurance benefits.
Railroad unemployment compensation 
benefits.
Disability payments from a government 
program paid as a substitute for unemploy-
ment compensation. (Amounts received as 
workers' compensation for injuries or ill-
ness are not unemployment compensa-
tion. See Workers' Compensation under 
Sickness and Injury Benefits, earlier.) 
Trade readjustment allowances under the 
Trade Act of 1974.
Unemployment assistance under the Dis-
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act of 1974.
Unemployment assistance under the Air-
line Deregulation Act of 1974 Program.
Governmental program.  If you contribute 
to a governmental unemployment compensa-
tion program and your contributions are not de-
ductible, amounts you receive under the pro-
gram are not included as unemployment 
compensation until you recover your contribu-
tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to 
the program, the entire amount you receive un-
der the program is included in your income.
Repayment of unemployment compen-
sation. If you repaid in 2013 unemployment 
compensation you received in 2013, subtract 
the amount you repaid from the total amount 
you received and enter the difference on line 19 
of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 
of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your 
entry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re-
paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-
tion in 2013 that you included in your income in 
an earlier year, you can deduct the amount re-
paid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you 
itemize deductions. If the amount is more than 
$3,000, see Repayments, later.
Tax withholding. You can choose to have 
federal income tax withheld from your unem-
ployment compensation. To make this choice, 
complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding 
Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax 
will be withheld at 10% of your payment.
If you do not choose to have tax with-
held from your unemployment com-
pensation, you may be liable for esti-
mated tax. If you do not pay enough tax, either 
through withholding or estimated tax, or a com-
bination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. 
For more information, see Publication 505, Tax 
Withholding and Estimated Tax.
Supplemental unemployment benefits.
Benefits received from an employer-financed 
fund (to which the employees did not contrib-
ute) are not unemployment compensation. 
They are taxable as wages and are subject to 
withholding for income tax. They may be sub-
ject to social security and Medicare taxes. For 
more information, see Supplemental Unemploy-
ment Benefits  in section 5 of Publication 15-A, 
Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. Report 
these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 
1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.
Repayment of benefits.  You may have to 
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment 
allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you 
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in 
the same year you receive them, reduce the to-
tal benefits by the amount you repay. If you re-
pay the benefits in a later year, you must in-
clude the full amount of the benefits in your 
income for the year you received them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an 
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. 
(You cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) 
Include the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, 
and enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on 
the dotted line next to line 36. If the amount you 
repay in a later year is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the later year instead of deducting the amount 
repaid. For information on this, see Repay-
ments, later.
Private unemployment fund.  Unemployment 
benefit payments from a private (nonunion) 
fund to which you voluntarily contribute are tax-
able only if the amounts you receive are more 
than your total payments into the fund. Report 
the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.
Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as 
an unemployed member of a union from regular 
union dues are included in your income on 
Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute 
to a special union fund and your payments to 
the fund are not deductible, the unemployment 
benefits you receive from the fund are includible 
in your income only to the extent they are more 
than your contributions.
Guaranteed annual wage.  Payments you re-
ceive from your employer during periods of un-
employment, under a union agreement that 
guarantees you full pay during the year, are tax-
able as wages. Include them on line 7 of Form 
1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 
1040EZ.
State employees.  Payments similar to a 
state's unemployment compensation may be 
made by the state to its employees who are not 
covered by the state's unemployment compen-
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
CAUTION
!
able, do not report them as unemployment 
compensation. Report these payments on Form 
1040, line 21.
Welfare and Other
Public Assistance Benefits
Do not include in your income governmental 
benefit payments from a public welfare fund 
based upon need, such as payments due to 
blindness. Payments from a state fund for the 
victims of crime should not be included in the 
victims' incomes if they are in the nature of wel-
fare payments. Do not deduct medical expen-
ses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You 
must include in your income any welfare pay-
ments that are compensation for services or 
that are obtained fraudulently.
Work-training program.  Payments you re-
ceive from a state welfare agency for taking part 
in a work-training program are not included in 
your income, as long as the payments (exclu-
sive of extra allowances for transportation or 
other costs) do not total more than the public 
welfare benefits you would have received other-
wise. If the payments are more than the welfare 
benefits you would have received, the entire 
amount must be included in your income as wa-
ges.
Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assis-
tance (RTAA) payments.  Payments you re-
ceive from a state agency under the Reemploy-
ment Trade Adjustment Assistance (RTAA) 
must be included in your income. The state 
must send you Form 1099-G to advise you of 
the amount you should include in income. The 
amount should be reported on Form 1040, 
line 21 or Form 1040NR, line 21.
Persons with disabilities.  If you have a disa-
bility, you must include in income compensation 
you receive for services you perform unless the 
compensation is otherwise excluded. However, 
you do not include in income the value of 
goods, services, and cash that you receive, not 
in return for your services, but for your training 
and rehabilitation because you have a disability. 
Excludable amounts include payments for 
transportation and attendant care, such as in-
terpreter services for the deaf, reader services 
for the blind, and services to help individuals 
with an intellectual disability do their work.
Disaster relief grants.  Do not include 
post-disaster grants received under the Disas-
ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in 
your income if the grant payments are made to 
help you meet necessary expenses or serious 
needs for medical, dental, housing, personal 
property, transportation, or funeral expenses. 
Do not deduct casualty losses or medical ex-
penses that are specifically reimbursed by 
these disaster relief grants. If you have deduc-
ted a casualty loss for the loss of your personal 
residence and you later receive a disaster relief 
grant for the loss of the same residence, you 
may have to include part or all of the grant in 
your taxable income. See Recoveries, earlier. 
Unemployment assistance payments under the 
Act are taxable unemployment compensation. 
Page 27 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 27

See Unemployment compensation  under 
Unemployment Benefits, earlier.
Disaster relief payments.  You can exclude 
from income any amount you receive that is a 
qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-
aster relief payment is an amount paid to you:
1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary personal, family, living, or funeral 
expenses that result from a qualified dis-
aster;
2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary expenses incurred for the repair or 
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-
placement of its contents to the extent it is 
due to a qualified disaster;
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or 
sale of transportation as a common carrier 
because of the death or personal physical 
injuries incurred as a result of a qualified 
disaster; or
4. By a federal, state, or local government, or 
agency or instrumentality in connection 
with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
mote the general welfare.
You can exclude this amount only to the extent 
any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not ap-
ply if you were a participant or conspirator in a 
terrorist action or a representative of one.
A qualified disaster is:
A disaster which results from a terrorist or 
military action;
A federally declared disaster; or
A disaster which results from an accident 
involving a common carrier, or from any 
other event, which is determined to be 
catastrophic by the Secretary of the Treas-
ury or his or her delegate.
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster 
is qualified if it is determined by an applicable 
federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-
tance from the federal, state, or local govern-
ment, agency, or instrumentality.
Disaster mitigation payments.  You also 
can exclude from income any amount you re-
ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-
ment. Qualified disaster mitigation payments 
are commonly paid to you in the period immedi-
ately following damage to property as a result of 
a natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation 
payments are used to mitigate (reduce the se-
verity of) potential damage from future natural 
disasters. They are paid to you through state 
and local governments based on the provisions 
of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act or the National 
Flood Insurance Act.
You cannot increase the basis or adjusted 
basis of your property for improvements made 
with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.
Home Affordable Modification Program 
(HAMP). If you benefit from Pay-for-Perform-
ance Success Payments under HAMP, the pay-
ments are not taxable.
Hardest Hit Fund and Emergency Home-
owners' Loan Program. If you receive or ben-
efit from payments made under:
A State Housing Finance agency (State 
HFA) Hardest Hit Fund program in which 
program payments can be used to pay 
mortgage interest, or
An Emergency Homeowners' Loan Pro-
gram (EHLP) administered by the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) or a state.
The payments are not included in gross income 
and are not taxable.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec-
tion 235 of the National Housing Act.  Pay-
ments made under section 235 of the National 
Housing Act for mortgage assistance are not in-
cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest 
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage as-
sistance program cannot be deducted.
Replacement housing payments.  Replace-
ment housing payments made under the Uni-
form Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder-
ally Assisted Programs are not includible in 
gross income, but are includible in the basis of 
the newly acquired property.
Relocation payments and home rehabilita-
tion grants.  A relocation payment under sec-
tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community 
Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to 
a displaced individual moving from a flood-dam-
aged residence to another residence is not in-
cludible in gross income. Home rehabilitation 
grants received by low-income homeowners in 
a defined area under the same act are also not 
includible in gross income.
Indian financing grants.  Nonreimbursable 
grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Act 
of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-
dian-owned economic enterprises on or near 
reservations are not includible in gross income.
Medicare. Medicare benefits received under ti-
tle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not in-
cludible in the gross income of the individuals 
for whom they are paid. This includes basic 
(part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the 
Aged)) and supplementary (part B (Supplemen-
tary Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance 
benefits (OASDI).  OASDI payments under 
section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act 
are not includible in the gross income of the in-
dividuals to whom they are paid. This applies to 
old-age insurance benefits, and insurance ben-
efits for wives, husbands, children, widows, 
widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as 
well as the lump-sum death payment.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food ben-
efits you receive under the Nutrition Program for 
the Elderly are not taxable. If you prepare and 
serve free meals for the program, include in 
your income as wages the cash pay you re-
ceive, even if you are also eligible for food ben-
efits.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
Payments made by a state to qualified people 
to reduce their cost of winter energy use are not 
taxable.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged in 
alphabetical order. Other income items briefly 
discussed below are referenced to publications 
which provide more information.
Activity not for profit.  You must include on 
your return income from an activity from which 
you do not expect to make a profit. An example 
of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you 
operate mostly for recreation and pleasure. En-
ter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-
tions for expenses related to the activity are 
limited. They cannot total more than the income 
you report and can be taken only if you itemize 
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). See 
Not-for-Profit Activities  in chapter 1 of Publica-
tion 535 for information on whether an activity is 
considered carried on for a profit.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.  If you re-
ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income 
fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report 
it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of 
Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The 
state of Alaska sends each recipient a docu-
ment that shows the amount of the payment 
with the check. The amount also is reported to 
the IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on Form 
1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
ceive. Amounts you receive for child support 
are not income to you. For complete informa-
tion, see Publication 504, Divorced or Separa-
ted Individuals.
Below-market loans.  A below-market loan is 
a loan on which no interest is charged or on 
which the interest is charged at a rate below the 
applicable federal rate. If you make a be-
low-market gift or demand loan, you must in-
clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate) 
as interest income on your return. These loans 
are considered a transaction in which you, the 
lender, are treated as having made:
A loan to the borrower in exchange for a 
note that requires the payment of interest 
at the applicable federal rate, and
An additional payment to the borrower, 
which the borrower transfers back to you 
as interest.
Depending on the transaction, the additional 
payment to the borrower is treated as a:
Gift,
Dividend,
Contribution to capital,
Payment of compensation, or
Another type of payment.
The borrower may have to report this payment 
as income, depending on its classification.
For more information on below-market 
loans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Page 28 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28 Publication 525 (2013)

Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your 
income.
Campaign contributions.  These contribu-
tions are not income to a candidate unless they 
are diverted to his or her personal use. To be 
exempt from tax, the contributions must be 
spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund 
for use in future campaigns. However, interest 
earned on bank deposits, dividends received 
on contributed securities, and net gains realized 
on sales of contributed securities are taxable 
and must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. 
Income Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-
zations. Excess campaign funds transferred to 
an office account must be included in the office-
holder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in the 
year transferred.
Canceled sales contract.  If you sell property 
(such as land or a residence) under a contract, 
but the contract is canceled and you return the 
buyer's money in the same tax year as the origi-
nal sale, you have no income from the sale. If 
the contract is canceled and you return the buy-
er's money in a later tax year, you must include 
your gain in your income for the year of the sale. 
When you return the money and take back the 
property in the later year, you treat the transac-
tion as a purchase that gives you a new basis in 
the property equal to the funds you return to the 
buyer.
Special rules apply to the reacquisition of 
real property where a secured indebtedness 
(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. For 
further information, see Repossession in Publi-
cation 537, Installment Sales.
Car pools.  Do not include in your income 
amounts you receive from the passengers for 
driving a car in a car pool to and from work. 
These amounts are considered reimbursement 
for your expenses. However, this rule does not 
apply if you have developed car pool arrange-
ments into a profit-making business of trans-
porting workers for hire.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from 
a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy is 
not income, but you must reduce your basis by 
the amount of the rebate.
Example. You buy a new car for $24,000 
cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from 
the manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income to 
you. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is the 
basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell 
the car and depreciation if you use it for busi-
ness.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
ments. You generally should not report these 
reimbursements on your return unless you are 
figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. 
See Publication 547.
Charitable gift annuities. If you are the bene-
ficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in-
clude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage 
payment in your income.
The payer will report the types of income 
you received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross 
distribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a, 
or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed 
as ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on 
Form 1040, line 16b, or on Form 1040A, 
line 12b. Report the portion taxed as capital 
gain as explained in the Instructions for Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
Child support payments.  You should not re-
port these payments on your return. See Publi-
cation 504 for more information.
Court awards and damages.  To determine if 
settlement amounts you receive by compromise 
or judgment must be included in your income, 
you must consider the item that the settlement 
replaces. The character of the income as ordi-
nary income or capital gain depends on the na-
ture of the underlying claim. Include the follow-
ing as ordinary income.
1. Interest on any award.
2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits 
in most cases.
3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does 
not matter if they relate to a physical injury 
or physical sickness.
4. Amounts received in settlement of pension 
rights (if you did not contribute to the plan).
5. Damages for:
a. Patent or copyright infringement,
b. Breach of contract, or
c. Interference with business operations.
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
tress received to satisfy a claim under Title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery 
is included in gross income.
Do not include in your income compensa-
tory damages for personal physical injury or 
physical sickness (whether received in a lump 
sum or installments).
Emotional distress.  Emotional distress it-
self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, 
but damages you receive for emotional distress 
due to a physical injury or sickness are treated 
as received for the physical injury or sickness. 
Do not include them in your income.
If the emotional distress is due to a personal 
injury that is not due to a physical injury or sick-
ness (for example, unlawful discrimination or in-
jury to reputation), you must include the dam-
ages in your income, except for any damages 
you receive for medical care due to that emo-
tional distress. Emotional distress includes 
physical symptoms that result from emotional 
distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and 
stomach disorders.
Deduction for costs involved in unlawful 
discrimination suits. You may be able to de-
duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
cover a judgment or settlement for a claim of 
unlawful discrimination under various provisions 
of federal, state, and local law listed in Internal 
Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against 
the United States government, or a claim under 
section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. 
You can claim this deduction as an adjustment 
to income on Form 1040, line 36. The following 
rules apply.
The attorney fees and court costs may be 
paid by you or on your behalf in connection 
with the claim for unlawful discrimination, 
the claim against the United States govern-
ment, or the claim under section 1862(b)
(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.
The deduction you are claiming cannot be 
more than the amount of the judgment or 
settlement you are including in income for 
the tax year.
The judgment or settlement to which your 
attorney fees and court costs apply must 
occur after October 22, 2004.
Pre-existing agreement.  If you receive 
damages under a written binding agreement, 
court decree, or mediation award that was in ef-
fect (or issued on or before) September 13, 
1995, do not include in income any of those 
damages received on account of personal inju-
ries or sickness.
Credit card insurance.  In most cases, if you 
receive benefits under a credit card disability or 
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are 
taxable to you. These plans make the minimum 
monthly payment on your credit card account if 
you cannot make the payment due to injury, ill-
ness, disability, or unemployment. Report on 
Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you 
received during the year that is more than the 
amount of the premiums you paid during the 
year.
Down payment assistance.  If you purchase 
a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit 
corporation to make the down payment, that as-
sistance is not included in your income. If the 
corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable 
organization, the assistance is treated as a gift 
and is included in your basis of the house. If the 
corporation does not qualify, the assistance is 
treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase 
price and is not included in your basis.
Employment agency fees.  If you get a job 
through an employment agency, and the fee is 
paid by your employer, the fee is not includible 
in your income if you are not liable for it. How-
ever, if you pay it and your employer reimburses 
you for it, it is includible in your income.
Energy conservation subsidies. You can ex-
clude from gross income any subsidy provided, 
either directly or indirectly, by public utilities for 
the purchase or installation of an energy con-
servation measure for a dwelling unit.
Energy conservation measure.  This in-
cludes installations or modifications that are pri-
marily designed to reduce consumption of elec-
tricity or natural gas, or improve the 
management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit.  This includes a house, 
apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, 
or similar property. If a building or structure con-
tains both dwelling and other units, any subsidy 
must be properly allocated.
Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, 
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal in-
come tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate or 
Page 29 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 29

trust, you may be taxed on your share of its in-
come distributed or required to be distributed to 
you. However, there is never a double tax. Es-
tates and trusts file their returns on Form 1041, 
U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and Trusts, 
and your share of the income is reported to you 
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).
Current income required to be distrib-
uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or 
trust that must distribute all of its current in-
come, you must report your share of the distrib-
utable net income, whether or not you actually 
received it.
Current income not required to be dis-
tributed. If you are the beneficiary of an estate 
or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of 
whether to distribute all or part of the current in-
come, you must report:
All income that is required to be distributed 
to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-
uted, plus
All other amounts actually paid or credited 
to you,
up to the amount of your share of distributable 
net income.
How to report.  Treat each item of income 
the same way that the estate or trust would treat 
it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is 
distributed to you, you report the distribution as 
dividend income on your return. The same rule 
applies to distributions of tax-exempt interest 
and capital gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell 
you the type of items making up your share of 
the estate or trust income and any credits you 
are allowed on your individual income tax re-
turn.
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gen-
erally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.
Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor 
trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over 
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transfer-
red property to the trust.) This rule applies if the 
property (or income from the property) put into 
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the 
grantor or the grantor's spouse.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the 
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at 
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the 
value of the transferred property.
Expenses paid by another.  If your personal 
expenses are paid for by another person, such 
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable 
to you depending upon your relationship with 
that person and the nature of the payment. But 
if the payment makes up for a loss caused by 
that person, and only restores you to the posi-
tion you were in before the loss, the payment is 
not includible in your income.
Exxon Valdez settlement income.  Include in 
your income on Form 1040, line 21, or Form 
1040NR, line 21, any qualified settlement in-
come you receive as a qualified taxpayer. See 
Statement, later. Qualified settlement income is 
any interest and punitive damage awards that 
are:
Otherwise includible in taxable income, 
and
Received in connection with the civil action 
In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV (HRH) 
(Consolidated) (D. Alaska).
You are a qualified taxpayer if you were a 
plaintiff in the civil action mentioned earlier or 
you were a beneficiary of the estate of your 
spouse or a close relative who was such a 
plaintiff and from whom you acquired the right 
to receive qualified settlement income.
The income can be received as a lump sum 
or as periodic payments. You will receive a 
Form 1099-MISC showing the gross amount of 
the settlement income paid to you in the tax 
year.
Contributions to eligible retirement plan.
If you are a qualified taxpayer, you can contrib-
ute all or part of your qualified settlement in-
come, up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement 
plan, including an IRA. Contributions to eligible 
retirement plans, other than a Roth IRA or a 
designated Roth contribution, reduce the quali-
fied settlement income that you must include in 
income. See Statement, later. For more infor-
mation on these contributions, see Publications 
560, 575, and 590.
Legal expenses.  You may be able to de-
duct attorney fees and court costs paid in con-
nection with the civil action. Depending on the 
facts and circumstances, these expenses are 
either claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040) or 
Form 1040NR (Schedule A), or deducted in fig-
uring the income you report on Form 1040, 
line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21. If the qualified 
settlement income was received in connection 
with your trade or business (other than as an 
employee), you can reduce the taxable amount 
of qualified settlement income by these expen-
ses. In all other situations, you can only claim 
these expenses as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 23, or Schedule A (Form 1040NR), 
line 9. For example, an employee or the surviv-
ing spouse or beneficiary of a deceased plaintiff 
would claim the expenses as a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. See 
Statement, next.
Statement. If you report on Form 1040, 
line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21, qualified set-
tlement income that is less than the gross 
amount shown on the Form 1099-MISC, you 
must attach a statement to your tax return. The 
statement must identify and show the gross 
amount of the qualified settlement income, the 
reductions for the amount contributed to an eli-
gible retirement plan or allowable as legal ex-
penses not reported as a miscellaneous item-
ized deduction, and the net amount.
Income averaging. For purposes of the in-
come averaging rules that apply to an individual 
engaged in a farming or fishing business, quali-
fied settlement income is treated as attributable 
to a fishing business for the tax year in which it 
is received. See Schedule J (Form 1040), In-
come Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen, 
and its instructions for more information.
Fees for services.  Include all fees for your 
services in your income. Examples of these 
fees are amounts you receive for services you 
perform as:
A corporate director,
An executor, administrator, or personal 
representative of an estate,
A manager of a trade or business you op-
erated before declaring Chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy,
A notary public, or
An election precinct official.
If you are not an employee and the 
fees for your services from the same 
payor total $600 or more for the year, 
you may receive a Form 1099-MISC.
Corporate director.  Corporate director 
fees are self-employment income. Report these 
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040).
Personal representatives.  All personal 
representatives must include in their gross in-
come fees paid to them from an estate. If you 
are not in the trade or business of being an ex-
ecutor (for instance, you are the executor of a 
friend's or relative's estate), report these fees 
on Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or 
business of being an executor, report these 
fees as self-employment income on Schedule C 
or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not 
includible in income if it is waived.
Manager of trade or business for bank-
ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay-
ments received from your bankruptcy estate for 
managing or operating a trade or business that 
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. 
Report this income on Form 1040, line 21.
Notary public.  Report payments for these 
services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040). These payments are not subject 
to self-employment tax. See the separate in-
structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for de-
tails.
Election precinct official.  You should re-
ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-
ices performed as an election official or election 
worker. Report these payments on line 7 of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 
1040EZ.
Food program payments to daycare provid-
ers. If you operate a daycare service and re-
ceive payments under the Child and Adult Care 
Food Program administered by the Department 
of Agriculture that are not for your services, the 
payments are not included in your income in 
most cases. However, you must include in your 
income any part of the payments you do not 
use to provide food to individuals eligible for 
help under the program.
Foreign currency transactions. If you have a 
gain on a personal foreign currency transaction 
because of changes in exchange rates, you do 
not have to include that gain in your income un-
less it is more than $200. If the gain is more 
than $200, report it as a capital gain.
TIP
Page 30 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30 Publication 525 (2013)

Foster care providers. Payments you receive 
from a state, political subdivision, or a qualified 
foster care placement agency for providing care 
to qualified foster individuals in your home are 
not included in your income in most cases. 
However, you must include in your income pay-
ments received for the care of more than 5 indi-
viduals age 19 or older and certain diffi-
culty-of-care payments.
A qualified foster individual is a person who:
1. Is living in a foster family home, and
2. Was placed there by:
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-
ical subdivisions, or
b. A qualified foster care placement 
agency.
Difficulty-of-care payments.  These are 
additional payments that are designated by the 
payer as compensation for providing the addi-
tional care that is required for physically, men-
tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fos-
ter individuals. A state must determine that the 
additional compensation is needed, and the 
care for which the payments are made must be 
provided in your home.
You must include in your income diffi-
culty-of-care payments received for more than:
10 qualified foster individuals under age 
19, or
5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or 
older.
Maintaining space in home.  If you are 
paid to maintain space in your home for emer-
gency foster care, you must include the pay-
ment in your income.
Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-
ceive payments that you must include in your 
income, you are in business as a foster-care 
provider and you are self-employed. Report the 
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business 
Use of Your Home, to help you determine the 
amount you can deduct for the use of your 
home.
Found property. If you find and keep property 
that does not belong to you that has been lost 
or abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to 
you at its fair market value in the first year it is 
your undisputed possession.
Free tour.  If you received a free tour from a 
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, 
you must include its value in your income. Re-
port the fair market value of the tour on Form 
1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or busi-
ness of organizing tours. You cannot deduct 
your expenses in serving as the voluntary 
leader of the group at the group's request. If you 
organize tours as a trade or business, report the 
tour's value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040).
Gambling winnings.  You must include your 
gambling winnings in your income on Form 
1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-
bling losses you had during the year, but only 
up to the amount of your winnings.
Lotteries and raffles.  Winnings from lot-
teries and raffles are gambling winnings. In ad-
dition to cash winnings, you must include in 
your income the fair market value of bonds, 
cars, houses, and other noncash prizes. How-
ever, the difference between the fair market 
value and the cost of an oil and gas lease ob-
tained from the government through a lottery is 
not includible in income.
Installment payments.  Generally, if you 
win a state lottery prize payable in installments, 
you must include in your gross income the an-
nual payments and any amounts you receive 
designated as interest on the unpaid install-
ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a 
lump sum, you must report the amount you re-
ceive from the sale as ordinary income (Form 
1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.
Form W-2G.  You may have received a 
Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-
ing the amount of your gambling winnings and 
any tax taken out of them. Include the amount 
from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include the 
amount shown in box 4 on Form 1040, line 62, 
as federal income tax withheld.
Gifts and inheritances.  In most cases, prop-
erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri-
tance is not included in your income. However, 
if property you receive this way later produces 
income such as interest, dividends, or rents, 
that income is taxable to you. If property is 
given to a trust and the income from it is paid, 
credited, or distributed to you, that income is 
also taxable to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheri-
tance is the income from the property, that in-
come is taxable to you.
Inherited pension or IRA.  If you inherited 
a pension or an individual retirement arrange-
ment (IRA), you may have to include part of the 
inherited amount in your income. See Survivors 
and Beneficiaries  in Publication 575, if you in-
herited a pension. See What If You Inherit an 
IRA? in Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA.
Expected inheritance. If you sell an inter-
est in an expected inheritance from a living per-
son, include the entire amount you receive in 
gross income on Form 1040, line 21.
Bequest for services.  If you receive cash 
or other property as a bequest for services you 
performed while the decedent was alive, the 
value is taxable compensation.
Gulf oil spill. If you received payments for lost 
wages or income, property damage, or physical 
injury due to the Gulf oil spill, the payment may 
be taxable.
Lost wages or income.  Payments you re-
ceived for lost wages, lost business income, or 
lost profits are taxable.
Property damage. Payments you received 
for property damage are not taxable if the pay-
ments are not more than your adjusted basis in 
the property. If the payments are more than 
your adjusted basis, you will realize a gain. If 
the damage was due to an involuntary conver-
sion, you may defer the tax on the gain if you 
purchase qualified replacement property. See 
Publication 544.
If the payments (including insurance pro-
ceeds) you received, or expect to receive, are 
less than your adjusted basis, you may be able 
to claim a casualty deduction. See Publication 
547.
Physical injury.  Payments you received 
for personal physical injuries or physical sick-
ness are not taxable. This includes payments 
for emotional distress that is attributable to per-
sonal physical injuries or physical sickness. 
Payments for emotional distress that is not at-
tributable to personal physical injuries or physi-
cal sickness are taxable.
More information.  For the most recent 
guidance, go to IRS.gov and enter “Gulf Oil 
Spill” in the search box.
Historic preservation grants.  Do not include 
in your income any payment you receive under 
the National Historic Preservation Act to pre-
serve a historically significant property.
Hobby losses.  Losses from a hobby are not 
deductible from other income. A hobby is an ac-
tivity from which you do not expect to make a 
profit. See Activity not for profit , earlier, under 
Other Income.
If you collect stamps, coins, or other 
items as a hobby for recreation and 
pleasure, and you sell any of the 
items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. 
However, if you sell items from your collection 
at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.
Holocaust victims restitution.  Restitution 
payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or 
the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest 
earned on the payments are not taxable. Ex-
cludable interest is earned by escrow accounts 
or settlement funds established for holding 
funds prior to the settlement. You also do not in-
clude the restitution payments and interest the 
funds earned prior to disbursement in any com-
putations in which you ordinarily would add ex-
cludable income to your adjusted gross income, 
such as the computation to determine the taxa-
ble part of social security benefits. If the pay-
ments are made in property, your basis in the 
property is its fair market value when you re-
ceive it.
Excludable restitution payments are pay-
ments or distributions made by any country or 
any other entity because of persecution of an 
individual on the basis of race, religion, physical 
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by 
Nazi Germany, any other Axis regime, or any 
other Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, 
whether the payments are made under a law or 
as a result of a legal action. They include com-
pensation or reparation for property losses re-
sulting from Nazi persecution, including pro-
ceeds under insurance policies issued before 
and during World War II by European insurance 
companies.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activities, 
such as money from dealing illegal drugs, must 
be included in your income on Form 1040, 
line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-
ity.
CAUTION
!
Page 31 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 31

Indian fishing rights. If you are a member of a 
qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights se-
cured by treaty, executive order, or an Act of 
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not include 
in your income amounts you receive from activi-
ties related to those fishing rights. The income 
is not subject to income tax, self-employment 
tax, or employment taxes.
Indian money account litigation settlement.
Amounts received by an individual Indian as a 
lump sum or periodic payment pursuant to the 
Class Action Settlement Agreement dated De-
cember 7, 2009, are not included in gross in-
come. This amount will not be used to figure ad-
justed gross income (AGI) or modified AGI in 
applying any Internal Revenue Code provision 
that takes into account excludable income.
Interest on frozen deposits.  In general, you 
exclude from your income the amount of inter-
est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is fro-
zen if, at the end of the calendar year, you can-
not withdraw any part of the deposit because:
The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or
The state where the institution is located 
has placed limits on withdrawals because 
other financial institutions in the state are 
bankrupt or insolvent.
Excludable amount.  The amount of inter-
est you exclude from income for the year is the 
interest that was credited on the frozen deposit 
for that tax year minus the sum of:
1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-
posit during that year, and
2. The amount that could have been with-
drawn at the end of that tax year (not re-
duced by any penalty for premature with-
drawals of a time deposit).
The excluded part of the interest is included in 
your income in the tax year it becomes with-
drawable.
Interest on qualified savings bonds.  You 
may be able to exclude from income the interest 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if 
you pay qualified higher educational expenses 
in the same year. Qualified higher educational 
expenses are those you pay for tuition and re-
quired fees at an eligible educational institution 
for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A 
qualified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond 
issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond 
must have been issued to you when you were 
24 years of age or older. For more information 
on this exclusion, see Education Savings Bond 
Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550 and in 
chapter 10 of Publication 970.
Interest on state and local government obli-
gations. This interest is usually exempt from 
federal tax. However, you must show the 
amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed-
eral income tax return. For more information, 
see State or Local Government Obligations  in 
chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and 
either pays you an allowance or reimburses you 
for your transportation and other travel expen-
ses, the amount you receive is not taxable in 
most cases. You include in income only the 
amount you receive that is more than your ac-
tual expenses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be 
included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. 
If you must give the pay to your employer be-
cause your employer continues to pay your sal-
ary while you serve on the jury, you can deduct 
the amount turned over to your employer as an 
adjustment to income. Enter the amount you re-
pay your employer on Form 1040, line 36. Enter 
“Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotted line 
next to line 36.
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, side 
commissions, push money, or similar payments 
you receive in your income on Form 1040, 
line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ 
(Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-
ity.
Example. You sell cars and help arrange 
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay 
back part of their commissions to you for refer-
ring customers to them. You must include the 
kickbacks in your income.
Manufacturer incentive payments. You must 
include as other income on Form 1040, line 21 
(or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 
if you are self-employed) incentive payments 
from a manufacturer that you receive as a 
salesperson. This is true whether you receive 
the payment directly from the manufacturer or 
through your employer.
Example. You sell cars for an automobile 
dealership and receive incentive payments from 
the automobile manufacturer every time you sell 
a particular model of car. You report the incen-
tive payments on Form 1040, line 21.
Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs 
and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most ca-
ses, you do not include in income amounts you 
withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare 
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for 
qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified 
medical expenses are those you can deduct on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information 
about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage 
MSAs, see Publication 969.
Moving expense reimbursements.  You gen-
erally should not report these benefits on your 
return. See Publication 521 for more informa-
tion.
Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a 
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz 
program, beauty contest, or other event, you 
must include it in your income. For example, if 
you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, 
you must report this income on Form 1040, 
line 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not in-
clude its value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services 
must be included in your income at their fair 
market value.
Employee awards or bonuses.  Cash 
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
ployer for good work or suggestions generally 
must be included in your income as wages. 
However, certain noncash employee achieve-
ment awards can be excluded from income. 
See Bonuses and awards  under Miscellaneous 
Compensation, earlier.
Prize points. If you are a salesperson and 
receive prize points redeemable for merchan-
dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-
facturer to employees of dealers, you must in-
clude their fair market value in your income. The 
prize points are taxable in the year they are paid 
or made available to you, rather than in the year 
you redeem them for merchandise.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.  If you 
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you 
generally must include the value of the prize in 
your income. However, you do not include this 
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
ing requirements.
1. You were selected without any action on 
your part to enter the contest or proceed-
ing.
2. You are not required to perform substan-
tial future services as a condition for re-
ceiving the prize or award.
3. The prize or award is transferred by the 
payer directly to a governmental unit or 
tax-exempt charitable organization as des-
ignated by you. The following conditions 
apply to the transfer.
a. You cannot use the prize or award be-
fore it is transferred.
b. You should provide the designation 
before the prize or award is presented 
to prevent a disqualifying use. The 
designation should contain:
i. The purpose of the designation 
by making a reference to section 
74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code,
ii. A description of the prize or 
award,
iii. The name and address of the or-
ganization to receive the prize or 
award,
iv. Your name, address, and tax-
payer identification number, and
v. Your signature and the date 
signed.
c. In the case of an unexpected presen-
tation, you must return the prize or 
award before using it (or spending, 
depositing, investing it, etc., in the 
case of money) and then prepare the 
statement as described in (b).
d. After the transfer, you should receive 
from the payer a written response 
stating when and to whom the desig-
nated amounts were transferred.
Page 32 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32 Publication 525 (2013)

These rules do not apply to scholarship or 
fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fel-
lowships, later.
Qualified tuition program (QTP).  A qualified 
tuition program (also known as a 529 program) 
is a program set up to allow you to either prepay 
or contribute to an account established for pay-
ing a student's qualified higher education ex-
penses at an eligible educational institution. A 
program can be established and maintained by 
a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, 
or an eligible educational institution.
The part of a distribution representing the 
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not in-
cluded in income. This is a return of the invest-
ment in the program.
In most cases, the beneficiary does not in-
clude in income any earnings distributed from a 
QTP if the total distribution is less than or equal 
to adjusted qualified higher education expen-
ses. See Publication 970 for more information.
Railroad retirement annuities.  The following 
types of payments are treated as pension or an-
nuity income and are taxable under the rules 
explained in Publication 575.
Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are 
more than the social security equivalent 
benefit.
Tier 2 benefits.
Vested dual benefits.
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing 
information, include it in your income.
Sale of home.  You may be able to exclude 
from income all or part of any gain from the sale 
or exchange of your main home. See Publica-
tion 523.
Sale of personal items.  If you sold an item 
you owned for personal use, such as a car, re-
frigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or silver-
ware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Re-
port it as explained in the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040). You cannot deduct a 
loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for in-
vestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, 
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain 
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
Example. You sold a painting on an online 
auction website for $100. You bought the paint-
ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report 
your $80 gain as a capital gain as explained in 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Scholarships and fellowships.  A candidate 
for a degree can exclude amounts received as 
a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified 
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-
ceive that is for:
Tuition and fees required to enroll at or at-
tend an eligible educational institution, or
Course related expenses, such as fees, 
books, and equipment that are required for 
courses at the eligible educational institu-
tion. These items must be required of all 
students in your course of instruction.
Amounts used for room and board do not qual-
ify for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for 
more information on qualified scholarships and 
fellowship grants.
Payment for services. Generally, you can-
not exclude from your gross income the part of 
any scholarship or fellowship that represents 
payment for teaching, research, or other serv-
ices required as a condition for receiving the 
scholarship. This applies even if all candidates 
for a degree must perform the services to re-
ceive the degree.
Exceptions. You do not have to include in 
income the part of any scholarship or fellowship 
that represents payment for teaching, research, 
or other services if you receive the amount un-
der:
The National Health Services Corps Schol-
arship Program, or
The Armed Forces health Professions 
Scholarship and Financial Assistance Pro-
gram.
For information about the rules that apply to 
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to 
employees and their families by an educational 
institution, see Publication 970.
VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in 
your income. These allowances are not consid-
ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest 
are not scholarships or fellowships if you do not 
have to use the prizes for educational purpo-
ses. You must include these amounts in your in-
come on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you 
use the amounts for educational purposes.
Smallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eligi-
ble individual who receives benefits under the 
Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act 
of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a 
covered countermeasure, you can exclude the 
payment from your income (to the extent it is 
not allowed as a medical and dental expense 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligible 
individuals include health care workers, emer-
gency personnel, and first responders in a 
smallpox emergency, who have received a 
smallpox vaccination.
Social security and equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits.  Social security or equiva-
lent railroad retirement benefits, if taxable, must 
be included in the income of the person who 
has the legal right to receive the benefits. 
Whether any of your benefits are taxable, and 
the amount that is taxable, depends on the 
amount of the benefits and your other income.
Social security benefits include any monthly 
benefit under Title II of the Social Security Act 
and any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefit 
treated as a social security benefit. Social se-
curity benefits do not include any supplemental 
security income (SSI) payments.
Form SSA-1099. If you received social se-
curity benefits during the year, you will receive 
Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-
ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with 
your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a 
worksheet you can use to figure whether any of 
your benefits are taxable.
For an explanation of the information found 
on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915.
Form RRB-1099.  If you received equiva-
lent railroad retirement or special guaranty ben-
efits during the year, you will receive Form 
RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-
ment Board.
For an explanation of the information found 
on your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915.
If you received other railroad retirement ben-
efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier.
Joint return.  If you are married and file a 
joint return, you and your spouse must combine 
your incomes and your social security and 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-
uring whether any of your combined benefits 
are taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive 
any benefits, you must add your spouse's in-
come to yours when figuring if any of your bene-
fits are taxable.
Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in the 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction package 
to determine the amount of your benefits to in-
clude in your income. Publication 915 also has 
worksheets you can use. However, you must 
use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any of 
the following situations apply.
You received a lump-sum benefit payment 
during the year that is for one or more ear-
lier years.
You exclude employer-provided adoption 
benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav-
ings bonds.
You take the foreign earned income exclu-
sion, the foreign housing exclusion or de-
duction, the exclusion of income from 
American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-
come from Puerto Rico by bona fide resi-
dents of Puerto Rico.
Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.
You must use the special worksheets in appen-
dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable 
benefits and your IRA deduction if all of the fol-
lowing conditions apply.
You receive social security or equivalent 
railroad retirement benefits.
You have taxable compensation.
You contribute to your IRA.
You or your spouse is covered by a retire-
ment plan at work.
How to report.  If any of your benefits are 
taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A to report the taxable part. You can-
not use Form 1040EZ. Report your net benefits 
(as shown on your Forms SSA-1099 and 
RRB-1099) on line 20a of Form 1040 or line 14a 
of Form 1040A. Report the taxable part on 
line 20b of Form 1040 or on line 14b of Form 
1040A.
Stolen property.  If you steal property, you 
must report its fair market value in your income 
in the year you steal it unless in the same year, 
you return it to its rightful owner.
Transporting school children.  Do not in-
clude in your income a school board mileage al-
lowance for taking children to and from school if 
you are not in the business of taking children to 
Page 33 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 33

school. You cannot deduct expenses for 
providing this transportation.
Union benefits and dues.  Amounts deducted 
from your pay for union dues, assessments, 
contributions, or other payments to a union can-
not be excluded from your income.
You may be able to deduct some of these 
payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub-
ject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to 
your job and if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information, 
see Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deduc-
tions.
Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid 
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, 
including both cash and the fair market value of 
other property, usually are included in your in-
come as compensation. You can exclude these 
benefits from your income only when the facts 
clearly show that the union intended them as 
gifts to you.
Reimbursed union convention expen-
ses. If you are a delegate of your local union 
chapter and you attend the annual convention 
of the international union, do not include in your 
income amounts you receive from the interna-
tional union to reimburse you for expenses of 
traveling away from home to attend the conven-
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed expen-
ses, even if you are reimbursed in a later year. If 
you are reimbursed for lost salary, you must in-
clude that reimbursement in your income.
Utility rebates.  If you are a customer of an 
electric utility company and you participate in 
the utility's energy conservation program, you 
may receive on your monthly electric bill either:
A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
A nonrefundable credit against the pur-
chase price of the electricity.
The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-
able credit is not included in your income.
Whistleblower's award. If you receive a whis-
tleblower's award from the Internal Revenue 
Service, you must include it in your income. Any 
deduction allowed for attorney fees and court 
costs paid by you, or on your behalf, in connec-
tion with the award are deducted as an adjust-
ment to income, but cannot be more than the 
amount included in income for the tax year.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you included 
in your income in an earlier year, you may be 
able to deduct the amount repaid from your in-
come for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if 
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it. In most cases, 
you can claim a deduction or credit only if the 
repayment qualifies as an expense or loss in-
curred in your trade or business or in a for-profit 
transaction.
Type of deduction. The type of deduction you 
are allowed in the year of repayment depends 
on the type of income you included in the earlier 
year. In most cases, you deduct the repayment 
on the same form or schedule on which you 
previously reported it as income. For example, 
if you reported it as self-employment income, 
deduct it as a business expense on Schedule C 
or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F 
(Form 1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, 
deduct it as a capital loss as explained in the In-
structions for Schedule D (Form 1040). If you 
reported it as wages, unemployment compen-
sation, or other nonbusiness income, deduct it 
as a miscellaneous itemized deduction on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
If you repaid social security or equivalent 
railroad retirement benefits, see Publication 
915.
Repayment of $3,000 or less.  If the amount 
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from 
your income in the year you repaid it. If you 
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 23.
Repayment over $3,000.  If the amount you 
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct 
the repayment (as explained earlier under Type 
of deduction ). However, you can choose in-
stead to take a tax credit for the year of repay-
ment if you included the income under a claim 
of right. This means that at the time you inclu-
ded the income, it appeared that you had an un-
restricted right to it. If you qualify for this choice, 
figure your tax under both methods and com-
pare the results. Use the method (deduction or 
credit) that results in less tax.
When determining whether the 
amount you repaid was more or less 
than $3,000, consider the total amount 
being repaid on the return. Each instance of re-
payment is not considered separately.
Method 1.  Figure your tax for 2013 claim-
ing a deduction for the repaid amount. If you 
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 28.
Method 2.  Figure your tax for 2013 claim-
ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these 
steps.
1. Figure your tax for 2013 without deducting 
the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in 2013.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
2013 figured without the deduction (step 
1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form 
1040, line 71.
Example. For 2012 you filed a return and 
reported your income on the cash method. In 
2013 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2012 
income under a claim of right. Your filing status 
CAUTION
!
in 2013 and 2012 is single. Your income and tax 
for both years are as follows:
2012
 With Income  Without Income
Taxable 
Income $15,000 $10,000 
Tax $ 1,819 $ 1,069
2013
Without Deduction With Deduction
Taxable 
Income $49,950 $44,950 
Tax $ 8,416 $ 7,166
Your tax under method 1 is $7,166. Your tax 
under method 2 is $7,666, figured as follows:
Tax previously determined for 2012 ...... $1,819
Less: Tax as refigured ............... − 1,069 
Decrease in 2012 tax $ 750 
Regular tax liability for 2013 ............ $8,416
Less: Decrease in 2012 tax ............ − 750 
Refigured tax for 2013 $7,666
You pay less tax using method 1, so you should 
take a deduction for the repayment in 2013.
Repaid wages subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.  If you had to repay an 
amount that you included in your wages or com-
pensation in an earlier year on which social se-
curity, Medicare, or tier 1 RRTA taxes were 
paid, ask your employer to refund the excess 
amount to you. If the employer refuses to refund 
the taxes, ask for a statement indicating the 
amount of the overcollection to support your 
claim. File a claim for refund using Form 843, 
Claim for Refund and Request for Abatement.
Repaid wages subject to Additional Medi-
care Tax taxes.  Employers cannot make an 
adjustment or file a claim for refund for Addi-
tional Medicare Tax withholding when there is a 
repayment of wages received by an employee 
in a prior year because the employee deter-
mines liability for Additional Medicare Tax on 
the employee's income tax return for the prior 
year. If you had to repay an amount that you in-
cluded in your wages or compensation in an 
earlier year, and on which Additional Medicare 
Tax was paid, you may be able to recover the 
Additional Medicare Tax paid on the amount. 
To recover Additional Medicare Tax on the re-
paid wages or compensation, you must file 
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return, for the prior year in which the wa-
ges or compensation were originally received. 
See the Instructions for Form 1040X.
Repayment rules do not apply.  This discus-
sion does not apply to:
Deductions for bad debts;
Deductions for theft losses due to criminal 
fraud or embezzlement in a transaction en-
tered into for profit;
Deductions from sales to customers, such 
as returns and allowances, and similar 
items; or
Deductions for legal and other expenses of 
contesting the repayment.
Page 34 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34 Publication 525 (2013)

Year of deduction (or credit).  If you use the 
cash method, you can take the deduction (or 
credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which 
you actually make the repayment. If you use 
any other accounting method, you can deduct 
the repayment or claim a credit for it only for the 
tax year in which it is a proper deduction under 
your accounting method. For example, if you 
use an accrual method, you are entitled to the 
deduction or credit in the tax year in which the 
obligation for the repayment accrues.
How To Get Tax Help
Whether it's help with a tax issue, preparing 
your tax return or a need for a free publication 
or form, get the help you need the way you want 
it: online, use a smart phone, call or walk in to 
an IRS office or volunteer site near you.
Free help with your tax return.  You can get 
free help preparing your return nationwide from 
IRS-certified volunteers. The Volunteer Income 
Tax Assistance (VITA) program helps 
low-to-moderate income, elderly, people with 
disabilities, and limited English proficient tax-
payers. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program helps taxpayers age 60 and 
older with their tax returns. Most VITA and TCE 
sites offer free electronic filing and all volun-
teers will let you know about credits and deduc-
tions you may be entitled to claim. In addition, 
some VITA and TCE sites provide taxpayers 
the opportunity to prepare their own return with 
help from an IRS-certified volunteer. To find the 
nearest VITA or TCE site, you can use the VITA 
Locator Tool on IRS.gov, download the IRS2Go 
app, or call 1-800-906-9887.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers 
the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the 
nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, visit AARP's web-
site at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide or call 
1-888-227-7669. For more information on these 
programs, go to IRS.gov and enter “VITA” in the 
search box.
Internet. IRS.gov and IRS2Go are ready 
when you are —24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Download the free IRS2Go app from the 
iTunes app store or from Google Play. Use 
it to check your refund status, order tran-
scripts of your tax returns or tax account, 
watch the IRS YouTube channel, get IRS 
news as soon as it's released to the public, 
subscribe to filing season updates or daily 
tax tips, and follow the IRS Twitter news 
feed, @IRSnews, to get the latest federal 
tax news, including information about tax 
law changes and important IRS programs.
Check the status of your 2013 refund with 
the Where's My Refund? application on 
IRS.gov or download the IRS2Go app and 
select the Refund Status option. The IRS 
issues more than 9 out of 10 refunds in 
less than 21 days. Using these applica-
tions, you can start checking on the status 
of your return within 24 hours after we re-
ceive your e-filed return or 4 weeks after 
you mail a paper return. You will also be 
given a personalized refund date as soon 
as the IRS processes your tax return and 
approves your refund. The IRS updates 
Where's My Refund? every 24 hours, usu-
ally overnight, so you only need to check 
once a day.
Use the Interactive Tax Assistant (ITA) to 
research your tax questions. No need to 
wait on the phone or stand in line. The ITA 
is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 
and provides you with a variety of tax infor-
mation related to general filing topics, de-
ductions, credits, and income. When you 
reach the response screen, you can print 
the entire interview and the final response 
for your records. New subject areas are 
added on a regular basis.
Answers not provided through ITA may be 
found in Tax Trails, one of the Tax Topics 
on IRS.gov which contain general individ-
ual and business tax information or by 
searching the IRS Tax Map, which in-
cludes an international subject index. 
You can use the IRS Tax Map, to search 
publications and instructions by topic or 
keyword. The IRS Tax Map integrates 
forms and publications into one research 
tool and provides single-point access to 
tax law information by subject. When the 
user searches the IRS Tax Map, they will 
be provided with links to related content in 
existing IRS publications, forms and in-
structions, questions and answers, and 
Tax Topics.
Coming this filing season, you can immedi-
ately view and print for free all 5 types of 
individual federal tax transcripts (tax re-
turns, tax account, record of account, 
wage and income statement, and certifica-
tion of non-filing) using Get Transcript. 
You can also ask the IRS to mail a return 
or an account transcript to you. Only the 
mail option is available by choosing the 
Tax Records option on the IRS2Go app by 
selecting Mail Transcript on IRS.gov or by 
calling 1-800-908-9946. Tax return and tax 
account transcripts are generally available 
for the current year and the past three 
years.
Determine if you are eligible for the EITC 
and estimate the amount of the credit with 
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) 
Assistant.
Visit Understanding Your IRS Notice or 
Letter to get answers to questions about a 
notice or letter you received from the IRS.
If you received the First Time Homebuyer 
Credit, you can use the First Time 
Homebuyer Credit Account Look-up tool 
for information on your repayments and ac-
count balance.
Check the status of your amended return 
using Where's My Amended Return? Go to 
IRS.gov and enter Where's My Amended 
Return? in the search box. You can gener-
ally expect your amended return to be pro-
cessed up to 12 weeks from the date we 
receive it. It can take up to 3 weeks from 
the date you mailed it to show up in our 
system.
Make a payment using one of several safe 
and convenient electronic payment options 
available on IRS.gov. Select the Payment 
tab on the front page of IRS.gov for more 
information.
Determine if you are eligible and apply for 
an online payment agreement, if you owe 
more tax than you can pay today.
Figure your income tax withholding with 
the IRS Withholding Calculator on IRS.gov. 
Use it if you've had too much or too little 
withheld, your personal situation has 
changed, you're starting a new job or you 
just want to see if you're having the right 
amount withheld.
Determine if you might be subject to the Al-
ternative Minimum Tax by using the 
Alternative Minimum Tax Assistant on 
IRS.gov.
Request an Electronic Filing PIN by go-
ing to IRS.gov and entering Electronic Fil-
ing PIN in the search box.
Download forms, instructions and publica-
tions, including accessible versions for 
people with disabilities.
Locate the nearest Taxpayer Assistance 
Center (TAC) using the Office Locator tool 
on IRS.gov, or choose the Contact Us op-
tion on the IRS2Go app and search Local 
Offices. An employee can answer ques-
tions about your tax account or help you 
set up a payment plan. Before you visit, 
check the Office Locator on IRS.gov, or 
Local Offices under Contact Us on IRS2Go 
to confirm the address, phone number, 
days and hours of operation, and the serv-
ices provided. If you have a special need, 
such as a disability, you can request an ap-
pointment. Call the local number listed in 
the Office Locator, or look in the phone 
book under United States Government, In-
ternal Revenue Service.
Apply for an Employer Identification 
Number (EIN). Go to IRS.gov and enter 
Apply for an EIN in the search box.
Read the Internal Revenue Code, regula-
tions, or other official guidance.
Read Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Sign up to receive local and national tax 
news and more by email. Just click on 
“subscriptions” above the search box on 
IRS.gov and choose from a variety of op-
tions.
Phone. You can call the IRS, or you can carry 
it in your pocket with the IRS2Go app on your 
smart phone or tablet. Download the free 
IRS2Go app from the iTunes app store or from 
Google Play.
Call to locate the nearest volunteer help 
site, 1-800-906-9887 or you can use the 
VITA Locator Tool on IRS.gov, or down-
load the IRS2Go app. Low-to-moderate in-
come, elderly, people with disabilities, and 
limited English proficient taxpayers can get 
free help with their tax return from the na-
tionwide Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program. The Tax Counseling for 
the Elderly (TCE) program helps taxpayers 
age 60 and older with their tax returns. 
Most VITA and TCE sites offer free elec-
tronic filing. Some VITA and TCE sites pro-
vide IRS-certified volunteers who can help 
prepare your tax return. Through the TCE 
program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide coun-
seling program; call 1-888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest Tax-Aide location.
Page 35 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 (2013)   Page 35

Call the automated Where's My Refund? 
information hotline to check the status of 
your 2013 refund 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week at 1-800-829-1954. If you e-file, you 
can start checking on the status of your re-
turn within 24 hours after the IRS receives 
your tax return or 4 weeks after you've 
mailed a paper return. The IRS issues 
more than 9 out of 10 refunds in less than 
21 days. Where's My Refund? will give you 
a personalized refund date as soon as the 
IRS processes your tax return and ap-
proves your refund. Before you call this au-
tomated hotline, have your 2013 tax return 
handy so you can enter your social secur-
ity number, your filing status, and the exact 
whole dollar amount of your refund. The 
IRS updates Where's My Refund? every 
24 hours, usually overnight, so you only 
need to check once a day. Note, the above 
information is for our automated hotline. 
Our live phone and walk-in assistors can 
research the status of your refund only if 
it's been 21 days or more since you filed 
electronically or more than 6 weeks since 
you mailed your paper return.
Call the Amended Return Hotline, 
1-866-464-2050, to check the status of 
your amended return. You can generally 
expect your amended return to be pro-
cessed up to 12 weeks from the date we 
receive it. It can take up to 3 weeks from 
the date you mailed it to show up in our 
system.
Call 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) 
to order current-year forms, instructions, 
publications, and prior-year forms and in-
structions (limited to 5 years). You should 
receive your order within 10 business 
days.
Call TeleTax, 1-800-829-4477, to listen to 
pre-recorded messages covering general 
and business tax information. If, between 
January and April 15, you still have ques-
tions about the Form 1040, 1040A, or 
1040EZ (like filing requirements, depend-
ents, credits, Schedule D, pensions and 
IRAs or self-employment taxes), call 
1-800-829-1040.
Call using TTY/TDD equipment, 
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or or-
der forms and publications. The TTY/TDD 
telephone number is for people who are 
deaf, hard of hearing, or have a speech 
disability. These individuals can also con-
tact the IRS through relay services such as 
the Federal Relay Service.
Walk-in. You can find a selection of forms, 
publications and services — in-person.
Products. You can walk in to some post of-
fices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up 
certain forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, and city 
and county government offices have a col-
lection of products available to photocopy 
from reproducible proofs.
Services. You can walk in to your local 
TAC for face-to-face tax help. An em-
ployee can answer questions about your 
tax account or help you set up a payment 
plan. Before visiting, use the Office Locator 
tool on IRS.gov, or choose the Contact Us 
option on the IRS2Go app and search Lo-
cal Offices for days and hours of operation, 
and services provided.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, in-
structions, and publications to the address be-
low. You should receive a response within 10 
business days after your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
 
The Taxpayer Advocate Service Is Here to Help 
You. The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
is your voice at the IRS. Our job is to ensure 
that every taxpayer is treated fairly and that you 
know and understand your rights.
 
What can TAS do for you? We can offer you 
free help with IRS problems that you can't re-
solve on your own. We know this process can 
be confusing, but the worst thing you can do is 
nothing at all! TAS can help if you can't resolve 
your tax problem and:
Your problem is causing financial difficul-
ties for you, your family, or your business.
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action.
You've tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn't responded by the date promised.
 
If you qualify for our help, you'll be assigned to 
one advocate who'll be with you at every turn 
and will do everything possible to resolve your 
problem. Here's why we can help:
TAS is an independent organization within 
the IRS.
Our advocates know how to work with the 
IRS.
Our services are free and tailored to meet 
your needs.
We have offices in every state, the District 
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.
 
How can you reach us? If you think TAS can 
help you, call your local advocate, whose num-
ber is in your local directory and at Taxpayer 
Advocate, or call us toll-free at 1-877-777-4778.
 
How else does TAS help taxpayers?
 
TAS also works to resolve large-scale, systemic 
problems that affect many taxpayers. If you 
know of one of these broad issues, please re-
port it to us through our Systemic Advocacy 
Management System.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) serve in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level 
and need to resolve tax problems such as au-
dits, appeals and tax collection disputes. Some 
clinics can provide information about taxpayer 
rights and responsibilities in different languages 
for individuals who speak English as a second 
language. Visit Taxpayer Advocate  or see IRS 
Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic 
List.
Page 36 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36 Publication 525 (2013)

Page 37 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
1231 property sale 16
401(k) plans 9
Excess contributions 11
403(b) plans 9
Limit for 9
457 plans 9
Limit for deferrals under 10
501(c)(18)(D) plans 9
Contributions 10
501(c)(3) organizations 20
529 program 33
83(b) election 14
A
Academic health centers:
Meals and lodging when 
teaching and research 
organization 7
Accelerated death benefits 22
Accidental death benefits 6
Accident insurance 4
Accrual method taxpayers 2
Accrued leave payment:
At time of retirement or 
resignation 4
Disability retirement 17
Activity not for profit 28
Adoption:
Employer assistance 5
Advance commissions 3
Aircraft 9
Airlines:
No-additional-cost services 8
Valuation of flights on 
employer-provided 
aircraft 9
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividend 28
Aliens:
Nonresident 23
Alien status, waiver of 15
Alimony 28
Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Recoveries, refiguring of 25
Stock options 12
Annuities:
Charitable gift 29
Railroad retirement 33
Tax-sheltered 9
Archer MSAs 4, 32
Armed forces 15
Combat zone bonus 15
Disability 15
Disability pensions 18
Health professions 
scholarship 8
Military action as cause of 
disability injuries 18
Qualified reservist 
distribution 15
Rehabilitative program 
payments 15
Retirement pay 15
Veterans benefits 15
Assistance (See Tax help)
Athletic facilities, 
employer-provided 5
Automobile (See Vehicle, 
employer-provided)
Awards (See Damages from 
lawsuits)
B
Babysitting 3
Back pay, award for 3
Backup withholding:
Barter exchange 
transactions 20
Bankruptcy:
Canceled debt not deemed to 
be income 21
Barter income 19
Below-market loans 28
Bequest for services 31
Bicycle 8
Fringe benefit 8
Black lung benefit payments 19
Bonuses 3, 32
Breach of contract:
Damages as income 29
Bribes 29
Business expenses:
Reimbursements 3
Business income 16, 17
C
Cafeteria plans 17
Campaign contributions 29
Campus lodging 8
Cancellation of debt 20
Cancellation of sales 
contracts 29
Capital gains:
Recoveries 23, 25
Capital gains or losses:
Employee stock option plans 
(ESOPs) 13
Incentive stock options 
(ISOs) 12
Sale of personal property 33
Car (See Vehicle, 
employer-provided)
Car pools 29
Cash or deferred arrangements 
(CODAs) 9
Cash rebates 29
Casualty insurance:
Reimbursements from 29
Catch-up contributions 9, 10
Charitable gift annuities 29
Child and Adult Care Food 
Program:
Payments to daycare 
providers 30
Childcare providers 3, 30
Child support payments 29
Chronic illness 18
Accelerated death benefits paid 
to 22
Citizens outside U.S.:
Exclusion of foreign income 2
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title 
VII:
Back pay and damages for 
emotional distress 
under 29
Clergy 14
Coal 16
Colleges and universities:
Faculty lodging 7
Scholarships and 
fellowships 33
Commissions:
Advance 3
Commuter highway vehicles 8
Compensation:
Employee 3
Miscellaneous 3
Unemployment 27
Workers' 18
Compensatory damages 19, 29
Constructive receipt of 
income 2
Copyrights:
Infringement damages 29
Royalties 16
Corporate directors 30
Cost-of-living allowances 3
Court awards 29
 (See also Damages from lawsuits)
Credit card Insurance 29
Credits:
Recoveries, refiguring of 
unused credits 25
Currency transactions, 
foreign 30
D
Damages from lawsuits 29
Back pay awards 3
Breach of contract 29
Compensatory damages 19, 
29
Emotional distress under Title 
VII, Civil Rights Act of 
1964 29
Punitive damages 29
Daycare providers 3
 (See also Childcare providers)
Food program payments to 30
Death benefits 21
 (See also Life insurance)
Accelerated 22
Debts:
Canceled 20
Excluded debt 21
Nonrecourse debts 20
Recourse 20
Stockholder's 20
Deduction:
Costs of discrimination 
suits 29
Deferred compensation:
Nonqualified plans 3
De minimis benefits 5, 7
Dependent care benefits 5
Depletion allowance 16
Differential wage payments 3
Armed forces 15
Directors' fees 30
Disability:
Military 15
Pensions 17
Workers' compensation 19
Person with 27
Unemployment compensation, 
paid as substitute for 27
Disaster relief:
Disaster mitigation 
payments 28
Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act:
Grants 27
Unemployment benefits 25
Mitigation payments 2
Payments 28
Discounts:
Employee discounts 5
Employee stock purchase 
plans 13
Mortgage loan for early 
payment 20
Dividends:
Restricted stock 14
Divorced taxpayers:
Stock options exercised 
incident to divorce 12
Down payment assistance 29
E
Educational assistance:
Employer-provided 5
Scholarships and 
fellowships 33
Educational institutions:
Faculty lodging 7
Elderly persons:
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 28
Tax Counseling for the 
Elderly 16
Election precinct officials 30
Elective deferrals 9
Catch-up contributions 9, 10
Excess annual additions 11
Excess contributions 11
Excess deferrals 10
Increased limit for last 3 years 
prior to retirement age 10
Limit on 9
Reporting by employer 10
Emergency Homeowners' Loan 
Program 28
Emotional distress damages 29
Employee achievement 
awards 3
Employee awards or 
bonuses 32
Employee compensation 3–14
Fringe benefits 4–9
Restricted property 13, 14
Retirement plan 
contributions 9
Stock options 11–13
Employee discounts 5
Employee stock purchase 
plans 12, 13
Employer, foreign 15
Publication 525 (2013) Page 37

Page 38 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employer-owned life 
insurance 21
Employer-provided:
Educational assistance 5
Vehicles 9
Employment:
Abroad 15
Agency fees 29
Contracts:
Severance pay for 
cancellation of 4
Endowment proceeds 22
Energy:
Assistance 28
Conservation:
Subsidies 29
Utility rebates 34
Estate income 29
Estimated tax:
Unemployment 
compensation 27
Excess:
Annual additions 11
Contributions 11
Deferrals 10
Expected inheritance 31
Expenses paid by another 30
Exxon Valdez settlement 30
Eligible retirement plan 30
Income averaging 30
Legal expenses 30
Reporting 
requirement-statement 30
F
Faculty lodging 7
Fair market value (FMV) 9
Stock options 11
Farming:
Qualified farm debt, 
cancellation of 21
Federal employees:
Federal Employees:
Accrued leave payment 4
Compensation Act (FECA) 
payments 19
Cost-of-living allowances 3
Disability pensions 18
Thrift Savings Plan for 9
Federal income tax:
Refunds 22
Fees for services 30
Financial counseling fees 5
Fellowships 33
FICA withholding:
Foreign employers, U.S. 
citizens working for in 
U.S. 15
Paid by employer 4
Fiduciaries:
Fees for services 30
Financial counseling fees 5
 (See also Retirement planning 
services)
Fitness programs:
Employer-provided 5
Flights:
Employer-provided aircraft 9
No-additional-cost services 8
Food benefits:
Daycare providers, food 
program payments to 30
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 28
Foreign:
Currency transactions 30
Employment 15
Governments, employees 
of 15
Income 2
Service 18
Form 1040:
Form 1040, Schedule A:
Outplacement services, 
deduction for 4
Repayment of commissions 
paid in advance 3
Form 1040, Schedule C:
Bartering 19
Childcare providers to use 3
Personal property rental, 
reporting income from 16
Royalties 16
Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
Bartering 19
Childcare Providers to use 3
Personal property rental, 
reporting income from 16
Royalties 16
Form 1040, Schedule D:
Stock options 12
Stock options reported on 12
Form 1040, Schedule E:
Partner's return 17
Royalties 16
Excess contributions to elective 
deferrals 11
Recoveries 24
Unemployment 
compensation 25
Wages from Form W-2 3
Form 1040A:
Recoveries 24
Unemployment 
compensation 25
Wages from Form W-2 3
Form 1040EZ:
Recoveries 24
Unemployment 
compensation 25
Wages from Form W-2 3
Form 1040 or 1040A, 
Schedule B:
Restricted stock dividends 14
Form 1041:
Form 1041, Schedule K-1:
Beneficiary's share of income, 
deductions, credits, etc. 29
Estates and trusts 29
Form 1065:
Form 1065, Schedule K-1:
Partner's share of income 17
Partnership return 17
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest 
statement 22
Form 1099-B:
Barter exchange 
transactions 20
Form 1099-C:
Cancellation of debt 20
Form 1099-DIV:
Restricted stock dividends 14
Form 1099-G:
State tax refunds 22
Unemployment 
compensation 25
Form 1099-MISC:
Services totaling $600 or 
more 30
Stock options exercised 
incident to divorce 12
Form 1099-R:
Charitable gift annuities 29
Excess annual additions 11
Excess deferral amounts 10
Surrender of life insurance 
policy for cash 22
Form 1120-POL:
Political organizations 29
Form 1120S:
Form 1120S, Schedule K-1:
Shareholder's share of income, 
credits, deductions, etc. 17
S corporation return 17
Form 2441:
Child and dependent care 
expenses 5
Form 4255:
Recapture of investment 
credit 25
Form 6251:
Alternative minimum tax 12
Form 8839:
Adoption assistance 5
Form 8853:
Accelerated death benefits 22
Archer MSAs and long-term 
care insurance contracts 4
Form 8919:
Uncollected social security and 
Medicare tax on wages 3
Form RRB-1099:
Railroad retirement board 
payments 33
Form SSA-1099:
Social security benefit 
statement 33
Form W-2:
501(c)(18)(D) contributions 10
Accrued leave payment at time 
of retirement or 
resignation 4
Back pay awards 3
Bonuses or awards 3
Elective deferrals, reporting by 
employer 10
Failure to receive from 
employer 3
Fringe benefits reported on 4
Stock options from 
employers 12
Wage and tax statement 3
Form W-2G:
Gambling winnings 31
Form W-4V:
Unemployment compensation, 
voluntary withholding 
request 27
Form W-9:
Request for taxpayer 
identification number 20
Foster care 31
Foster Grandparent 
Program 16
Found property 31
Free tax services 35
Fringe benefits 4–9
Accident and health 
insurance 4
Adoption, employer 
assistance 5
Athletic facilities 5
Commuter highway vehicles 8
De minimis benefits 5, 7
Dependent care benefits 5
Educational assistance 5
Employee discounts 5
Faculty lodging 7
Financial counseling fees 5
Holiday gifts 5
Meals and lodging 7
Moving expenses (See Moving 
expenses)
No-additional-cost services 8
Parking 8
Retirement 
planning (See Retirement 
planning services)
Transit pass 8
Tuition reduction 8
Valuation of 8, 9
Vehicle 9
Working condition benefits 8
Frozen deposits:
Interest on 32
G
Gambling winnings and 
losses 31
Gas:
Royalties from 16
Gifts 31
Holiday gifts from employer 5
Government 
employees (See Federal 
employees; State employees)
Grantor trusts 30
Group-term life insurance:
Worksheets 6, 7
Gulf oil spill 2, 31
H
HAMP:
Home affordable modification 
program:
Pay-for-performance 
success payments 28
Hardest Hit Fund Program 28
Health:
Flexible spending 
arrangement 4
Insurance 4
Reimbursement 
arrangement 5
Savings account 5
Help (See Tax help)
Highly compensated 
employees:
Excess contributions to elective 
deferrals 11
Historic preservation grants 31
Hobby losses 31
Holding period requirement 12
Holiday gifts 5
Holocaust victims 
restitution 31
Home, sale of 33
Host or hostess 21
Hotels:
No-additional-cost services 8
Housing (See Lodging)
I
Illegal activities 31
Incentive stock options 
(ISOs) 12
Page 38 Publication 525 (2013)

Page 39 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income:
Assigned 2
Business and investment 16, 
17
Constructive receipt of 2
Estate and trust 29
Foreign employers 15
Illegal 31
Miscellaneous 19
Other 28
Partnership 17
Prepaid 2
S corporation 17
Indian fishing rights 32
Indian money account 32
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Deduction 33
Inherited IRA 31
Inheritance 31
IRA 31
Property not substantially 
vested 14
Injury benefits 17–19
Insurance:
Credit card 29
Health 4
Life (See Life insurance)
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance)
Interest:
Canceled debt including 20
Frozen deposits 32
Mortgage refunds 22
Option on insurance 21
Recovery amounts 22
Savings bond 32
State and local government 
obligations 32
Interference with business 
operations:
Damages as income 29
International organizations, 
employees of 15
Interview expenses 32
Investment counseling fees 5
 (See also Retirement planning 
services)
Investment income 16, 17
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Iron ore 16
Itemized deductions:
Limited 24
Recoveries 22, 23
J
Job interview expenses 32
Joint returns:
Social security benefits or 
railroad retirement 
payments 33
Joint state/local tax return:
Recoveries 23
Jury duty pay 32
K
Kickbacks 32
L
Labor unions:
Convention expenses, 
reimbursed 34
Dues 34
Strike and lockout benefits 34
Unemployment benefits paid 
from 27
Last day of tax year, income 
received on 2
Leave (See Accrued leave 
payment)
Length-of-service awards 3
Life insurance:
Employer-owned 21
Proceeds 21
Surrender of policy for cash 22
Loans 20
 (See also Mortgage)
Below-market 28
Student 20
Lockout benefits 34
Lodging:
Campus lodging 8
Clergy 14
Employer-paid or 
reimbursed 7
Faculty lodging 7
Replacement housing 
payments 28
Long-term care insurance 4, 18
Lotteries and raffles 31
Lump-sum distributions:
Survivor benefits 25
M
Manufacturer incentive 
payments 32
Meals:
Employer-paid or 
reimbursed 7
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 28
Medical:
Care reimbursements 19
Savings accounts 32
Medicare:
Advantage MSAs 32
Benefits 28
Tax paid by employer 4
Medicare tax (See Social security 
and Medicare taxes)
Military (See Armed forces)
Minerals:
Royalties from 16
Miscellaneous:
Compensation 3
Income 19
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Mortgage:
Assistance payment (under 
sec. 235 of National 
Housing Act) 28
Discounted loan 20
Interest refund 22
Qualified principal residence 
indebtedness 21
Relief 20
Motor vehicle, 
employer-provided 9
Moving expenses:
Reimbursements 3, 32
MSAs (Medical savings 
accounts) 32
N
National Health Service Corps 
Scholarship Program 8
National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric 
Administration 18
National Senior Service 
Corps 16
No-additional-cost services 8
Nobel prize 32
No-fault car insurance:
Disability benefits under 19
Nonrecourse debt 20
Nonstatutory stock options 11
Nontaxable income 2
Notary fees 30
Notes received for services 4
Not-for-profit activities 28
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 28
O
Oil:
Royalties from 16
Old-age, survivors, and 
disability insurance benefits 
(OASDI) 28
Options, stock 11, 13
Outplacement services 4
Overseas work 2
P
Parking fees:
Employer-paid or 
reimbursed 8
Partner and partnership 
income 17
Patents:
Infringement damages 29
Royalties 16
Peace Corps 16
Pensions:
Clergy 14
Disability pensions 17
Inherited pensions 31
Military 15
Personal property:
Rental income and 
expense 16
Sale of 33
Personal 
representatives (See Fiduciari
es)
Prepaid income 2
Price reduced after 
purchase 21
Prizes and awards 3, 32
Achievement awards 3
Employee awards or 
bonuses 32
Length-of-service awards 3
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar 
prizes 32
Safety achievement 3
Scholarship prizes 33
Profit-sharing plan 17
Public assistance benefits 27
Publications (See Tax help)
Public Health Service 18
Public safety officers killed in 
line of duty 25
Public transportation passes, 
employer-provided 8
Pulitzer prize 32
Punitive damages 29
Q
Qualified joint venture 2
Qualified tuition program 
(QTP) 33
R
Raffles 31
Railroad:
Retirement annuities 33
Retirement benefits 33
Sick pay 19
Unemployment compensation 
benefits 27
Real estate:
Qualified real property business 
debt, cancellation of 21
Rebates:
Cash 29
Utility 34
Recovery of amounts 
previously deducted 22, 24
Itemized deductions 22, 23
Non-itemized deductions 25
Unused tax credits, refiguring 
of 25
Worksheet of itemized 
deductions (Worksheet 
2) 26
Refunds:
Federal income tax 22
Mortgage interest 22
State tax 22
Rehabilitative program 
payments 15
Reimbursements:
Business expenses 3
Casualty losses 29
Meals and lodging 7
Medical expenses 19
Moving expenses 3, 32
Related party transactions:
Stock option transfer 12
Religious order members 14
Rental income and expenses:
Personal property rental 16
Reporting of 16
Repayments 34, 35
Repossession 29
Restricted property 13, 14
Retired Senior Volunteer 
Program (RSVP) 16
Retirement:
Settlement 2
Retirement planning 
services 5, 8
Retirement plans 15
 (See also Pensions)
Automatic contribution 
arrangements 9
Contributions 9, 11, 12
Elective deferrals (See Elective 
deferrals)
Rewards 33
Roth contributions 10
Royalties 16
Publication 525 (2013) Page 39

Page 40 of 40  Fileid: … tions/P525/2013/A/XML/Cycle06/source 15:40 - 31-Dec-2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
S
Safety achievement awards 3
Salary reduction simplified 
employee pension 
plans (See SARSEPs)
Sale of home 33
Sales contracts:
Cancellation of 29
SARSEPs 9
Excess contributions 11
Savings bonds 32
Savings incentive match plans 
for employees (See SIMPLE 
plans)
Scholarships and 
fellowships 33
S corporations 17
Self-employed persons:
U.S. citizens working for foreign 
employers in U.S. treated 
as 15
Senior Companion Program 16
Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE) 16
Severance pay 4
Outplacement services 4
Sickness and injury 
benefits 17, 19
Sick pay 4
SIMPLE plans 9
Limit for deferrals under 9
Smallpox vaccine injuries 33
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Foreign employers, U.S. 
citizens working for in 
U.S. 15
Paid by employer 4
Social security benefits 33
Standard deduction:
Recoveries 24
State employees:
Unemployment benefits paid 
to 27
State or local governments:
Interest on obligations of 32
State or local taxes:
Refunds 22
Statutory stock option holding 
period 12
Stock appreciation rights 4
Stockholder debts 20
Stock options 11, 13
Stock options, nonstatutory:
Exercise or transfer 11
Grant 11
Sale 12
Stock options, statutory:
Exercise 12
Grant 12
Sale 12
Stolen property 33
Strike benefits 34
Student loans:
Cancellation of debt 20
Substantially vested 
property 13
Substantial risk of forfeiture 13
Supplemental security income 
(SSI) payments 33
Supplemental unemployment 
benefits 27
Surviving spouse:
Life insurance proceeds paid 
to 21
Survivor benefits 25
T
Tables and figures:
Group-term life insurance 
(Table 1) 6
Tax benefit rule 22
Tax Counseling for the 
Elderly 16
Tax help 35
Tax-sheltered annuity plans 
(403(b) plans) 9
Limit for 9
Terminal illness 22
Terrorist attacks:
Disability payments for injuries 
from 18
Victims of, tax relief 2
Thrift Savings Plan 9
Title VII, Civil Rights Act of 
1964:
Back pay and damages for 
emotional distress 
under 29
Tour guides, free tours for 31
Trade Act of 1974:
Trade readjustment allowances 
under 27
Transferable property 13
Transit passes 8
Travel agencies:
Free tour to organizer of group 
of tourists 31
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Free tours from travel 
agencies 31
Fringe benefits 8
Reimbursements 3
School children, transporting 
of 33
Trusts:
Grantor trusts 30
Income 29
Tuition program, qualified 
(QTP) 33
Tuition reduction 8
U
Unemployment 
compensation 25
Unions (See Labor unions)
Unlawful discrimination suits:
Deduction for costs 29
V
Valuation:
Fringe benefits 8, 9
Stock options 11
VA payments 33
Vehicle:
Commuter highway 8
Employer-provided 9
Veterans benefits 15
Disability compensation 18
Retroactive VA 
determination 18
Special statute of 
limitations. 18
Viatical settlements 22
Volunteers in Service to 
America (VISTA) 16
Volunteer work 16
Tax counseling (Volunteer 
Income Tax Assistance 
Program) 16
W
W-2 form (See Form W-2)
Welfare benefits 27
Whistleblower 34
Winter energy payments 28
Withholding:
Barter exchange 
transactions 20
Unemployment 
compensation 27
Workers' compensation 18
Working condition benefits 8
Worksheets:
Group-term life insurance 
(Worksheet 1) 6, 7
Recoveries of itemized 
deductions (Worksheet 
2) 26
Work-training programs 27
Page 40 Publication 525 (2013)