Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.sgm (23-Apr-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063pTax Guide for
Department Small Business For use in
of the
preparingTreasury
(For Individuals Who UseInternal 2001Revenue
Service Schedule C or C–EZ) Returns


Page 2 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.

Page 3 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you need information about: You shouldContents see:
Introduction.............................. 3
Partnerships.................. Publication 541
Important Changes for 2001.................. 3 Corporations.................. Publication 542
Important Changes for 2002.................. 4 S corporations................ Instructions for
Form 1120SImportant Reminders....................... 4
Farming ..................... Publication 2251. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 5
Direct selling.................. Publication 911
2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 10 Commercial fishing............. Publication 595
3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 14 Recordkeeping................ Publication 583
4. General Business Credit................. 16
What you need to know.Table A (shown later) provides5. Business Income....................... 17
a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet
6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 22 your federal tax obligations. After each question is the
location in this publication where you will find the related7. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 25 discussion. 
8. Business Expenses..................... 26
IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top quality
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 35 service by helping them understand and meet their tax
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity10. Sample Returns........................ 36 and fairness to all.
11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 52
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
12. How To Get More Information............. 53 ments about this publication and your suggestions for
future editions.Index .................................... 57
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site at
www.irs.gov.
You can write to us at the following address:Introduction
The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-Internal Revenue Service
mation about the federal tax laws that apply to smallTechnical Publications Branch
business owners who are sole proprietors and to statutoryW:CAR:MP:FP:P
employees. 1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224A sole proprietor is someone who owns an unincorpor-
ated business, including a limited liability company, by
himself or herself. A statutory employee has a checkmark We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
in box 13 of his or her Form W–2, Wage and Tax State- would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
ment. Statutory employees have to use Schedule C ornumber, including the area code, in your correspondence.
C–EZ to report their wages and expenses.
To use this publication, you will generally need the
following forms. Important Changes for 2001
• Form 1040 and its instructions.
The following are some of the tax changes for 2001. For• Schedule C or C–EZ and its instructions. information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2001 Tax Changes.See chapter 12 for information on ordering these forms.
Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-Husband-wife business.If you and your spouse jointlyment earnings subject to the social security part (12.4%) ofown and operate a business and share in the profits andthe self-employment tax increased to $80,400 for 2001.losses, you are partners in a partnership, whether or notFor more information, see Self-Employment Tax in chapteryou have a formal partnership agreement. Do not use 1.Schedule C or C-EZ. You must file Form 1065. For more
information on partnerships, see Publication 541, Partner- Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
ships. cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
This publication does not cover the topics listed in the 2001 is 341/2 cents a mile for all business miles. See Car
following table. and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
Page 3

Page 4 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note: The following is a list of questions you need to answer so you can fill out your federal
income tax return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication. )
What Must I Know Where To Find The Answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them?
What forms must I file?
What must I do if I have employees?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses?
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return?
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return?
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it?
What are my rights as a taxpayer?
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters?
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or may I start it in any
other month?
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses?
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year?
See chapter 1.
See chapter 1.
See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
See chapter 5.
See chapter 8.
See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
See chapter 9.
See chapter 3.
See chapter 11.
See chapter 12.
/H22668/H22668
Third party designee.Beginning with your tax return for ployee pension, you can receive a tax credit of 50% of the
2001, you can check the “Yes” box in the “Third Party first $1,000 of qualified startup costs. For more information,
Designee” area of your return to authorize the IRS tosee Publication 553.
discuss your return with a friend, family member, or anyHealth insurance deduction for the self-employed.Forother person you choose. This allows the IRS to call the2002, this deduction is 70% of the amount you paid forperson you identified as your designee to ask any ques-medical insurance for yourself and your family. For moretions that may arise during the processing of your return. It
information, see Insurance in chapter 8.also allows your designee to perform certain actions. See
your income tax package for details. Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-
ment earnings subject to the social security part of the
self-employment tax increases to $84,900 for 2002.
Important Changes for 2002
The following are some of the tax changes for 2002. ForImportant Remindersinformation on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2001 Tax Changes. Accounting methods. Certain small business taxpayers
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method ofNew tax credit for employer provided child-care facili-
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-ties.For tax years beginning after 2001, you can receive a
ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.tax credit of 25% of the qualified expenses you paid for
employee child care and 10% of qualified expenses youPhotographs of missing children.The Internal Reve-paid for child care resource and referral services. Thisnue Service is a proud partner with the National Center forcredit is limited to $150,000 each year. For more informa-Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missingtion, see Publication 553. children selected by the Center may appear in this publica-
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can helpNew tax credit for small business pension plan startup
bring these children home by looking at the photographscosts.For tax years beginning after 2001, if you begin a
and calling 1–800–THE –LOST (1 –800–843–5678) ifnew qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan
you recognize a child.(including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
Page 4

Page 5 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not eligible to get) a social security number (SSN). To
apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7, Application for IRS
1. Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, with the IRS. It
usually takes about 30 days to get an ITIN. Enter it wher-
ever an SSN is requested on a tax return. If you mustFiling and Paying include another person’s SSN on your return and that
person does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter thatBusiness Taxes person’s ITIN. 
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
holder to social security benefits or change theIntroduction
holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
Employer identification number (EIN).You must alsotaxpayer identification numbers.
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifTable 1–1 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay,
you do either of the following.their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
Table 1–2 provides checklists that highlight the typical
• Pay wages to one or more employees.forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out
• File pension or excise tax returns.of business.
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen- If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNdars for 2002. It has tax calendars that tell youon your Schedule C or C–EZ.when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
You can get an EIN either through the mail or by tele-
phone. But first you must fill out Form SS–4, Application
for Employer Identification Number. This form is availableUseful Items from either the SSA or the IRS. You may want to see:
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
Publication form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax EIN.
Form (and Instructions) When you need identification numbers of other per-
sons. In operating your business, you will probably make❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
certain payments you must report on information returns.❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals These payments are discussed under Information Re-
turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total❏ Sch C –EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit From Business amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’s
identification number and your identification number on the❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax
returns and statements.See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
Employee. If you have employees, you must get antions and forms.
SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on the
employee’s social security card. If the employee’s name isIdentification Numbers not correct as shown on the card, the employee should
request a new card from the SSA. This may occur if theThis section explains three types of taxpayer identificationemployee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how tovorce.get them. If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
Social security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSNshould file Form SS–5 with the SSA.
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thisOther payee.If you make payments to someone who isnumber on each of your individual income tax forms, suchnot your employee and you must report the payments onas Form 1040 and its schedules. an information return, get that person’s SSN. If you mustTo apply for an SSN, use Form SS–5, Application for areport payments to an organization, such as a corporationSocial Security Card. This form is available from Socialor partnership, you must get its EIN.Security Administration (SSA) offices or by calling To get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W–9, Re-1–800–772–1213. It is also available from the SSA’s quest for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.Internet web site at www.ssa.gov. A payee who does not provide you with an identification
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
IRS will issue an ITIN to an alien who does not have (and is mation on backup withholding, see the Form W–9 instruc-
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.
5498, and W–2G. If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax
Income Tax (discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your
return. Use Form 1040–ES to figure and pay the tax. If youThis part explains whether you have to file an income taxdo not have to make estimated tax payments, you may payreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay theany tax due when you file your return. For more informationtax. on estimated tax, see Publication 505. 
Do I Have To File Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay
an Income Tax Return? enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2001 by
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
You have to file an income tax return for 2001 if your netmay have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If yourwill figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400,can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
you still have to file an income tax return if you meet anyIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a
other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-
tions. mation, see Publication 505. 
How Do I File?
Self-Employment TaxFile your income tax return on Form 1040 and attach
Schedule C  or Schedule C–EZ.  Enter the net profit orSelf-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security andloss from Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ on page 1 of Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-Form 1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or lossselves. It is similar to the social security and Medicarefrom your business. If you operated more than one busi-taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.ness as a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate
Schedule C for each business. You can use the simpler If you earned income as a statutory employee,
Schedule C–EZ if you operated only one business as a you do not pay SE tax on that income. 
sole proprietorship, you did not have a net loss, and youCAUTION
!
meet the other requirements listed in Part I of the schedule.
(Part I of Schedule C–EZ is printed in chapter 10.)
Social security coverage.Your payments of SE tax con-
tribute to your coverage under the social security system ifWhat are my filing options?You may be able to file a
you are covered. Social security coverage provides youpaperless return using IRS e-file (electronic filing). This
includes the following options. with retirement benefits, disability benefits, survivor bene-
fits, and hospital insurance (Medicare) benefits. Social
1) Using a tax professional who is an authorized IRSsecurity benefits are available to self-employed persons
e-file provider. just as they are to wage earners.
2) Using your personal computer. By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
come, you could cause your social security bene-3) Using a telephone (TeleFile). fits to be lower when you retire.CAUTION
!
For details about IRS e-file, see the Form 1040 instruc-
tions. How to become insured under social security.You
must be insured under the social security system beforeWhen is my tax return due?Form 1040 for calendar you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-year 2001 is due by April 15, 2002. If you use a fiscal yearsured if you have the required number of credits (also(explained in chapter 2), your return is due by the 15th daycalled quarters of coverage), discussed next.of the 4th month after the end of your fiscal year. If you file
Earning credits in 2001 and 2002.For 2001, you re-late, you may have to pay penalties and interest. If you
ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for eachcannot file your return on time, use Form 4868, Application
$830 ($870 for 2002) of income subject to social security.for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual
Therefore, for 2001, if you had income (self-employmentIncome Tax Return, to request an automatic 4-month ex-
and wages) of $3,320 that was subject to social securitytension. 
taxes, you received four credits ($3,320 ÷ $830).
For an explanation of the number of credits you mustHow Do I Pay Income Tax?
have to be insured, and of the benefits available to you and
your family under the social security program, consult yourFederal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it
nearest Social Security Administration office.as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–1. Which Forms Must I File?
If You Are Liable For: Due By:
1
Income tax 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year
File with Form 1040.
15th day of 4th, 6th and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31
4
See Publication 15.
Self-employment tax
Social security and Medicare taxes
and income tax withholding
Providing information on social
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax
Filing information returns for
payments to nonemployees and
transactions with other persons
Excise tax
Estimated tax
1040 and Schedule C
2 
or C-EZ
Schedule SE
1040-ES
941
8109 (to make deposits)
3
W-2 (to employee)
W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security
Administration)
940 or 940-EZ
8109 (to make deposits)
3
See Information Returns.
See Excise Taxes.
January 31
4
Last day of February (March 31 if
filing electronically)
4
January 31
4
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability
for unpaid tax is more than $100
Forms 1099—to the recipient by
January 31 and to the IRS by
February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically)
See the instructions to the forms.
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
1
If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information,
see Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2002.
2
File a separate schedule for each business.
3
Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
Use Form:
4
See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Making false statements to get or to increase The SE tax rules apply even if you are fully in-
social security benefits may subject you to penal- sured under social security or have started re-
ties. ceiving benefits.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit forMethods for figuring net earnings.There are three
posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSA ways to figure net earnings from self-employment.
will give you credit only for self-employment income re-
ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15• The regular method
days after the tax year you earned the income. If you file• The nonfarm optional methodyour tax return or report a change in your self-employment
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-• The farm optional method
ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA
will not change its records to increase your self-employ-You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
ment income. to use one or both of the optional methods. Multiply your
total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) to get
your net earnings under the regular method.Who must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SE
tax and file Schedule SE if either of the following applies.Why use the optional methods?You use the optional
methods when you have a loss or a small net profit and any1) Your net earnings from self-employment (excludingone of the following applies.church employee income) were $400 or more.
2) You had church employee income of $108.28 or
• You want to receive credit for social security benefit
more. coverage.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You incurred child or dependent care expenses for
which you could claim a credit. (An optional methodExcise Taxes
may increase your earned income, which could in-
crease your credit.) This section explains the excise taxes you may have to pay
and the forms you have to file if you do any of the following.
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,
• Manufacture or sell certain products.
which could increase your credit.) • Operate certain kinds of businesses.
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-SE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3% ucts.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
• Receive payment for certain services.Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first
For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,$80,400 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
Excise Taxes for 2002.2001 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formretirement (tier 1) tax.
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2001
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-tax. pleting chemicals and imported products containingIf your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-or manufactured with these chemicals.ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
• Communications and air transportation taxes.least $80,400, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you • Fuel taxes.must pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,net earnings.
and tractors.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
• Luxury tax on the first retail sale of passenger vehi-to income on line 27 of Form 1040. 
cles.
TIP
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
of different articles.More information.For more information on the SE tax,
see Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to report2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-information, see the instructions for Form 2290.
ing items.
ATF forms. If you produce, sell, or import guns, tobacco,
• Social security and Medicare taxes. or alcohol products, or if you manufacture equipment for
their production, you may be liable for one or more excise• Federal income tax withholding.
taxes. Report these taxes on forms filed with the Bureau of
• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF).
For more information, see Publication 15, Circular E, Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterlyEmployer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your taxexcise tax return on Form 720, you may have to depositresponsibilities as an employer. your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
depositing excise taxes, see Publication 510. To help you determine whether the people working for
you are your employees, see Publication 15 – A,
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has
information to help you determine whether an individual isInformation Returns
an independent contractor or an employee.
If you make or receive payments in your business, youIf you incorrectly classify an employee as an
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.independent contractor, you can be held liable for
The IRS compares the payments shown on the informationemployment taxes for that worker plus a penalty.CAUTION
!
returns with each person’s income tax return to see if the
An independent contractor is someone who is payments were included in income. You must give a copy
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or of each information return you are required to file to the
pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–2. Going Out of Business Checklists
Income Tax File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
(Note: The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if
you ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms. )
File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or exchange
property used in your business or in which the business use of certain section 179 or
listed property drops to 50% or less.
File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-Employment Tax File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment Taxes File Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage payments.
Note: Do not forget to check the box above line 1, If you do not have to file returns in
the future..., and enter the date final wages were paid.
File Form 940 or 940-EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were paid.
Note: Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns in the future...,
under Question C box.
Information Returns Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you make
final wage payments. Note: These forms are generally due by the due date of your
final Form 941.
File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note: These forms are generally due within 1
month after the due date of your final Form 941.
Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least $600
for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in which you go
out of business.
File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
If You Are Liable For: You May Need To:
low, you may have to use other returns to report certainForm W –2. You must file Form W–2, Wage and Tax
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details onStatement, to report payments to your employees, such as
information returns and when you have to file them, seewages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,
the Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G. social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned
income credit payments. For more information on what to
Form 1099 –MISC. Use Form 1099–MISC, Miscellane- report on Form W–2, see the Instructions for Forms W–2ous Income, to report certain payments you make in yourand W –3.business. These payments include the following items.
• Payments of $600 or more for services performedPenalties.The law provides for the following penalties if
for your business by people not treated as your em-you do not file Form 1099–MISC or Form W–2 or do not
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,correctly report the information. For more information, seeaccountants, or directors. the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rentsW –2G.
paid to real estate agents.
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forapplies if you do not file information returns by theservices, such as winnings on TV or radio shows. due date, if you do not include all required informa-
• Royalty payments of $10 or more. tion, or if you report incorrect information. 
• Payments to certain crew members by operators of• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
fishing boats. penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
ment to a payee by the required date, if you do notYou also use Form 1099–MISC to report your sales of
include all required information, or if you report incor-$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
rect information. anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Waiver of penalty.This penalty will not apply if you can income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
show that the failure was due to reasonable cause and not the following tax years.
willful neglect.
• A calendar tax year.In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
the required information, or for including incorrect informa-• A fiscal tax year.
tion, on a de minimis (small) number of information returnsYou adopt a tax year when you file your first income taxif you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returnsreturn. You must adopt your first tax year by the due dateare due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of(not including extensions) for filing a return for that year.10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
required to file for the year.) Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31.Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of thePayments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
following apply.if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-
tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash• You do not keep adequate records.includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-
• You have no annual accounting period.cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s and
traveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in- • Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscalclude a check drawn on an individual’s personal account year.(personal check). For more information, see Publication
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re- If you filed your first income tax return using the calendarceived in a Trade or Business). tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor,
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless youPenalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-
get IRS approval to change it. See Change in tax year,ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (or
later.causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, or
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintainstructuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
31 of each year.
Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive2. months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52–53 week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on theAccounting Periods last day of a month.
If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourand Methods
books and records and report your income and expenses
using the same type of tax year.
For more information on a fiscal tax year, including aIntroduction
52–53 week tax year, see Publication 538.
You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax
return for an annual accounting period called a “tax year.” Change in tax year.Once you have chosen your tax
Also, you must consistently use an accounting method thatyear, you must, with certain exceptions, get IRS approval
clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.to change it. To get approval, you must file Form 1128,
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year. You
may have to pay a fee. For more information, see the formUseful Items
instructions. You may want to see:
Publication
Accounting Methods❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
tions and forms. when and how income and expenses are reported. Your
accounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment you
use for any material item.
Accounting Periods
You choose an accounting method for your business
When preparing a statement of income and expenses when you file your first income tax return that includes a
(generally your income tax return), you must use your Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to
books and records for a specific interval of time called an change your accounting method, you must generally get
accounting period. The annual accounting period for your IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
Page 10 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 11 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Kinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of the Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks
following accounting methods. or postpone taking possession of similar property from one
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You• Cash method. must report the income in the year the property is received
• An accrual method. or made available to you without restriction.
• Special methods of accounting for certain items ofExample. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-income and expenses. titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-
• Combination method using elements of two or more cember 2001. She was told in December that her payment
of the above. was available. At her request, she was not paid until
January 2002. She must include this payment in her 2001
You must use the same accounting method to figureincome because it was constructively received in 2001.
your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, youChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the taxmust use an accounting method that clearly shows youryear is constructive receipt of income in that year, even ifincome. you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.Business and personal items.You can account for busi-
ness and personal items under different accounting meth-Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-ods. For example, you can figure your business incomecember 31, 2001, from a patient. She could not deposit theunder an accrual method, even if you use the cash methodcheck in her business account until January 2, 2002. Sheto figure personal items. must include this fee in her income for 2001.
Debts paid by another person or canceled.If yourTwo or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
relief as income. If you receive income in this way, youincome of each business. They are separate and distinct
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-only if you maintain complete and separate books and
celed or paid. See Canceled Debt under Kinds of Incomerecords for each business.
in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier toyou make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory isspecial rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generallyRepayments in chapter 13 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales andExpenses.purchases. See Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses inUnder the cash method, include in your gross income allthe tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receivebusiness expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2000, Mrs. Sycamore sent
Expenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expenseyou a check for interior decorating services you provided to
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.her. You received the check on January 2, 2001. You must
include the amount of the check in income for 2001.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2001 for a business insurance policy effec-Constructive receipt.You have constructive receipt of
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inincome when an amount is credited to your account or
2001 and $500 in 2002.made available to you without restriction. You do not need
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as
Accrual Method
having received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2001. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2002. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2001. the correct year.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 11

Page 12 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You generally include an advance payment in incomeIncome — General Rule
for the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can
Under an accrual method, you generally include anuse an alternative method. For information about the alter-
amount in your gross income for the tax year in which allnative method, see Publication 538.
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
Expensesaccuracy.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generallyExample. You are a calendar year, accrual methoddeduct or capitalize a business expense when both thetaxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2001.following apply.You billed the customer in the first week of January 2002,
but you did not receive payment until February 2002. You1) The all-events test has been met. The test has beenmust include the amount received for the computer in yourmet when:2001 income.
a) All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
ity, andIncome — Special Rules
b) The liability can be determined with reasonable
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-accuracy.
ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
schedule for services. 2) Economic performance has occurred.
Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimatedEconomic performance. You generally cannot deduct oramount in gross income, and later determine the exactcapitalize a business expense until economic performanceamount is different, take the difference into account in theoccurs. If your expense is for property or services providedtax year in which you make the determination. to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
occurs as the property or services are provided or as theChange in payment schedule for services.If you per-
property is used. If your expense is for property or servicesform services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you
you provide to others, economic performance occurs asmust accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree
you provide the property or services. An exception allowsto receive payments at a lower rate until you complete the
certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during aservices and then receive the difference.
tax year even though economic performance has not oc-Advance payments for services.Generally, you reportcurred. For more information on economic performance,an advance payment for services to be performed in a latersee Publication 538.tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
However, if you receive an advance payment for servicesExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, youaccrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies incan choose to postpone including the advance payment inDecember 2001. You receive the supplies and the bill inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-December, but you pay the bill in January 2002. You canpone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2001 because all events that fix theFor more information about reporting advance pay-fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilityments for services, see Publication 538. That publicationcould be reasonably determined, and economic perform-also explains special rules for reporting the following typesance occurred in that year.of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2001, even if the• Advance payments for service agreements.
supplies are not delivered until 2002 (when economic• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty performance occurs).contracts.
Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid interest. sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
business, you must generally take inventories into account• Prepaid rent.
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-Advance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.cluding income from advance payments on agreements forFor more information, see Inventories, later.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of yourSpecial rule for related persons.You cannot deduct
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv- business expenses and interest owed to a related person
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary who uses the cash method of accounting until you make
to treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a the payment and the corresponding amount is includible in
gift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat the related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-
amounts that are due and payable as amounts you re- ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which the
ceived. expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If a
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con- For more information, see Cash Method of Accounting
for Qualifying Taxpayers under Cash Method in Publica-tinue to apply even if your relationship with the person
tion 538.ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person. Items included in inventory.If you are required to ac-Related persons include members of your immediatecount for inventories, include the following items whenfamily, including only brothers and sisters (either whole oraccounting for your inventory.
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
• Merchandise or stock in trade.a list of other related persons, see Publication 538.
• Raw materials.
Combination Method • Work in process.
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,• Finished products.
and special methods of accounting if the combination• Supplies that physically become a part of the itemclearly shows your income and expenses and you use itintended for sale.consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at the
come, you must generally use an accrual method forbeginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine the
later.) You can use the cash method for all othervalue of your inventory, you need a method for identifying
the items in your inventory and a method for valuing theseitems of income and expenses.
items.• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for allyou must use the cash method for reporting yourkinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourexpenses. inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent frompenses, you must use an accrual method for figuring
year to year.your income.
• If you use a combination method that includes theMore information.For more information about invento-
cash method, treat that combination method as theries, see Publication 538.
cash method.
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizeInventories
the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production
or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofGenerally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather thanyour business, you must keep an inventory and use the
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover theaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goodsHowever, if you are a qualifying taxpayer, you can choose
sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-to do the following, even if you produce, purchase, or sell
erty.merchandise in your business.
Activities subject to the rules.You are subject to the• Use the cash method of accounting.
uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the following,
• Not keep an inventory, even if you do not change tounless the property is produced for your use other than in a
the cash method. business or an activity carried on for profit.
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For thisYou are a qualifying taxpayer only if you meet the gross
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,receipts test for each tax year ending after December 16,
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-1998. Your average annual gross receipts must be erty.$1,000,000 or less for the 3 tax years ending with the prior
tax year. You must test 1998, 1999, and 2000 to see if you• Acquire property for resale.
qualify to use the cash method and to not keep an inven-
tory for 2001. You qualify if your average annual grossExceptions.These rules do not apply to the following
property.receipts for 1996, 1997, and 1998 are $1,000,000 or less
(1998 test), your average annual gross receipts for 1997,1) Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-1998, and 1999 are $1,000,000 or less (1999 test), andage annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.your average annual gross receipts for 1998, 1999, and
2000 are $1,000,000 or less (2000 test). A tax shelter2) Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
cannot be a qualifying taxpayer. ing conditions.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Your indirect costs of producing the property areUseful Items
$200,000 or less. You may want to see:
b) You use the cash method of accounting and do
Publicationnot account for inventories. For more information,
see Inventories, earlier. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Special Methods ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
There are special methods of accounting for certain items❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and Losses
of income or expense. These include the following.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
• Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publicationtions and forms.
535, Business Expenses.
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publication
535. What Is a Disposition
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publicationof Property?535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To A disposition of property includes the following transac-
Depreciate Property. tions.
• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In- • You sell property for cash or other property.stallment Sales.
• You exchange property for other property.
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
Change in of a lease.
Accounting Method • You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
generally get IRS approval before you can change to• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
another method. A change in your accounting method • You abandon property.includes a change in:
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
1) Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac- your mortgage or repossesses your property.
crual method, and
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
2) Your treatment of any material item. you receive property or money in payment.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for • Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
Change in Accounting Method. You may have to pay a fee. the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-For more information, see the form instructions. erty or money in payment.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544.3.
Nontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of property
are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isDispositions of not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain
or loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise
Business Property
dispose of the property you receive.
Like-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-
Introduction change of property for the same kind of property. It is the
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be aIf you dispose of business property, you may have a gainlike-kind exchange, the property traded and the propertyor loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in some
received must be both of the following.cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that
is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have• Business or investment property.a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to
• Like property.report the gain or loss.
Page 14 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 15 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form value of all property or services you receive. The amount
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information aboutyou realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544 assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
property you transferred is subject, such as real estateInstallment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-taxes or a mortgage.erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax
Fair market value.Fair market value is the price atyear of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-which the property would change hands between a buyer
gage from a third party, you probably have an installmentand a seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having
sale. reasonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
For more information about installment sales, see Publi-
cation 537, Installment Sales. Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or lossSale of a business.The sale of a business is not usually
for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included ina sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business
gross income. Recognized losses are deductible fromare sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-as being sold separately for determining the treatment of
gain or loss. tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax-
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of aable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesfrom the disposition of property held for personal use.
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
Acquisition Statement Under Sections 338 and 1060, to Is My Gain or Lossprovide this information. The buyer and seller should each
Ordinary or Capital?attach Form 8594 to their federal income tax return for the
year in which the sale occurred. You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinaryFor more information about the sale of a business, see
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure yourchapter 2 of Publication 544.
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
part, everything you own and use for personal purposes orHow Do I Figure investment is a capital asset.
a Gain or Loss? Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
Table 3–1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains andIF your... THEN you have a... losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
Adjusted basis is more than the For more information about ordinary and capital gains
amount realized, Loss. and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
Amount realized is more than
the adjusted basis, Gain. Is My Capital Gain or Loss
Short Term or Long Term?Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair market
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needIf you have a capital gain or loss, you must determineto know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
is long or short term depends on how long you own theBasis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually its
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or other
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,
inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you must
Table 3–2. Do I Have a Short-Term oruse a basis other than its cost. For more information about
basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets. Long-Term Gain or Loss?
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is yourIF you hold theoriginal cost or other basis plus certain additions, andproperty... THEN you have a...minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-
1 year or less, Short-term capital gain or loss.alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-
ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,More than 1 year, Long-term capital gain or loss.are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
For more information about short-term and long-termAmount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 15

Page 16 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.Where Do I Report
Alcohol fuels credit (Form 6478).This credit applies toGains and Losses? alcohol you sold or used as fuel. Alcohol, for purposes of
this credit, includes ethanol and methanol. It does notReport gains and losses from the following dispositions on
include alcohol produced from petroleum, natural gas,the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
coal, or peat. Nor does it include alcohol of less than 150how to fill them out.
proof. For more information, see Form 6478.
Dispositions of business property and depreciable
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-property.Use Form 4797. If you have a taxable gain, you
opment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies tomay also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
certain contributions made to a selected community devel-
Like-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824, Like-Kind Ex- opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and mation, see Form 8847.
Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Credit for social security taxes paid on certain em-
Installment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-ployee tips (Form 8846).The credit is generally equal to
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Scheduleyour (employer’s) portion of social security and Medicare
D (Form 1040). taxes paid on tips received by employees of your food and
beverage establishment where tipping is customary. TheCasualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties and credit applies regardless of whether the food is consumedThefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. on or off your business premises. However, you cannot get
credit for your part of social security and Medicare taxes onCondemned property. Use Form 4797. You may also
those tips that are used to meet the federal minimum wagehave to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
rate that applies to the employee under the Fair Labor
Standards Act. For more information, see Form 8846.
Disabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled ac-
cess credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible
4. small business that pays or incurs expenses to provide
access to persons who have disabilities. You must pay or
incur the expenses to enable your business to comply with
General Business the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. For more
information, see Form 8826.
Credit
Empowerment zone employment credit (Form 8844).
You may qualify for this credit if you have employees and
are engaged in a business in an empowerment zone for
Introduction
which the credit is available. For more information, seeYour general business credit for the year consists of yourForm 8844 and Publication 954.carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
Enhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This credittotal of your current year business credits. In addition, your
applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs forgeneral business credit for the current year may be in-
the tax year. For more information, see Form 8830.creased later by the carryback of business credits from
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.Indian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-All of the following credits are part of the general busi-plies to the part of the qualified wages and health insur-ness credit. The form you use to figure each credit isance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid orshown in parentheses. Be sure you also read How To incurred during a tax year that is more than the sum of theClaim the Credit later because you may also have to fill outcomparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid or in-Form 3800, General Business Credit, in certain situations.curred during calendar year 1993. The employee must be
an enrolled member, or the spouse of an enrolled member,Useful Items of an Indian tribe. The employee must perform substan-You may want to see: tially all of his or her services within an Indian reservation
while living on or near the reservation. For more informa-Publication tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.
❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zones andInvestment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit isOther Distressed Communities the total of the following three credits.
Form (and Instructions) • Energy credit.
❏ 3800 General Business Credit • Reforestation credit.
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— Individuals • Rehabilitation credit.
Page 16 Chapter 4 General Business Credit

Page 17 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Energy credit.This credit applies to certain expenses
for solar or geothermal energy property you placed inHow To Claim the Credit
service during the tax year. For more information, see the
instructions for Form 3468. If you meet all the following conditions, use only the form
shown in parentheses with each of the credits discussedReforestation credit.The reforestation credit appliesabove.to part of the expenses you incur each year to forest or
reforest property you hold for growing trees for sale or use
• You have only one current year business credit.
in the commercial production of timber products. For infor-• You have no carryback or carryover credit(s).mation about these expenses, see chapter 9 in Publication
• The credit (other than the low-income housing credit)535, Business Expenses.
is not from a passive activity. See Form 8582–CR,Rehabilitation credit.This credit applies to expenses Passive Activity Credit Limitations, for informationyou incur to rehabilitate certain buildings. For more infor-about passive activity credits. mation, see the instructions for Form 3468.
If you do not meet all these conditions, you must also fill
out Form 3800.Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
generally applies to qualified low-income housing buildingsAlthough the empowerment zone employmentplaced in service after 1986. For more information, see credit (Form 8844) is part of the general businessForm 8586. credit, do not report it on Form 3800.CAUTION
!
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug creditAlternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may notapplies to qualified expenses incurred in testing certainowe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum taxdrugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases andon Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. Afterconditions.” For more information, see Form 8820. you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. 
Renewable electricity production credit (Form 8835).
The renewable electricity production credit is available to
sellers of electricity. It is based on electricity that was sold
to unrelated persons and was produced from qualified
5.energy resources at a qualified facility during the 10-year
period after the facility is placed in service. For more
information, see Form 8835.
Business Income
Research credit (Form 6765).The research credit is
designed to encourage businesses to increase the Introduction
amounts they spend on research and experimental activi-This chapter primarily explains business income and howties. The credit is generally 20% of the amount by whichto account for it on your tax return. It also explains whatyour research expenses for the year are more than youritems are not considered income.base amount. However, the credit does not apply to ex-If there is a connection between any income you receivepenses you pay or incur after June 30, 2004. For moreand your business, the income is business income. Ainformation, see Form 6765. connection exists if it is clear that the payment of income
would not have been made if you did not have the busi-
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). The ness.
welfare-to-work credit provides businesses with an incen-You can have business income even if you are not
tive to hire long-term family assistance recipients. How-involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
ever, the credit does not apply to wages you pay or incurfrom work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
for qualified long-term family assistance recipients whocan be business income.
begin work for you after December 31, 2001. For moreYou report most business income, such as income from
information, see Form 8861 and Publication 954. the sale of your products or services, on Schedule C or
C –EZ. But you report the income from the sale of business
assets, such as land and office buildings, on other formsWork opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work oppor-
instead of Schedule C or C–EZ. For information on sellingtunity credit provides businesses with an incentive to hire
business assets, see chapter 3.individuals from targeted groups that have a particularly
high unemployment rate or other special employment Nonemployee compensation. Business income
needs. However, the credit does not apply to wages you includes amounts you received in your business
pay or incur for qualified targeted group members who that were properly shown on Forms 1099–MISC.
TIP
begin work for you after December 31, 2001. For moreThis includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more informationinformation, see Form 5884 and Publication 954.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 17

Page 18 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099–MISC you goods or services provided or received. As soon as units
received. are credited to your account, you can use them to buy
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to other
members.
You must include the value of credit units you received
in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units areKinds of Income
credited to your account.
The dollar value of units received for services by anYou must report on your tax return all income you receive
employee of the club, who can use the units in the samefrom your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
manner as other members, must be included in thecases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
employee’s gross income for the tax year in which re-checks, and credit card charges. But business income can
ceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medicarebe in other forms, such as property or services. These and
taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), andother types of income are explained next.
income tax withholding. See Publication 15, Circular E,If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomeEmployer’s Tax Guide.from sources outside the United States (foreign
income), you must report that income on your taxCAUTION
!
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and usereturn unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youthe cash method of accounting. You join a barter club andlive outside the United States, you may be able to excludeagree to provide plumbing services to any member for apart or all of your foreign-source business income. Forspecified number of hours. Each member has access to adetails, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizensdirectory that lists the members of the club and the ser-and Resident Aliens Abroad. vices available.
Members contact each other directly and request ser-
vices to be performed. You are not required to provideBartering for Property or Services services unless requested by another member, but you
can use as many of the offered services as you wishBartering is an exchange of property or services. You mustwithout paying a fee.include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fairYou must include the fair market value of any servicesmarket value of property or services you receive in bar-you receive from club members in your gross receiptstering. If you exchange services with another person andwhen you receive them even if you have not provided anyyou both have agreed ahead of time on the value of theservices to club members.services, that value will be accepted as the fair market
value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.Information returns.If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-forms.form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
• Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter
the corporation. You must include the fair market value ofExchange Transactions.
the shares in income. • Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income.
Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art toFor information about these forms, see the General In-
compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of yourstructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.
apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
Real Estate Rentsclude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
rental income. If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both
who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an
report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C ororganization that each year gives its members a directory
C –EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofof members and the services each member provides.
owner described in the preceding sentence, report theMembers get in touch with other members directly and
rental income and expenses on Schedule E, instead of onbargain for the value of the services to be performed.
Schedule C or C–EZ.In return for accounting services you provided for the
house painter’s business, the house painter painted yourPrepaid rent.Advance payments received under a lease
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair marketthat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment
value of the services you received from the house painter.are income in the year you receive them. This is true no
The house painter must include the fair market value ofmatter what accounting method or period you use.
your accounting services in his or her gross receipts.
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for
Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your
uses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts for gross receipts in the year it is received.
Page 18 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 19 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-Canceled Debtceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in gross
receipts in the year received. The following explains the general rule for including can-
celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generalPayments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-rule.ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your
debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
General Ruleexample of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
your property taxes on leased real property. Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other than
as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledSettlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report thement of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased propertycanceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredto its original condition are income in the amount that thethe debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,payments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
nected by the lessee.
Exceptions
Personal Property Rents
The following discussion covers some exceptions to the
If you are in the business of renting personal propertygeneral rule for canceled debt.
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule CPrice reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to theor C–EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described inseller for property you bought and the seller reduces thethe preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also beamount you owe, you generally do not have income fromreceived for renting personal property. If you receive any ofthe reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treatthose payments, include them in your gross receipts asthe amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-explained in that discussion. ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-
celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt wouldInterest and dividends may be considered business in-
have led to a deduction.come.
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that youExample. You get accounting services for your busi-have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Yourcome if you are in the business of lending money.accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
accounting services. How you treat the canceled debtUncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomes
depends on your method of accounting.uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual
method of accounting, you must include in gross income
• Cash method – You do not include the canceledinterest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
debt in income because payment of the debt wouldble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
have been deductible as a business expense.may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
in chapter 8. • Accrual method – You include the canceled debt in
income because the expense was deductible whenUnstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
you incurred the debt.an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of each
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest and
For information on the cash and accrual methods ofOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
accounting, see chapter 2.Sales.
Dividends.Generally, dividends are business income to
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-Exclusions
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-
Do not include canceled debt in income in the followingcome. If you hold stock as a personal investment
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,separately from your business activity, the dividends from
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-the stock are nonbusiness income.
ness. For more information, see Form 982.  If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all or
1) The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy casepart of the dividend as business income on your return. To
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-find out how much you have to report, see Recovery of
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.items previously deducted under Other Income, later.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 19

Page 20 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. erty business debt secured by this property imme-
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you diately before the cancellation.
are insolvent. See Publication 908.
2) The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property3) The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to aheld by you immediately before the cancellation.qualified person. See chapter 4 in Publication 225,These adjusted bases are determined after any ba-Farmer’s Tax Guide. sis reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy,
4) The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- insolvency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into
ness debt. This situation is explained later. account depreciable real property acquired in con-
templation of the cancellation.If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-Choice. To make this choice, complete Form 982 andtions (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place whenattach it to your income tax return for the tax year in whichyou are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3) and (4)the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by thedo not apply to the extent you are insolvent. due date (including the extensions). If you timely filed your
return for the year without making the choice, you can stillDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any
make the choice by filing an amended return within 6debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-you hold.
sions). For more information, see When to file in the form
Qualified real property business debt.You can choose instructions.
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, you
Other Incomemust reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginningThe following discussion explains how to treat other typesof your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-of business income you may receive.lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyRestricted property.Restricted property is property that
before the disposition. has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
restricted stock or other property for services performed,Cancellation of qualified real property businessthe fair market value of the property in excess of your costdebt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (otheris included in your income on Schedule C or C–EZ whenthan qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi-the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to betions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
information on including restricted property in income, see1) It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.property used in a trade or business.
Gains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C–EZ2) It was secured by such real property.
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither3) It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.times. Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.a) Before January 1, 1993.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherb) After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange ofto acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale toreal property.
customers on Schedule C or C–EZ. In general, you report
them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated4) It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
interest) when you receive them.
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
Lost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent it
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C–EZ any pay-does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
ment you receive for the lost income of your business fromYou cannot exclude more than either of the following
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C oramounts.
C –EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive
1) The excess (if any) of: the payment.
a) The outstanding principal of qualified real prop-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-
erty business debt (immediately before the can-tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the
cellation), over following injuries connected with your business.
b) The fair market value (immediately before the• Patent infringement.
cancellation) of the business real property that is• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-• Antitrust injury.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Economic injury.You may be entitled to a deduction including in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
against the income if it compensates you for actual eco- you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
amounts. find out when you recapture the deduction.
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages inSale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may have
in the tax year to recover that amount. to report as income all or part of the gain due to deprecia-
tion. You figure the income due to depreciation recapture
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-in Part III of Form 4797. For more information, see chapterducted. 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets.Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them inItems That Are Not Income
your income on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, do not
include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of aIn some cases the property or money you receive is not
related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost ofincome.
goods sold.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not
Recovery of items previously deducted.If you recoverincome.
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,
Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are notinclude the recovery in income on Schedule C or C–EZ.
income until you realize the increases through a sale orHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
other taxable disposition.not reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
reduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery fromLeasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings orincome, you must include with your return a computationmakes improvements to your property, the increase in theshowing how you figured the exclusion. value of the property due to the improvements is not
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that theExample. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-improvements are a payment of rent to you, then thecome of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and otherincrease in value would be income.allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal
exemptions of $5,800. He would not pay income tax even ifExchange of like-kind property.If you exchange your
he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he will not reportbusiness property or property you hold for investment
as income any part of the $300 he may recover in anysolely for property of a like kind to be used in your business
future year. or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is notException for depreciation.This rule does not apply
deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is theto depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rules
trade-in of a business automobile for another businessexplained next.
automobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3.
Recapture of depreciation.In the following situations,
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersyou have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisemeans you include in income part or all of the depreciation
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneeyou deducted in previous years.
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods
Listed property.If your business use of listed propertyon consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% orsignee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the propertyshipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-until it is sold.
tion deduction. You do this by including in income onDo not include merchandise you receive on consign-
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business on merchandise consigned to you in your income when
Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
See Do the Business-Use Limits Apply? in chapter 4 of commission, depending upon the method of accounting
Publication 946, How To Depreciate Property. That chap- you use.
ter explains how to determine whether property is used
more than 50% in your business. Construction allowances.If you enter into a lease after
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-Section 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a renttion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under bothasset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period thethe following conditions.percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by• Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali- 2) Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
fied long-term real property for use in your busi- count.
ness at that retail space. You must use the chosen method every year for all your
purchase discounts.Amount you can exclude.You can exclude the con- If you use the second method, the credit balance in thestruction allowance to the extent it does not exceed theaccount at the end of your tax year is business income.amount you spent for construction or improvements.Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (orsold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space foryour closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determiningof merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. average or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
dise.• Take into account options to renew when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do notTrade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-take into account any option to renew at fair marketlog prices and usually are not written into the invoice orvalue determined at the time of renewal. charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
• Two or more successive leases that are part of the
the cost of the merchandise purchased. See Trade dis-same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
counts in chapter 6.for the same or substantially similar retail space are
treated as one lease.
Payment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your property
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you doRetail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually orcupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of thebusiness of selling tangible personal property or services
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you willto the general public.
have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
Qualified long-term real property.Qualified long-termuntil the next year.
real property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
or otherwise present at, your retail space and that revertsSales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-
to the landlord when the lease ends. tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Accounting for Your Income Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differsvance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
tion discusses some of the more common differences thatInsurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anothermay affect business transactions. type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustFigure your business income on the basis of a tax yearsubtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.and according to your regular method of accounting (seeYou cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orchapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producingtheft loss.factor in your business, you usually have to use inventoriesFor information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are nottion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. 6.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
How To Figureagreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
For income tax purposes you can use either of the follow-Introduction
ing two methods to account for cash discounts.
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
1) Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for per-ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-
sonal use in chapter 6). tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.
Page 22 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 23 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer, earlier years. They are not a part of cost of goods sold for
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-figuring gross income for the year of the contribution. Costs
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.and expenses for the contributed property incurred in the
This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-year of the contribution are deductible as part of cost of
ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,goods sold for that year if this treatment of costs and
or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceexpenses is proper under your accounting method. If you
business and also sell or charge for the materials andtake such a deduction, those costs and expenses are not
supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-treated as resulting in a basis for the contributed property.
plies to you.
Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who usesIf you must account for an inventory in your busi-an accrual method of accounting. In 2001, you contributedness, you must generally use an accrual methodproperty from inventory to a church. It had a fair marketof accounting for your purchases and sales. SeeCAUTION
!
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2000chapter 2. properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of
the property, and in 2000, you properly deducted $50 of
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-
erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
Figuring Cost of Goods Sold –
allowed for 2001 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold theSchedule C Lines 35 – 42
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining grossFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35–42 of
income for 2001 must not include the $400. You removeSchedule C. These lines are reproduced below and are
that amount from opening inventory for 2001.explained in the discussion that follows.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-year’s closing inventory, attach explanation......
uted property in 2001 at a cost of $400, you would include
the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
u s e ................................. sold for 2001 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
other expenses attributable to the property for that year.
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-yourself..............................
duction for the contributed property.
38 Materials and supplies....................
Line 3639 Other costs............................
Purchases Less Cost of Items
40 Add lines 35 through 39................... Withdrawn for Personal Use
41 Inventory at end of year....................
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4....... includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased for
manufacture into a finished product.
Trade discounts.The differences between the statedLine 35
prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them areInventory at Beginning of Year called trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost ofDo not show the discount amount separately as an item inmerchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that yougross income.will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car inducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in
inventory reduced by a manufacturer’s rebate that repre-process, finished goods, and materials and supplies used
sents a trade discount.in manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closingCash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices forence in a schedule attached to your return. prompt payments. There are two methods of accounting
for cash discounts. You may either credit them to a sepa-Donation of inventory.If you donate any inventory item
rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasesto a charitable organization, the amount of your deductible
for the year. Whichever method you use, you must becontribution is the fair market value of the item minus the
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringamount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application foritem at its fair market value on the date of the gift.
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seeYou must remove from opening inventory the costs and
Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.expenses for the contributed property that you incurred in
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 23

Page 24 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, you sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
must include this credit balance in your business income at are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do not business expense when you use them. Business ex-
reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts. penses are discussed in chapter 8.
Purchase returns and allowances.You must deduct all
Line 39returns and allowances from your total purchases during
Other Coststhe year.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orMerchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-
mining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldchandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
are as follows.this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-Containers.Containers and packages that are an integralcount with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost ofsonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawinggoods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.A drawing account is a separate account you should
Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as aOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-“withdrawals account” or “personal account.” penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Line 37 overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included in
Cost of Labor
your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-Line 40chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do notAdd Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theerly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Yearthose employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include aSubtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directlyappropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part ofand supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you payusually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function thatyear.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Line 42the manufacturing process.
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold may be deducted as selling orWhen you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at the
administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborend of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,
costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold arethe remainder is your cost of goods sold during the tax
the direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsyear.
treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38
Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
Page 24 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 25 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Items To Check7.
Consider the following items before figuring your gross
profit.
Gross receipts.At the end of each business day, makeFiguring Gross Profit
sure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
receipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
registers to keep track of receipts. You should also use aIntroduction proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
for your business.After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your recordsyou are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-show the correct sales tax collected.mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withexpenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldIf you are filing Schedule C–EZ, your gross profit is yourusually be the same.gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained later
under Additions to Gross Profit. Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
sonal use —  use them yourself, provide them to your
family, or give them as personal gifts, etc. —  be sure toBusinesses that sell products.If you are filing Scheduleremove them from the cost of goods sold. For details onC, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.how to adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise with-Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anydrawn from sale in chapter 6.returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).
Returns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-
cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off the
dures should ensure all items have been included inactual sales price.
inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netUse inventory forms and adding machine tapes as thereceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from youronly evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-business. able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record whoBusinesses that sell services.You do not have to figure
made the physical count, who priced the items, who madethe cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an
the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. Theseincome-producing factor for your business. Your gross
forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record tominus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most
support its validity.professions and businesses that sell services rather than
Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in
this way.
Testing GrossIllustration.This illustration of the gross profit section of
the income statement of a retail business shows how grossProfit Accuracyprofit is figured.
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can checkIncome Statement the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide grossYear Ended December 31, 2001 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
Gross receipts............................... $400,000 the average spread between the merchandise cost of
Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940 goods sold and the selling price.
Net receipts................................ $385,060 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.Minus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140
Little or no difference between these two percentagesGross profit................................ $96,920
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
The cost of goods sold for this business is figured asdifference between these percentages may show that you
follows: did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forInventory at beginning of year................... $37,845 the difference.Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250 Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On theGoods available for sale....................... $321,095
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willMinus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955
Cost of goods sold.......................... $288,140 realize a gross profit of 331/3% on its sales. The net receipts
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 25

Page 26 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown on
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isBad Debts
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’s
a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts— businessresults, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
bad debts and nonbusiness bad debts.($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per- A business bad debt is generally one that comes fromcentage of 331/3%. operating your trade or business. You can deduct business
bad debts as an expense on your business tax return.
Business bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss fromAdditions to Gross Profit the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.
If your business has income from a source other than its1) Created or acquired in your business.regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
2) Closely related to your business when it becameSchedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
partly or totally worthless.business income. If you use Schedule C–EZ, include the
income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples includeA debt is closely related to your business if your primary
income from an interest-bearing checking account, incomemotive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
8. notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
Business Expenses accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
owed you was included in your gross income
CAUTION
!
either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a prior
year.
Introduction
You can deduct the costs of running your business. TheseAccrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youcosts are known as business expenses. These are costs
can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods
ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sold.
come.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that
ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-is common and accepted in your field of business. A
ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsnecessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriateowed to you that you have not received and cannot collectfor your business. An expense does not have to be indis-if you never included those amounts in income.pensable to be considered necessary.
More information.For more information about businessFor more information about the general rules for deduct-
bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.ing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
Business Expenses. Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
If you have an expense that is partly for businessbusiness bad debts and deductible as short-term capital
and partly personal, separate the personal partlosses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
from the business part. on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication 550, Invest-
CAUTION
!
ment Income and Expenses.
Useful Items
You may want to see: Car and Truck Expenses
Publication If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining your❏ 535 Business Expenses vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of local
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
tions and forms. business.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 27 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electric Methods for Deductingvehicle or a deduction from gross income for aCar and Truck Expensespart of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you place
TIP
in service during the year. The vehicle must meet certainFor local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,requirements and you do not have to use it in your busi-you generally can use one of the following methods toness to qualify for the credit or the deduction. For morefigure your expenses.information, see chapter 12 in Publication 535.    
• Standard mileage rate.
• Actual expenses.Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-
penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
following. Standard mileage rate.You may be able to use the
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of
• Getting from one workplace to another in the courseoperating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for businessof your business or profession when you are travel-purposes. For 2001, the standard mileage rate is 341/2ing within the city or general area that is your taxcents a mile for all business miles.home. Tax home is defined later.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for• Visiting clients or customers. a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses
• Going to a business meeting away from your regular for that year except for business-related parkingCAUTION
!
workplace. fees and tolls.
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplaceChoosing the standard mileage rate.If you want towhen you have one or more regular places of work.use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,These temporary workplaces can be either within theyou must choose to use it in the first year the car isarea of your tax home or outside that area. available for use in your business. In later years, you can
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualLocal business transportation does not include expenses
expenses.you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those
If you want to use the standard mileage rate for a carexpenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-
you lease, you must choose to use it for the entire leasecussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
period (including renewals).However, if you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure yourStandard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot usecar expense deduction. the standard mileage rate if you:
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your2) Operate two or more cars at the same time,
business or work is located. 3) Claimed a depreciation deduction using ACRS or
MACRS in an earlier year,Example. You operate a printing business out of rented
4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip5) Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, ortransportation between your customers and your print
6) Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-shop.
bursement.You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car
or truck between your home and your main or Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-regular workplace. These costs are personalCAUTION
!
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedcommuting expenses. parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingOffice in the home.Your workplace can be your homeexpenses.)if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
Actual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-principal place of business. See Business Use of Your
dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualHome, later.
car or truck expenses.
Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate If you qualify to use both methods, figure youryour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as deduction both ways to see which gives you ayour principal place of business. You occasionally have tolarger deduction.
TIP
drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
tween your home and your clients. items.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 27

Page 28 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration fees What cannot be depreciated.You cannot depreciate
any of the following items.Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires
• Property placed in service and disposed of in the
Insurance Parking fees Tolls same year.
• Inventory (explained in chapter 2).If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-• Land.
ness and personal use. You can divide based on the miles
• Repairs and replacements that do not increase thedriven for each purpose.
value of your property, make it more useful, or
lengthen its useful life. You can deduct theseExample. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000 amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of Sched-
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000ule C–EZ.
miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%
(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as aDepreciation method.The method for depreciating mostbusiness expense. business and investment property placed in service after
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost RecoveryMore information.For more information about the rules
System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463,
cation 946.Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Reimbursing Your Employees Section 179 deduction.You can choose to deduct a
limited amount of the cost of certain depreciable propertyfor Expenses
in the year you place the property in service. This deduc-
You generally can deduct the amount you reimburse yourtion is known as the “section 179 deduction.” For more
employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-information, see Publication 946. It explains what propertyment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct itqualifies for the deduction, what limits apply to the deduc-depend in part on whether you reimburse the expensestion, and when and how to recapture the deduction.under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For
details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chapter
explains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tellsListed property.Listed property is any of the following.
you whether to report the reimbursement on your
• Most passenger automobiles.employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement.
• Most other property used for transportation.
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-Depreciation ment, recreation, or amusement.
If property you acquire to use in your business is expected• Certain computer and related peripheral equipment.
to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-the entire cost as a business expense in the year youtions equipment).acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C or You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-C –EZ. This method of deducting the cost of businessquirements when depreciating listed property. For moreproperty is called depreciation.
information about listed property, see Publication 946.The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946, How To Depre-
ciate Property. Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.What can be depreciated.You can depreciate property if
it meets all the following requirements. • Depreciation on property placed in service during the
current tax year.• It must be property you own.
• A section 179 deduction.• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
when it was placed in service).• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
beyond the year it is placed in service.
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file• It must be something that wears out, decays, gets
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C–EZ.used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from
CAUTION
!
natural causes.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 29 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption assistance.
Employees ’ Pay • Cafeteria plans.
• Dependent care assistance.You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform for your• Educational assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
• Group-term life insurance coverage.To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or • Welfare benefit funds.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests. You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be reasonable.
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or• The pay must be for services performed. other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a
Chapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines theserent or lease expense. If you own the property, include
requirements. your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179
deduction or a depreciation deduction.You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
withdrawals you make from your business. You are not an You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringe
employee of the business. benefits you provide from your employees’
wages. For more information about fringe bene-If you had employees during the year, you must
TIP
fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15–B,use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.C –EZ.CAUTION
!
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
your employees are listed below. For an explanation ofInsuranceeach of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards.
ing kinds of insurance related to your business. • Bonuses.
1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.• Education expenses.
2) Credit insurance on losses from unpaid debts.• Fringe benefits (discussed later).
3) Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
ployees, including long-term care insurance.to repay if they are for personal services actually
performed. 4) Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for5) Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6) Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-re-• Vacation pay.
lated diseases suffered by employees in your busi-
ness, regardless of fault.Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay pro-
vided to any person for the performance of services by that7) Contributions to a state unemployment insuranceperson. The following are examples of fringe benefits.fund. Contributions are deductible as taxes if they
are considered taxes under state law.• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
8) Overhead insurance that pays you for business over-• Meals and lodging.
head expenses you have during long periods of disa-• The use of a car. bility caused by your injury or sickness.
• Flights on airplanes. 9) Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
• Discounts on property or services. used in your business for liability, damages, and
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
sonal use, you can deduct only the part of your
• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events. insurance premiums that applies to the business use
of the vehicle. If you use the standard mileage rate toEmployee benefit programs include the following. figure your car expenses, you cannot deduct any car
insurance premiums.• Accident and health plans.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 29

Page 30 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10) Life insurance covering your employees if you are• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (relating to
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the foreign earned income).
contract.
• You are using amounts paid for long-term care insur-
11) Business interruption insurance that pays you for lost ance to figure the deduction.
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or
other cause. Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to anyNondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiumsexpense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create anon the following kinds of insurance. asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
end of the current tax year.1) Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct
amounts credited to a reserve you set up for self-in-Example. In 2001, you signed a 3-year insurance con-surance. This applies even if you cannot get busi-tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2001, 2002,ness insurance coverage for certain business risks.and 2003 when you signed the contract, you can onlyHowever, your actual losses may be deductible. Seededuct the premium for 2001 on your 2001 tax return. YouPublication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.can deduct in 2002 and 2003 the premium allocable to
2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for athose years.
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-
More information.For more information about deductingness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.ous list.
3) Certain life insurance and annuities.
a) For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, youInterest
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering yourself, an employee, or any per-You can generally deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ all
son with a financial interest in your business ifinterest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts
you are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of therelated to your business. Interest relates to your business if
policy. You are included among possible benefi-you use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
ciaries of the policy if the policy owner is obligateddoes not matter what type of property secures the loan.
to repay a loan from you using the proceeds ofYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of the
the policy. A person has a financial interest infollowing requirements.
your business if the person is an owner or part
• You are legally liable for that debt.owner of the business or has lent money to the
business. • Both you and the lender intend that the debt be
repaid.b) For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
insurance policy, endowment contract, or annuitytionship.
contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard toYou cannot deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the interest
whom the policy covers. you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
part personal, you must divide the interest between the
4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policypersonal part and the business part.
on your life or on the life of another person with a
financial interest in your business to get or protect aExample. In 2001, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.
business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as aDuring 2001, you used the car 60% for business and 40%
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premi-for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expenses
ums as interest on business loans or as an expenseon the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for
of financing loans. 2001 on Schedule C or C–EZ. The remaining interest of
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.
Self-employed insurance deduction.You may be able
More information.For more information about deductingto deduct up to 60% of the amount you paid during 2001 for
interest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chaptermedical insurance and qualified long-term care insurance
explains the following items.for you and your family.
How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can use • Interest you can deduct.
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your• Interest you cannot deduct.deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
use the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535. • How to allocate interest between personal and busi-
ness use.
• You have more than one source of income subject to
self-employment tax.
• When to deduct interest.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 31 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This For more information on retirement plans for small busi-
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallis a loan on which no interest is charged or on which
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).interest is charged at a rate below the applicable
federal rate.) Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged byRent Expenseaccountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deductibleRent is any amount you pay for the use of property you doon Schedule C or C–EZ. However, you usually cannotnot own. In general, you can deduct rent on Schedule C ordeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. AddC –EZ only if the rent is for property you use in yourthem to the basis of the property. business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to the
If the fees include payments for work of a personalproperty, you cannot deduct the rent.
nature (such as making a will), you can take a business
Unreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deductiondeduction only for the part of the fee related to your
for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-business. The personal part of legal fees for producing or
bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rentcollecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for
paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sametax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the sameyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-cation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.
Tax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule C Related persons include members of your immediate
or C–EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax returnfamily, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
relating to your business as a sole proprietor. You canhalf), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
deduct the remaining cost on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifa list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,
you itemize your deductions. Accounting Periods and Methods.
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the Rent on your home.If you rent your home and use part ofamount you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficien-it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct thecies for your business as a sole proprietor or statutoryrent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirementsemployee. for business use of your home. For more information, see
Business Use of Your Home, later.
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-Pension Plans
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount thatYou can set up and maintain the following small business
applies to your use of the rented property during the taxretirement plans for yourself and your employees.
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans. the period to which it applies.
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-More information.For more information about rent, seeees) plans. chapter 4 in Publication 535.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and yourTaxes
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for yourYou can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ various federal,
employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a solestate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to thebusiness.
plan for yourself on line 29 of Form 1040. You can alsoIncome taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ adeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notstate tax on gross income (as distinguished from netcover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally taxincome) directly attributable to your business. You canfree until you or your employees receive distributions fromdeduct other state and local income taxes on Schedule Athe plan in later years. (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deductUnder some plans, employees can have you contributefederal income tax.limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax freeEmployment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
until your employees receive distributions from the plan inMedicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
later years. paid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can alsoFuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
deduct payments you made as an employer to a statemotor fuels you use in your business are usually included
unemployment compensation fund or to a state disabilityas part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. a separate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federalSelf-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of your
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. Forself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. Self-employ-
more information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax Creditsment tax is explained in chapter 1.
and Refunds.
Personal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C or
C –EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
Travel, Meals,You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
property within a state or local area. and Entertainment
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had totainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C orpay $25 for their state license tags and $20 for their cityC –EZ.registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city personal
property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They areTravel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessaryclaiming their actual car expenses. Because they used theexpenses of traveling away from home for your business.car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or
You are traveling away from home if both the following$196, as a business expense.
conditions are met.
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or
C –EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business a) Your duties require you to be away from the gen-
property. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,eral area of your tax home (defined later) sub-
or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general publicstantially longer than an ordinary day’s work.
welfare. The taxes must be based on the assessed valueb) You need to get sleep or rest to meet the de-of the real estate and must be charged uniformly against allmands of your work while away from home.property under the jurisdiction of the taxing authority.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-
ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rulesness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
for deducting the following items. It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business is located. • Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
streets, and water and sewerage systems. The following is a brief summary of the expenses you
can deduct.• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
during the year. Transportation.You can deduct the cost of travel by
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method ofbusiness destination.accounting.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
fares for these and other types of transportation betweenSales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotelthe purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
and your work location away from home.service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
property is a deductible business expense, you can deductBaggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost of
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property issending baggage and sample or display material between
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of theyour regular and temporary work locations.cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, add
Car or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating andthe sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information
maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from homeon the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of
on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-Assets.
dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and TruckDo not deduct state and local sales taxes im-Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. Ifposed on the buyer that you must collect and payyou rent a car while away from home on business, you canover to the state or local government. Do notCAUTION
!
deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.
Meals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of meals
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or longExcise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ all
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properlyexcise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses of
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct onlycarrying on your business. Excise taxes are discussed
briefly in chapter 1. 50% of your meal expenses.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8–1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.)
General Rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or emplyee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the
associated test.
Definitions
• Entertainmentincludes any activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amuement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a
customer or client.
• An ordinaryexpense is one that is common and accepted in your field of
business, trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not
necessarily indipensable, for your business.
Tests To Be Met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or 
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period,
and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other
specific business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
Other Rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if
you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagent under the
circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment
expenses.
Cleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listed
in Table 8–1. For details about these rules, see Publica-laundry while on your business trip.
tion 463.Telephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls
while on your business trip, including business communi-Reimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen-cation by fax machine or other communication devices.erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
ees for travel and entertainment expenses. TheTips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youin this list.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theMore information.For more information about travelexpenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountableexpenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. ThatGift, and Car Expenses. chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct employee’s Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement.
business-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can
deduct only 50% of these expenses. Business UseThe following are examples of entertainment expenses.
of Your Home• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs,
theaters, or sporting events. To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to busi-for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
ness customers or their families. then, your deduction may be limited.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your business for that business. To determine your principal
home, you must meet the following tests. place of business, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances.
a) Your use of the business part of your home mustYour home office will qualify as your principal place ofbe: business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.i) Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclu-
sive use, later), • You use it exclusively and regularly for adminis-
trative or management activities of your business.ii) Regular,
• You have no other fixed location where you con-iii) For your business, AND
duct substantial administrative or management
activities of your business.b) The business part of your home must be one of
the following:
Alternatively, if you do business at more than one loca-
i) Your principal place of business (definedtion, and your home office does not qualify as your princi-
later), pal place of business based on the previous rules, you
determine your principal place of business based on theii) A place where you meet or deal with patients,
following factors.clients, or customers in the normal course of
your business, or
a) The relative importance of the activities per-
iii) A separate structure (not attached to your formed at each location.
home) you use in connection with your busi-
b) If the relative importance factor does not deter-ness.
mine your principal place of business, you can
also consider the time spent at each location.
Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,If, after considering your business locations, your homeyou must use a specific area of your home only for your cannot be identified as your principal place of business,business. The area used for business can be a room oryou cannot deduct home office expenses. However, forother separately identifiable space. The space does notother ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seeneed to be marked off by a permanent partition. Publication 587.You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use
test if you use the area in question both for business andDeduction limit.If your gross income from the businessfor personal purposes. use of your home equals or exceeds your total business
expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourExample. You are an attorney and use a den in yourbusiness expenses related to the use of your home. If yourhome to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.gross income from the business use is less than your totalYour family also uses the den for recreation. Since the denbusiness expenses, your deduction for certain expensesis not used exclusively in your profession, you cannot for the business use of your home is limited.claim a business deduction for its use.
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,
Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meetsuch as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eitheration taken last), allocable to the business is limited to theof the following ways. gross income from the business use of your home minus
the sum of the following.a) For the storage of inventory or product samples.
a) The business part of expenses you could deductb) As a day-care facility.
even if you did not use your home for businessFor an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication(such as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by casualty and theft losses).Day-Care Providers).
b) The business expenses that relate to the busi-
Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, you ness activity in the home (for example, salaries or
must use a specific area of your home for business on asupplies), but not to the use of the home itself.
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your businessDo not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half ofuse of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if youyour self-employment tax.do not use that area for any other purpose.
Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction. Principal place of business.You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a single
More information.For more information on deductingbusiness. To qualify to deduct the expenses for the busi-
expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-ness use of your home under the principal place of busi-
tion 587.ness test, your home must be your principal place of
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deductor Lossthem.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Donations to business organizations.
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Educational expenses. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Environmental cleanup costs.
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-• Impairment-related expenses. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Interview expense allowances.
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Licenses and regulatory fees. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Moving machinery.
that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions for• Outplacement services. line G and line 32 of Schedule C.
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance If you have more than one business, you mustor nonperformance of a contract. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
a separate Schedule C.• Repairs that keep your property in a normal effi-CAUTION
!
cient operating condition.
• Repayments of income.
• Subscriptions to trade or professional publica-Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
tions.
If your deductions for the year are more than your income• Supplies and materials. for the year (line 37 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You• Utilities.
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
Expenses You Cannot Deduct include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-
• Your trade or business.penses. For more information, see Publication 535.
• Your work as an employee (unreimbursed em-• Bribes and kickbacks.
ployee business expenses).
• Demolition expenses or losses.
• A casualty or theft.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon,
• Moving expenses.sporting, airline, and hotel clubs.
• Rental property.• Lobbying expenses.
• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmentalA loss from operating a business is the most common
agency or instrumentality because you broke thereason for an NOL.
law. For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It• Political contributions.
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim
• Repairs that add to the value of your property oran NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.
significantly increase its life.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there
is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or LossPage 35

Page 36 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities youLine G.Susan checks “Yes” because she materially par-
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come ticipated in her business during the year. The material
under this limit. participation rules are explained in the instructions for
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 Schedule C.
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-
Line H.She leaves the box blank because she did notplains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
start or acquire her business during the year.to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
can deduct.
Part I— Income and
Part III— Cost of Goods Sold
Susan enters items of income in Part I.
10.
Line 1.Susan enters her total sales of $397,742 for the
year.
Sample Returns
Line 2.She enters the refunds she gave on merchandise
her customers returned, as well as other adjustments sheThis chapter shows how two sole proprietors fill out theirmade to customers’ purchases. They total $1,442.income tax returns. Susan J. Brown reports her net profit
from her business on Schedule C. She cannot use Sched-Line 4.Susan uses Part III on page 2 of Schedule C toule C–EZ. Stanley Price reports his net profit from hisfigure her cost of goods sold.business on Schedule C–EZ.
Part III, line 35.Her inventory at the beginning of the
year, $42,843, is the same as her inventory at the end of
last year. This figure matches the amount on Part III, linePreparing the Return 41, of her last year’s Schedule C.
for Susan J. Brown Part III, line 36.The total cost of goods she bought to
sell to customers, minus the cost of the goods she returnedSusan J. Brown owns and operates Family Fashions, ato her suppliers, was $241,026. From this stock, she with-ready-to-wear clothing shop. She uses an accrual methoddrew clothing and accessories for her own use that costof accounting and files her return on a calendar year basis.$774. She subtracts the cost of these items from her totalFive employees worked in her shop during the year.purchases to figure net purchases of $240,252.She filed all the necessary employment tax forms and
Part III, line 40.She adds her net purchases to hermade the required tax deposits. See Publication 15, Circu-
beginning inventory. This sum is the total goods Susan hadlar E, Employer’s Tax Guide.
available for sale during the year.
Part III, line 41.Susan’s inventory at the end of the yearSchedule C
was $43,746.
First, Susan fills in the information required at the top ofPart III, line 42.Susan subtracts her inventory at theSchedule C. She starts by entering her name and socialend of the year (line 41) from the goods that were availablesecurity number. Then she completes lines A through H.for sale (line 40) to get the cost of goods sold during the
year. For more information on inventories, see chapter 2.Line A.She enters her principal business.
For more information on cost of goods sold, see chapter 6.
Line B.She enters 448140, which is the 6-digit business
code for a family clothing shop. She found the code onLine 5.Susan’s gross profit, $156,951, is the difference
page C–8 of the instructions for Schedule C. Susan lo-between her net sales (line 3) and the cost of goods sold
cates the major business category that describes her busi-(line 4).
ness. She reads down the items under “Retail Trade” to
Line 7.Because Susan did not have any income to reportfind 448140—“ Family clothing stores.”
on line 6, the gross income is the same as the gross profit
Line C.She enters the name of her business—“ Family (line 5).
Fashions.”
Line D. She enters her employer identification numberPart II— Expenses
(EIN). She has to have an EIN because she has employ-
Susan enters her expense items in Part II.ees. For information about EINs, see Identification Num-
bers in chapter 1. Line 8.Susan paid $3,500 for ads.
Line E.She enters her business address. Line 9.During the year, Susan determined that she would
Line F.She checks box 2 for accrual method of account- not be able to collect $479 from bad checks and deducted
ing. this amount as bad debts. See Bad Debts in chapter 8.
Page 36 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 37 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 10.She used her van 75% for business during theLine 32.Susan does not have a loss, so she skips this
year. She spent a total of $3,000 for gas and oil. She can line. If she had a loss and she was not “at risk” for all her
deduct 75% of $3,000 or $2,250 for gas and oil. Other van investment in the business, the amount of loss she could
expenses include $713 (75% of $950) for insurance, $812 enter on line 12 of Form 1040 might be limited. For an
(75% of $1,083) for repairs and upkeep, and $75 (75% of explanation of an investment “at risk,” see the Schedule C
$100) for tags. She enters the total, $3,850, on line 10. See instructions for line 32.
Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
Form 4562— DepreciationLine 13.Susan enters the $4,277 depreciation from Form
4562, discussed later. and Amortization
Line 15.Susan’s $238 deduction is for insurance on herSusan figures her depreciation for the year on Form 4562.business property (van insurance is included in line 10).
The deduction is only for premiums that give her coverageLines 1 through 13.On May 19, Susan bought a $200
for the year. See Insurance in chapter 8. adding machine and placed it in service on that same day.
She chose to deduct its cost as a section 179 deduction.Line 16b.Susan had borrowed money to use in her busi-See Depreciation in chapter 8.ness. The interest on these loans was $2,633 for the year.
See Interest in chapter 8. Line 15b.On May 19, Susan also bought and placed in
service some clothing racks. They cost $800. She uses theLine 18.The $216 Susan paid for postage during the year
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) tois her only office expense.
figure depreciation. The racks are 5-year property. SusanLine 20b.Her rent for the store was $1,000 a month, orfigures depreciation using the half-year convention and the$12,000 for the year. See Rent Expense in chapter 8. 200% declining balance method. See Publication 946 for
information about MACRS.Line 21.She had her store counters refinished and other
painting done at a total cost of $964. Line 19.Susan enters $1,117 for depreciation on assets
Line 22.She spent $1,203 on supplies. she purchased before 1987. For items bought after 1980
and before 1987, she uses the regular Accelerated CostLine 23.Susan renewed her business license and paidRecovery System (ACRS) percentages. For items boughtproperty tax on her store fixtures. She also paid thebefore 1981, she uses the straight-line method. See Publi-employer’s share of social security and Medicare taxes forcation 534, Depreciating Property Placed in Serviceher employees and paid state and federal unemploymentBefore 1987, for information about ACRS.taxes. She enters the total of all these taxes, $5,727, on
this line. See Taxes in chapter 8. Line 20.Susan enters the depreciation on listed property
from line 26 (explained next).Line 25.Susan’s total expense for heat, light, and tele-
phone for the year is $3,570. Lines 24 and 26.On March 20, Susan bought a van that
she placed in service in her business. The van weighs overLine 26.Susan paid her employees a total of $59,050 for
6,000 pounds; therefore, it is not a passenger automobilethe year. She does not include in wages any amounts she
for the special deduction limits. The van is 5-year property.paid to herself or withdrew from the business for her own
She figures depreciation using the 200% declining balanceuse. See Employees’ Pay in chapter 8.
method and applying the half-year convention underLine 27.Susan enters the total of her other businessMACRS. The van cost $18,667. Her basis for depreciationexpenses on this line. These expenses are not included onis 75% of $18,667, or $14,000, because only 75% of thelines 8–26. She lists the type and amount of the expensestotal miles she drove during the year were business miles.separately in Part V of page 2, and carries the total enteredSusan does not choose to deduct any part of the cost of theon line 48 to line 27. See chapter 8 for expenses you can orvan as a section 179 deduction.cannot deduct.
Lines 28 through 34.Because Susan is a sole proprietor,Line 28.Susan adds all her deductions listed in Part II andshe must complete lines 28 through 34.enters the total on this line.
Line 21.Susan has a total depreciation deduction ofLine 29.She subtracts her total deductions (line 28) from
$4,277. She enters her deduction here and on line 13 ofher gross income (line 7). Susan has a tentative profit of
Schedule C.$51,166.
Line 30.Susan did not use any part of her home forSchedule SE— Self-Employment Taxbusiness, so she does not make an entry here. For infor-
mation about business use of the home, see Business Use After Susan prepares Schedule C, she fills out Scheduleof Your Home in chapter 8. SE. She starts by entering her name and social security
Line 31.Susan has a net profit of $51,166 ( line 29 minus number at the top of the schedule. Then she reads the
line 30). She enters her net profit here, on line 12 of Form chart on page 1 of the schedule, which tells her she can
1040, and on line 2, Section A of Schedule SE (Form use Section A— Short Schedule SE to figure her self-em-
1040). ployment tax. She fills out the following lines in Section A.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 37

Page 38 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lines 2 and 3.She enters $51,166. This is her net profitLine 36.She enters $4,550. This is the standard deduc-
from line 31 of Schedule C. tion for a single filer.
Line 4.She multiplies $51,166 by .9235 to get her netLine 37.Susan subtracts line 36 from line 34 to getearnings from self-employment ($47,252). This is her net$40,085.profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line 38.She multiplies $2,900 by the number of exemp-Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than tions claimed on line 6d to get her total exemptions,$80,400, Susan multiplies the amount on line 4 ($47,252)$2,900.by .153 to get her self-employment tax of $7,230. She
enters that amount here and on line 53 of Form 1040.Line 39.Susan subtracts line 38 from line 37 to get her
taxable income, $37,185.Line 6.She multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to get her
deduction for one-half of self-employment tax of $3,615.
Line 40.Susan uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040She enters that amount here and on line 27 of Form 1040.
instructions to figure her income tax. In the Tax Table she
looks for the income bracket that includes $37,185. SheForm 1040 finds the bracket for incomes of at least $37,150 but less
than $37,200 and sees that the tax for a person filing asSusan fills out Form 1040 as follows:
single is $6,842. She enters this amount here.
Name, address, and social security number.Susan
enters her name, home address, and social security num-Lines 41 and 42.Because she does not owe alternative
ber. minimum tax, she enters -0- on line 41 and $6,842 on line
42.Presidential election campaign fund.Susan chooses to
have $3 go to this fund. She checks the box under “Yes.” Line 47.Because Susan received the advance payment
of her 2001 taxes, she is not entitled to claim the rateLine 1.Susan checks the box on this line because she is
reduction credit.filing as single.
Lines 6a and 6d.Susan claims an exemption for herself.Lines 51 and 52.Because Susan does not have any of
She checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in the the credits listed on lines 43 through 50, she enters -0- on
far right-hand entry space. She also enters “1” in the box line 51 and $6,842 on line 52.
on line 6d.
Line 53.She enters $7,230 from line 5 in Section A ofLine 8a.Susan enters $398 of taxable interest credited toSchedule SE.her personal savings account for the year.
Line 58.Susan adds the amounts on lines 52 through 57Line 9.Susan enters $390 of dividends she received fromand enters the total, $14,072.CBA Corporation.
Line 60.She enters $14,000 of estimated tax paymentsLine 12.She enters her business net profit of $51,166
she made for the year.from line 31 of Schedule C.
Line 22.Susan adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21Line 66.She enters $14,000.
and enters the total, $51,954.
Line 70.Susan subtracts line 66 from line 58 to get theLine 27.Susan enters one-half of her self-employmentamount of tax she owes, $72. She writes a check payabletax. She got this amount from line 6 in Section A ofto the United States Treasury for $72. On the check sheSchedule SE. writes her social security number, her daytime telephone
number, and “2001 Form 1040.” Her name and addressLine 28.Susan enters $1,440 as her deduction for her
are printed on the check. She sends her payment withhealth insurance. This is 60% of her $2,400 in health
Form 1040–V, Payment Voucher (not illustrated). She fillsinsurance premiums for the year.
out that form and sends it to the IRS with her check and tax
Line 29.Susan enters her simplified employee pensionreturn. 
(SEP) deduction of $2,264. She figures her deduction by
using Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-Signing and assembling the return.She signs her
ness (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans). name and enters the date signed, her occupation, and a
daytime telephone number. She assembles her originalLine 32.Susan adds the amounts on lines 23 through 31aForm 1040, Schedules C and SE, and Form 4562 in thatand enters the total, $7,319. order. (See “Attachment Sequence Number” in the upper
right corner of each schedule or form.) Then she makes aLine 33.Susan subtracts the amount on line 32 from the
copy of the return for her records. Finally, she mails it to theamount on line 22 to arrive at her adjusted gross income,
IRS.$44,635. She also enters this amount on line 34.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 39 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J BROWN
1313 EMPIRE BLVD
FRANKLIN, NY 18725
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
1
1
398 00
390
51,166
51,954
3,615
1,440
2,264
7,319
44,635
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2001, or other tax year beginning , 2001, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
3
Check only
one box.
4
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year spouse died /H17075). (See page 19.)5
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 20)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than six
dependents,
see page 20.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 22)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bTotal IRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 23)15a
16b16aTotal pensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 23)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 25)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
23IRA deduction (see page 27)23
Archer MSA deduction. Attach Form 8853 2525
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
26
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 30)
26
2727
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
2828
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
2929
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
32Add lines 23 through 31a
30
Subtract line 32 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31a
Adjusted
Gross
Income
33
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 21. Form
Married filing separate return. Enter spouse ’s social security no. above and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2001)
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 19.) If the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent,
enter this child’s name here. /H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 27)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24 24
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 72.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of your
children on 6c
who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
entered on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 20)
32
31a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 28)
30
33
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
2001
(See page 19.)
(99)
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 39

Page 40 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
44,635 00
4,550
40,085
2,900
37,185
6,842
- 0 -
6,842
7,230
14,072
14,000
14,000
72
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/27/02 Retail shop ownerSusan J. Brown
- 0 -
6,842 00
555 735-0001
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 59, 60, 61a, and 62 through 65. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2001)
Amount from line 33 (adjusted gross income)34 34
Check if:35aTax and
Credits 35aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single,
$4,550
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075
b
35b
36 36
37Subtract line 36 from line 3437
38
If line 34 is $99,725 or less, multiply $2,900 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 34 is over $99,725, see the worksheet on page 32
38
39Taxable income. Subtract line 38 from line 37. If line 38 is more than line 37, enter -0-39
40 40
43
44
46
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
47
48
Other credits from:
49
51
52
Add lines 43 through 50. These are your total credits
49
53
Subtract line 51 from line 42. If line 51 is more than line 42, enter -0- /H17075
51
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
52
Other
Taxes
54
53
67
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
56
Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required55
57
Add lines 52 through 57. This is your total tax /H1707558 58
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109959 59
602001 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2000 return60
Payments
61a
64Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 51)
63
62Excess social security and RRTA tax withheld (see page 51)
64
66
Other payments. Check if from65
68a68a
69 69
If line 66 is more than line 58, subtract line 58 from line 66. This is the amount you overpaid
70 70
Amount of line 67 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
71
Amount of line 67 you want applied to your 2002 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty. Also include on line 70
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
71
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800 b Form 8396
c Form 8801 d Form (specify)
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
56
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H 57
65
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 33). Check if any tax is from
Amount you owe. Subtract line 66 from line 58. For details on how to pay, see page 52 /H17075
b
Direct
deposit? See
page 51 and
fill in 68b,
68c, and 68d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking SavingsType:
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
66
45
47
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
54
55
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
67
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 37)
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
46
48
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
62
63
Head of
household,
$6,650
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$7,600
Married
filing
separately,
$3,800
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
b Nontaxable earned income
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
41
42
43
Alternative minimum tax (see page 34). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 40 and 41 /H17075
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
44
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
41
42
61a
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2001)
● People who
checked any
box on line
35a or 35b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 31.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 53)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
50
Rate reduction credit. See the worksheet on page 36
50
61b
Page 40 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 41 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
8140
1012345 67
Susan J. Brown
Retail, Family clothing
Family Fashions
725 Big Sur Drive
Franklin, NY 18725
397,742
1,442
396,300
239,349
156,951
156,951
00
00
00
00
00
00
3,500
479
3,850
4,277
238
2,633
216
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
12,000
964
1,203
5,727
3,570
59,050
8,078
105,785
51,166
51,166
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
44
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C
(Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or Form 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
A Principal business or profession, including product or service (see page C-1 of the instructions) B Enter code from pages C-7 & 8
/H17075
D Employer ID number (EIN), if anyBusiness name. If no separate business name, leave blank.C
Accounting method:
E
F
Yes NoG
H
Did you “materially participate” in the operation of this business during 2001? If “No,” see page C-2 for limit on losses
If you started or acquired this business during 2001, check here /H17075
Income
Gross receipts or sales. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the“Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see page C-2 and check here /H17075
1
1
22 Returns and allowances
33 Subtract line 2 from line 1
44 Cost of goods sold (from line 42 on page 2)
5Gross profit. Subtract line 4 from line 35
6Other income, including Federal and state gasoline or fuel tax credit or refund (see page C-3)6
7 Gross income. Add lines 5 and 6 /H170757
Expenses. Enter expenses for business use of your home only on line 30.
8
21Repairs and maintenance21
Advertising8
22Supplies (not included in Part III)22
Bad debts from sales or
services (see page C-3)
9
23
9
Taxes and licenses23
10
Travel, meals, and entertainment:24
Car and truck expenses
(see page C-3)
10
24a
11
Travela
Commissions and fees11
12Depletion12
Meals and
entertainment
b
Depreciation and section 179
expense deduction (not included
in Part III) (see page C-3)
13
Enter nondeduct-
ible amount in-
cluded on line 24b
(see page C-5)
c
13
14 Employee benefit programs
(other than on line 19)
24d
14
Subtract line 24c from line 24bd
25
15
Utilities25
Insurance (other than health)15
26Wages (less employment credits)26
Interest:16
16aMortgage (paid to banks, etc.)a
Other expenses (from line 48 on
page 2)
27
16bOtherb
17
Legal and professional
services
17
18Office expense18
19Pension and profit-sharing plans19
Rent or lease (see page C-4):20
20aVehicles, machinery, and equipmenta
b Other business property 20b
Total expenses before expenses for business use of home. Add lines 8 through 27 in columns /H1707528 28
31
31
All investment is at risk.32a
32
Some investment is not
at risk.
32b
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2001For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
(1) Cash (2) Accrual (3) Other (specify) /H17075
Business address (including suite or room no.) /H17075
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
Cat. No. 11334P
29
30
Tentative profit (loss). Subtract line 28 from line 7
Expenses for business use of your home. Attach Form 8829
29
30
/H20854
Part I
Part II
27
Net profit or (loss). Subtract line 30 from line 29.
● If a profit, enter on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2 (statutory employees,
see page C-5). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If a loss, you must go to line 32.
If you have a loss, check the box that describes your investment in this activity (see page C-6).
● If you checked 32a, enter the loss on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2
(statutory employees, see page C-5). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If you checked 32b, you must attach Form 6198.
/H20854
2001
(99)
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 41

Page 42 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
42,843
240,252
283,095
43,746
239,349
00
00
00
00
00
180
60
6,000
1,600
238
8,078
00
00
00
00
00
00
Bank service charges
Chamber of Commerce
Free Credit Card Co.
Trash removal
Window washing
Page 2Schedule C (Form 1040) 2001
Cost of Goods Sold (see page C-6)
35Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year ’s closing inventory, attach explanation
33
36Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
34
37Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to yourself
35
38Materials and supplies
36
39Other costs
37
40Add lines 35 through 39
38
41Inventory at end of year
39
Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4
40
42
Part IV
Part III
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on
line 10 and are not required to file Form 4562 for this business. See the instructions for line 13 on page
C-3 to find out if you must file.
41
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .
42
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2001, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting c Other
45 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
46 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
47a Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes No
Other Expenses. List below business expenses not included on lines 8 –26 or line 30.
48 Total other expenses. Enter here and on page 1, line 27
//
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
48
Part V
Method(s) used to
value closing inventory: Cost b Other (attach explanation)
Was there any change in determining quantities, costs, or valuations between opening and closing inventory? If
“Yes,” attach explanation
Lower of cost or market ca
NoYes
43
44
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2001
Page 42 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 43 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
51,166
47,252
7,230
3,615
00
00
00
00
51,166 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE Self-Employment Tax
(Form 1040)
/H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 53.
Section A— Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2001
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 27
● $80,400 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 53.
● More than $80,400, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $9,969.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 53.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2001?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $80,400?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2001
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 43

Page 44 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
October 15, 2001(subject to change)
Susan J. Brown Family Fashions 1 1 1 - 00 - 1 1 1 1
200
- 0 -
24,000
200
200
- 0 -
24,000
200
Adding machine 200 200
800 5 HY 200 DB 160
1,1 1 7
2,800
4,277
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Tangible Property Under Section 179
Note: If you have any “listed property,” complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$24,0001Maximum dollar limitation. If an enterprise zone business, see page 2 of the instructions1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see page 2 of the instructions)2
$200,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married
filing separately, see page 2 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter amount from line 277
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from 2000 (see page 3 of the instructions).10
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2002. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property (automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones,
certain computers, or property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement). Instead, use Part V for listed property.
MACRS Depreciation for Assets Placed in Service Only During Your 2001 Tax Year (Do not include
listed property.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only— see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B— General Depreciation System (GDS) (See page 3 of the instructions.)
3-year property15a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C— Alternative Depreciation System (ADS) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
S/L16a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See instructions beginning on page 5.)
GDS and ADS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200117 17
18Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election18
ACRS and other depreciation19 19
Summary (See page 6 of the instructions.)
2020 Listed property. Enter amount from line 26
Total. Add deductions from line 12, lines 15 and 16 in column (g), and lines 17 through 20. Enter
here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations — see instructions
21
21
22 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 22
Form 4562 (2001)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 9 of the instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach this form to your return.
39 yrs.
(99)
Section A— General Asset Account Election
14 If you are making the election under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax year into one
or more general asset accounts, check this box. See page 3 of the instructions /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
2001
Page 44 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 45 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
October 15, 2001(subject to change)
Page 2Form 4562 (2001)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
23a, 23b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A— Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 7 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
23b23a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):24
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):25
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
26 Add amounts in column (h). Enter the total here and on line 20, page 1 26
Add amounts in column (i). Enter the total here and on line 7, page 127 27
Section B— Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven during
the year ( do not include commuting miles —
see page 2 of the instructions)
28
Total commuting miles driven during the year29
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
30
Total miles driven during the year.
Add lines 28 through 30
31
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYes
Was the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
32
Was the vehicle used primarily by a
more than 5% owner or related person?
33
Is another vehicle available for
personal use?
34
Section C— Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYes
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
35
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 8 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
36
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?37
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
38
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? (See page 8 of the instructions.)39
Note: If your answer to 35, 36, 37, 38, or 39 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
40 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2001 tax year (see instructions beginning on page 8):
41 Amortization of costs that began before your 2001 tax year 41
42 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 9 of the instructions for where to report 42
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who
are not more than 5% owners or related persons (see page 8 of the instructions).
Form 4562 (2001)
7,500
2,025
475
10,000
USA 280 VAN 3-20-01 75 18,667 14,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY 2,800 - 0 -
- 0 -
2,800
Proof as of
October 15, 2001
(subject to change)
Page 2Form 4562 (2001)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
23a, 23b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A— Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 7 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
23b23a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):24
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (see page 6 of the instructions):25
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
26 Add amounts in column (h). Enter the total here and on line 20, page 1 26
Add amounts in column (i). Enter the total here and on line 7, page 127 27
Section B— Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven during
the year ( do not include commuting miles —
see page 2 of the instructions)
28
Total commuting miles driven during the year29
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
30
Total miles driven during the year.Add lines 28 through 3031
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYes
Was the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
32
Was the vehicle used primarily by amore than 5% owner or related person?33
Is another vehicle available for
personal use?
34
Section C— Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYes
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
35
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 8 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
36
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?37
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
38
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? (See page 8 of the instructions.)39
Note: If your answer to 35, 36, 37, 38, or 39 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
40 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2001 tax year (see instructions beginning on page 8):
41 Amortization of costs that began before your 2001 tax year 41
42 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 9 of the instructions for where to report 42
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who
are not more than 5% owners or related persons (see page 8 of the instructions).
Form 4562 (2001)
7,500
2,025
475
10,000
USA 280 VAN 3-20-01 75 18,667 14,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY 2,800 - 0 -
- 0 -
2,800
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 45

Page 46 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A of Schedule SE (Form
1040).Preparing the Return
for Stanley Price Part III–Information on Your Vehicle
Stanley Price owns and operates Stan’s Barber Shop. He Stanley leaves this part blank because he is not deductinghas been in business for 32 years. Stanley uses the cashcar or truck expenses.method of accounting and files his return on a calendar
year basis.
Schedule SE— Self-Employment Tax
Schedule C–EZ After Stanley prepares Schedule C–EZ, he fills out Sched-
ule SE. He starts by entering his name and social securityStanley uses Schedule C–EZ to report the net profit fromnumber at the top of the schedule. Then he reads the charthis business because he meets all of the requirementson page 1 of the schedule, which tells him he can uselisted in Part I of the schedule. Stanley enters his name andSection A— Short Schedule SE to figure his self-employ-social security number at the top of the schedule.ment tax. He fills out the following lines in Section A.
Lines 2 and 3.He enters $24,670. This is his net profitPart I–General Information from line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
Stanley fills out Part I as follows: Line 4.He multiplies $24,670 by .9235 to get his net
earnings from self-employment ($22,783). This is his netLine A.He enters his principal business. profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line B.He enters 812111, which is the 6-digit businessLine 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less thancode for a barber shop. He found the code on page C–8 of $80,400, Stanley multiplies the amount on line 4 ($22,783)the instructions for Schedule C. Stanley locates the majorby .153 to get his self-employment tax of $3,486. He entersbusiness category that describes his business. He readsthat amount here and on line 53 of Form 1040.down the items under “Other Services” to find 812111—
“Barber shops.” Line 6.He multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to get his
deduction for one-half of self-employment tax of $1,743.Line C. He enters the name of his business—“ Stan’s He enters that amount here and on line 27 of Form 1040.Barber Shop.”
Line D.Stanley leaves this line blank. He does not haveForm 1040
an employer identification number (EIN) because he is not
required to have one. For information about EINs, seeStanley fills out Form 1040 as follows:
Identification Numbers in chapter 1. Name, address, and social security number.Stanley
enters his name, home address, and social security num-Line E.He enters his business address.
ber.
Presidential election campaign fund.Stanley choosesPart II–Figure Your Net Profit
to have $3 go to this fund. He checks the box under “Yes.”
Stanley fills out Part II as follows: Line 1.Stanley checks the box on this line because he is
Line 1–Gross receipts.Stanley enters his gross receiptsfiling as single.
from cutting hair. They include the amounts he charged forLines 6a and 6d.Stanley claims an exemption for him-haircuts and all the tips received from his customers. Theself. He checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” intotal for the year was $27,000. the far right-hand entry space. He also enters “1” in the box
on line 6d.Line 2–Total expenses.Stanley enters his expenses for
the year. They total $2,330 and consist of the following:Line 8a.Stanley enters $295 of taxable interest credited
• Advertising in the local newspaper— $145 to his personal savings account for the year.
• Supplies— $475 Line 9.Stanley enters $145 of dividends he received from
ABC Corporation.• Business licenses— $150
Line 12.He enters his business net profit of $24,670 from• Utilities (electricity and water)— $360
line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
• Rent— $1,200
Line 22.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21
and enters the total, $25,110.Line 3–Net profit.Stanley subtracts his total expenses
($2,330) from his gross receipts ($27,000) to get his netLine 23.Stanley enters the $2,000 contribution he made
profit of $24,670. He enters his net profit here, on line 12 of for the year to his individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
Page 46 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 47 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
According to the Form 1040 instructions, he can deductLines 51 and 52.Because Stanley does not have any of
this amount. the credits listed on lines 43 through 50, he enters -0- on
line 51 and $2,089 on line 52.Line 27.Stanley enters one-half of his self-employment
tax. He got this amount from line 6 in Section A of Schedule
SE. Line 53.He enters $3,486 from line 5 in Section A of
Schedule SE.Line 32.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 23 through
31a and enters the total, $3,743.
Line 58.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 52 through 57Line 33.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 32 from the
and enters the total, $5,575.amount on line 22 to arrive at his adjusted gross income,
$21,367. He also enters this amount on line 34.
Line 60.He enters $6,000 of estimated tax payments heLine 36.He enters $4,550. This is the standard deduction
made for the year.for a single filer.
Line 37.Stanley subtracts line 36 from line 34 to get
Line 66.He enters $6,000.$16,817.
Line 38.He multiplies $2,900 by the number of exemp-
Lines 67 and 68a.Stanley subtracts line 58 from line 66tions claimed on line 6d to get his total exemptions, $2,900.
to arrive at the amount he overpaid, $425. He wants thisLine 39.Stanley subtracts line 38 from line 37 to get hisamount refunded to him so he enters it on line 68a. Thetaxable income, $13,917. IRS will send him a check for this amount provided he
Line 40.Stanley uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040owes no other taxes, child support, spousal support, or
instructions to figure his income tax. In the Tax Table hecertain other federal nontax debt. If Stanley wanted the
looks for the income bracket that includes $13,917. Herefund deposited directly into his checking or savings ac-
finds the bracket for incomes of at least $13,900, but lesscount, he would have had to complete lines 68b, c, and d.
than $13,950 and sees that the tax for a person filing as
single is $2,089. He enters this amount here.
Signing and assembling the return.He signs his name
Lines 41 and 42.Because he does not owe alternativeand enters the date signed, his occupation, and a daytime
minimum tax, he enters -0- on line 41 and $2,089 on linetelephone number. He assembles his original Form 104042. and Schedules C–EZ and SE in that order. (See “Attach-
ment Sequence Number” in the upper right corner of eachLine 47.Because Stanley received the advance payment
schedule or form.) Then he makes a copy of the return forof his 2001 taxes, he is not entitled to claim the rate
his records. Finally, he mails it to the IRS.reduction credit.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 47

Page 48 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
STANLEY PRICE
99 OAK ST
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
000 00 0000
1
1
295 00
145
24,670
25,110
1,743
2,000
3,743
21,367
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2001, or other tax year beginning , 2001, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
3
Check only
one box.
4
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year spouse died /H17075). (See page 19.)5
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 20)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than six
dependents,
see page 20.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 22)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bTotal IRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 23)15a
16b16aTotal pensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 23)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 25)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
23IRA deduction (see page 27)23
Archer MSA deduction. Attach Form 8853 2525
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
26
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 30)
26
2727
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
2828
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
2929
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
32Add lines 23 through 31a
30
Subtract line 32 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31a
Adjusted
Gross
Income
33
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 21. Form
Married filing separate return. Enter spouse ’s social security no. above and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2001)
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 19.) If the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent,
enter this child’s name here. /H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 27)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24 24
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 72.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of your
children on 6c
who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
entered on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 20)
32
31a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 28)
30
33
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
2001
(See page 19.)
(99)
Page 48 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 49 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
21,367 00
4,550
16,817
2,900
13,917
2,089
- 0 -
2,089
3,486
5,575
6,000
425
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/15/02 Barber
425 00
6,000
Stanley Price 735-0002555
2,089 00
- 0 -
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 59, 60, 61a, and 62 through 65. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2001)
Amount from line 33 (adjusted gross income)34 34
Check if:35aTax and
Credits 35aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single,
$4,550
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075
b
35b
36 36
37Subtract line 36 from line 3437
38
If line 34 is $99,725 or less, multiply $2,900 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 34 is over $99,725, see the worksheet on page 32
38
39Taxable income. Subtract line 38 from line 37. If line 38 is more than line 37, enter -0-39
40 40
43
44
46
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
47
48
Other credits from:
49
51
52
Add lines 43 through 50. These are your total credits
49
53
Subtract line 51 from line 42. If line 51 is more than line 42, enter -0- /H17075
51
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
52
Other
Taxes
54
53
67
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
56
Tax on qualified plans, including IRAs, and other tax-favored accounts. Attach Form 5329 if required55
57
Add lines 52 through 57. This is your total tax /H1707558 58
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109959 59
602001 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2000 return60
Payments
61a
64Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 51)
63
62Excess social security and RRTA tax withheld (see page 51)
64
66
Other payments. Check if from65
68a68a
69 69
If line 66 is more than line 58, subtract line 58 from line 66. This is the amount you overpaid
70 70
Amount of line 67 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
71
Amount of line 67 you want applied to your 2002 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty. Also include on line 70
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
71
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800 b Form 8396
c Form 8801 d Form (specify)
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
56
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H 57
65
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 33). Check if any tax is from
Amount you owe. Subtract line 66 from line 58. For details on how to pay, see page 52 /H17075
b
Direct
deposit? See
page 51 and
fill in 68b,
68c, and 68d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking SavingsType:
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
66
45
47
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
54
55
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
67
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 37)
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
46
48
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
62
63
Head of
household,
$6,650
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$7,600
Married
filing
separately,
$3,800
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
b Nontaxable earned income
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
41
42
43
Alternative minimum tax (see page 34). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 40 and 41 /H17075
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
44
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
41
42
61a
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2001)
● People who
checked any
box on line
35a or 35b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 31.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 53)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
50
Rate reduction credit. See the worksheet on page 36
50
61b
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 49

Page 50 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
21 1 1Barber Shop
Stan’s Barber Shop
1001 Maple Ave.
Anytown, TX 70000
27,000
2,330
24,670
00
00
00
18
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C-EZ
(Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09A/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See instructions on back.
Business name. If no separate business name, leave blank. D Employer ID number (EIN), if any
Business address (including suite or room no.). Address not required if same as on Form 1040, page 1.
C
E
Gross receipts. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the“Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see Statutory Employees in the instructions for
Schedule C, line 1, on page C-2 and check here /H170751
22 Total expenses. If more than $2,500, you must use Schedule C. See instructions
3
3 Net profit. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If less than zero, you must use Schedule C. Enter on
Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2. (Statutory employees do not report this
amount on Schedule SE, line 2. Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.)
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 2001For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 14374D
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
You May Use
Schedule C-EZ
Instead of
Schedule C
Only If You:
And You:
● Use the cash method of accounting.
● Had only one business as a sole
proprietor.
● Had business expenses of $2,500 or
less. ● Are not required to file Form 4562,
Depreciation and Amortization, for
this business. See the instructions
for Schedule C, line 13, on page
C-3 to find out if you must file.
● Do not deduct expenses for
business use of your home.
● Do not have prior year unallowed
passive activity losses from this
business.
/H17075 /H17075
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
General Information
A Principal business or profession, including product or service B Enter code from pages C-7 & 8
/H17075
Figure Your Net Profit
Part I
Part II
● Did not have a net loss from your
business.
● Had no employees during the year.
1
● Did not have an inventory at any
time during the year.
Yes NoDo you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?6
Yes NoDo you have evidence to support your deduction?8a
Yes NoIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes NoWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?7
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2001, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:5
Business b Commuting c Other
4
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on line 2.Part III
a
b
(99)
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .//
2001
Page 50 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 51 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stanley Price 000 00 0000
24,670
22,783
3,486
1,743
00
00
00
00
24,670 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE Self-Employment Tax
(Form 1040)
/H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 53.
Section A— Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2001
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 27
● $80,400 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 53.
● More than $80,400, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $9,969.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 53.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2001?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $80,400?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2001
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 51

Page 52 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
11. actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You may also ask a court to review your
case.
Your Rights
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show youas a Taxpayer
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest thatThe first part of this chapter explains some of your most
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRSimportant rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
employee.the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Examinations, Appeals,Declaration of
Collections, and RefundsTaxpayer Rights
Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it forand protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.contact with us.
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you mayPrivacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose to
receive a refund.anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
The process of selecting a return for examination usu-by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computerfor information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
programs to identify returns that may have incorrectdo not provide requested information.
amounts. These programs may be based on information
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatreturns, such as Forms 1099 and W–2, on studies of past
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
employee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notsources that indicates that a return may have incorrect
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for youramounts. These sources may include the media, public
area or the center where you filed your return. records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
Representation.You may either represent yourself or,return for examination.
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as anprocedures that we follow in examinations. The following
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Ifsections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,tions.
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiriescases.
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request forYou can have someone accompany you at an interview.more information or a reason why we believe a change toYou may make sound recordings of any meetings with ouryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail orexamination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided youyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. Iftell us in writing 10 days before the meeting. you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we willPayment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.under the law— no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlyBy interview.If we notify you that we will conduct yourinstallment payments. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that theHelp with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad- examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatvocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayerproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explainAdvocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with thesecant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For morechanges, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.information, call toll free 1 – 877 – 777 – 4778
(1–800–829–4059 for TTY/TDD) or write to the TaxpayerRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for
Advocate at the IRS office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
Page 52 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 53 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you
as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue must file within 3 years from the date the return was
the examination. originally due to get that refund.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensive
and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights are
12.explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
How To Get MoreRights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagreeInformationwith its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.This section describes the help that the IRS and otherDistrict Court where you live. If you take your case to court,federal agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their ownthe IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youbusinesses.kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
finds that the IRS’ position was largely unjustified, you may
Internal Revenue Service
be able to recover some of your administrative and litiga-
tion costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costsThe following describes assistance provided by the IRS.
unless you tried to resolve your case administratively,You can order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-
including going through the appeals system, and you gavetions, and get more information from the IRS in several
us the information necessary to resolve the case.ways. By selecting the method that is best for you, you will
have quick and easy access to tax help. See Free taxCollections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro- services, later.cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regarding
payment of federal taxes. It describes: Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at-
tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, you• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes
should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.what to do if you get a tax bill and what to do if
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests andyou think your bill is wrong. It also covers making
concerns within the IRS by protecting your rights andinstallment payments, delaying collection action,
resolving problems that have not been fixed through nor-and submitting an offer in compromise.
mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot change• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing athe tax law or make a technical tax decision, they can clearlien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales,up problems that resulted from previous contacts andand release of property. ensure that your case is given a complete and impartial
review.Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail inTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate atInnocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your 1–877–777–4778.spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying
• Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your
joint return. However, if you qualify for innocent spouse• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office inrelief, you may not have to pay the tax, interest, and your area.penalties related to your spouse (or former spouse). For
• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDDinformation on innocent spouse relief and two other ways
user.to get relief, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouse Relief,
and Form 8857,Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (And
For more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax-Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief).
payer Advocate Service of the IRS.
Refunds. You may file a claim for refund if you think you
paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim withinSmall Business Tax Education Program.Small busi-
3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2 ness owners and other self-employed individuals can learn
years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. about business taxes through a unique partnership be-
The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is tween the IRS and local organizations. Through work-
not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or shops or in-depth tax courses, instructors provide training
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,on starting a business, recordkeeping, preparing business
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- tax returns, self-employment tax issues, and employment
tion on refunds. taxes.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 53

Page 54 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Some courses are offered free as a community service.• Get information on starting and operating a small
Courses given by an educational facility may include costs business.
for materials and tuition. Other courses may have a nomi-
You can also reach us with your computer using Filenal fee to offset administrative costs of sponsoring organi-
Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.zations.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached toMonday through Friday during regular business hours and
your fax machine, you can receive forms andask for your Taxpayer Education Coordinator. Check your
instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Followtelephone book for the local number of the IRS office
the directions from the prompts. When you order forms,closest to you or you can call 1–800–829–1040.
enter the catalog number for the form you need. The items
you request will be faxed to you.Your Business Tax Kit.Your Business Tax Kit is an
assortment of IRS forms and publications to help taxpay-For help with transmission problems, call the FedWorlders who operate their own businesses. To order the kit, seeHelp Desk at 703–487–4608.Free tax services, later. The kit consists of the following
items. Phone. Many services are available by phone.
Forms:
• SS –4, Application for Employer Identification • Ordering forms, instructions, and publications.Number Call 1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior
year forms, instructions, and publications.• 1040–ES, Estimated Tax for Individuals
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax• 9779, EFTPS Business Enrollment Form
questions at 1–800–829–1040.
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/Publications:
TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask• 509, Tax Calendars for 2002 tax questions or to order forms and publications.
• 583, Starting a Business and Keeping Records • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen
to pre-recorded messages covering various tax• 594, The IRS Collection Process
topics.• 910, Guide to Free Tax Services
• 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To(Received in a Trade or Business) ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,
and professional answers, we evaluate the quality of our
telephone services in several ways.Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Services. It
• A second IRS representative sometimes monitorscontains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax
live telephone calls. That person only evaluatestopics. It also describes other free tax information services,
the IRS assistor and does not keep a record ofincluding tax education and assistance programs and a list
any taxpayer’s name or tax identification number.of TeleTax topics.
• We sometimes record telephone calls to evaluatePersonal computer. With your personal com-
IRS assistors objectively. We hold these record-puter and modem, you can access the IRS on the
ings no longer than one week and use them onlyInternet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our web
to measure the quality of assistance.site, you can:
• We value our customers’ opinions. Throughout• Find answers to questions you may have.
this year, we will be surveying our customers for• Download forms and publications or search for their opinions on our service.forms and publications by topic or keyword.
• View forms that may be filled in electronically, Walk-in. You can walk in to many post offices,print the completed form, and then save the form libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,for recordkeeping. instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices,
libraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published in the
governments, credit unions, and office supply stores havelast few years.
an extensive collection of products available to print from a• Search regulations and the Internal RevenueCD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,Code. some IRS offices and libraries have the Internal Revenue
• Receive our electronic newsletters on hot tax is- Code, regulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-
sues and news. lative Bulletins available for research purposes.
Page 54 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 55 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the Distribution CenterSmall Business Administration
nearest to you and receive a response within 10
workdays after your request is received. Find the addressThe Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
that applies to your part of the country. and educational programs, counseling services, financial
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-• Western part of U.S.:
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a varietyWestern Area Distribution Center
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
tance provided by the SBA.
• Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).P.O. Box 8903 SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical ser-Bloomington, IL 61702–8903 vices to current and prospective small business owners
who cannot afford the services of a private consultant.• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:
Help is available when beginning, improving, or expandingEastern Area Distribution Center
a small business.P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer a
small business reference library, management videoCD-ROM. You can order IRS Publication 1796,tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.Federal Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain: BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
are in business or are interested in starting a business can
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.• Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
• Prior-year tax forms and instructions. Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
• Popular tax forms that may be filled in electroni-SCORE provides small business counseling and training
cally, printed out for submission, and saved forto current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
recordkeeping. is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,• Internal Revenue Bulletins. manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers
a variety of small business workshops.The CD-ROM can be purchased from National Techni-
cal Information Service (NTIS) by calling 1–877 – Personal computer. With your personal com-
233–6767 or on the Internet at www.irs.gov. The first puter and modem, you can access the SBA on
release is available in mid-December and the final releasethe Internet at www.sba.gov. While visiting the
is available in late January. SBA web site, you can find a variety of information of
IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Resource Guide,interest to small business owners.
is an interactive CD-ROM that contains information impor-
tant to small businesses. It is available in mid-February.Phone. Call the SBA Answer Desk at 1–800–
You can get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676 or UASK-SBA (1 –800–827–5722) for general in-
visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov. formation about programs available to assist
small business owners.
Comments on IRS enforcement actions. The Small
Business and Agriculture Regulatory Enforcement Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
Ombudsman and 10 Regional Fairness Boards were es- Development Center or Business Information
tablished to receive comments from small business about Center to request assistance with your small
federal agency enforcement actions. The Ombudsman willbusiness. To find the location nearest you, access the SBA
annually evaluate the enforcement activities of eachon the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk.
agency and rate its responsiveness to small business. If
you wish to comment on the enforcement actions of the
IRS, you can:
Other Federal Agencies• Call 1–888–REG –FAIR (1–888–734–3247),
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-• Send an e-mail to ombudsman@sba.gov , or
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-• Download the appraisal form at www.sba.gov/ able from the Superintendant of Documents at theregfair. Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the GPO on
the Internet at www.access.gpo.gov.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 55

Page 56 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone. Call the GPO at 1–202–512–1800. This
is not a toll-free call.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954
Page 56 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 57 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Energy ...................1 7 Tax year..................1 0A
Enhanced oil recovery........1 6 Trade discount.......... 22, 23Accounting method:
General business...........1 6 Travel expenses............3 2Accrual................ 11, 26
How to claim...............1 7 Depreciation:Cash .................. 11, 26
Indian employment..........1 6 Deduction.................2 8Change in.................1 4
Investment................1 6 Listed property.............2 8Combination...............1 3
Low-income housing.........1 7 Recapture.................2 1Special...................1 4
Orphan drug...............1 7 Disabled access credit.........1 6Accounting periods............1 0 Reforestation..............1 7 Disposition of property:Accrual method of accounting....1 1 Rehabilitation..............1 7 Business property...........1 4Adjusted basis of property......1 5 Renewable electricity Installment sale.......... 15, 16Alcohol fuels credit............1 6 production...............1 7 Like-kind exchange.... 14, 16, 21Alternative minimum tax........1 7 Research .................1 7 Nontaxable exchange........1 4Appeal rights................5 3 Taxes paid on certain Sale of a business...........1 5Assistance (See Tax help) employee tips............1 6 Dividend income..............1 9Audits......................5 2 Welfare-to-work............1 7 Donation of inventory..........2 3Work opportunity............1 7 Drawing account..............2 4
B
Bad debt ...................2 6 D EBarter income................1 8 Damages as income...........2 0 Electric vehicle credit..........2 7Basis of property.............1 5 Debt: Employee benefit programs.....2 9B a d......................2 6Business expenses............2 6 Employees’ p a y ..............2 9Canceled .................1 9Business income.............1 7 Employer identification numberQualified real propertyBusiness tax kit..............5 4 (EIN)......................5business................2 0 Employment taxes:Deductions: About .....................8C Travel expenses............3 2 Deduction for..............3 1Calendar tax year defined.......1 0 Definitions: Empowerment zoneCanceled debt............ 19, 20 Accounting method..........1 0 employment credit...........1 6Capital gain or loss............1 5 Accounting period...........1 0 Energy credit................1 7Car expenses............. 26, 27 Bartering..................1 8
Enhanced oil recovery credit.....1 6Cash discount............ 22, 23 Basis ....................1 5
Entertainment expenses........3 3Business bad debt..........2 6Cash method of accounting.....1 1
Escrow, payments placed in.....2 2Cash discount........... 22, 23Claim for refund..............5 3
Dispositions of property.......1 4 Estimated tax.................6Clean-fuel vehicle credit........2 7
Drawing account............2 4 Examinations (audits)..........5 2Collection of tax..............5 3 Entertainment expenses......3 3 Excise taxes:Combination method of Fair market value...........1 5 About .....................8accounting................1 3 Fringe benefit..............2 9 Deduction for..............3 2Comments ...................3 Local transportation Expenses ...................2 6Condemned property..........1 6 expenses................2 7Consignments ...............2 1 Necessary expense.........2 6 FConstruction allowances........2 1 Net operating loss...........3 5 Fair market value defined.......1 5Contributions to selected Nonbusiness bad debt.......2 6
Filing business taxes...........5community development Ordinary expense...........2 6
corporations, credit for.......1 6 Fiscal tax year defined.........1 0Principal place of business....3 4
Cost of goods sold............2 2 Form 4797 ..................2 1Qualified long-term real
Credit: property .................2 2 Form:
Alcohol fuels...............1 6 Qualified real property 1040 ......................6
Clean-fuel vehicle...........2 7 business debt............2 0 1040–E S ..................6
Contributions to selected Rent .....................3 1 1040–V ..................3 8
community development Restricted property ..........2 0 1099–B ..................1 8
corporations.............1 6 Retail space...............2 2 1099–MISC .............9 ,  1 8
Disabled access............1 6 Self-employment tax..........6 1128 .....................1 0
Electric vehicle.............2 7 Sole proprietor..............3 2210 ......................6
Empowerment zone Statutory employee ...........3 2290 ......................8
employment..............1 6 Tax home .................2 7 3115 .....................1 4
Page 57

Page 58 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3468 .....................1 6 Cancelled lease payments....1 9 O
3800 .....................1 7 Dividend..................1 9 Ordinary gain or loss..........1 5
4562 .....................2 8 How to account for..........2 2 Orphan drug credit............1 74684 .....................1 6 Other types................2 0 Other deductible expenses......3 54797 .....................1 6 Paid to a third party....... 19, 22 Other nondeductible expenses . . . 354868 ......................6 Prepaid rent...............1 8
5884 .....................1 7 Rental................. 18, 19 P6251 .....................1 7 Income tax: Parking fees.................2 76252 .....................1 6 About .....................66478 .....................1 6 Pay, different kinds of..........2 9Deduction for..............3 16765 .....................1 7 Paying:How to pay.................67 2 0.......................8 Business taxes..............5Underpayment penalty........68300 .....................1 0 Income tax.................6Income tax return, who must file . . . 68582–C R .................1 7 Penalty:Independent contractor..........88586 .....................1 7 Failure to file informationIndian employment credit.......1 68594 .....................1 5 returns...................9Individual taxpayer identification8820 .....................1 7 Failure to furnish correct payeenumber (ITIN)...............58824 .................. 15, 16 statements...............9Information returns.............88826 .....................1 6 Underpayment of tax..........6
Innocent spouse relief.........5 38829 .....................3 4 Pension plans................3 1
8830 .....................1 6 Installment sales..............1 5 Personal property tax..........3 28835 .....................1 7 Insurance: Prepaid expense:8844 .....................1 6 Expense ..................2 9 Extends useful life...........3 08845 .....................1 6 Proceeds .................2 2 Rent .....................3 18846 .....................1 6 Interest: Professional fees.............3 18847 .....................1 6 Expense ..................3 0 Promissory notes.............2 08857 .....................5 3 Income ...................1 9 Publications (See Tax help)8861 .....................1 7 Inventories..................1 39 8 2......................1 9 Investment credit.............1 6Schedule C.................6 QIRS mission..................3Schedule C–E Z .............6 Qualified real property business
SS –4 .....................5 debt .....................2 0
SS –5 .....................5 K
W –2......................9 Kickbacks................ 21, 35 RW –7......................5 Real estate rents.............1 8W –9......................5
Real estate taxes.............3 2LFree tax services.............5 3
Recovery of deductions........2 1Legal fees..................3 1Fringe benefits...............2 9
Reforestation credit...........1 7Like-kind exchanges........ 14, 21Fuel taxes..................3 2
Refund, claim for.............5 3Local transportation expenses . . . 27
Rehabilitation credit...........1 7Lodging ....................3 2G Related persons:Long-term capital gain or loss....1 5General business credit........1 6 Special rule................1 2Lost income.................2 0Gross profit: Unreasonable rent..........3 1Low-income housing credit......1 7Accuracy..................2 5 Renewable electricity
Additions to................2 6 production credit............1 7
M Rent expense................3 1
Meals ......................3 2 Rental income...............1 8H
Mileage rate for vehicles........2 7 Repayment of income..........1 1Health insurance, deduction for
More information (See Tax help) Research credit..............1 7self-employed..............3 0
Restricted property............2 0Help (See Tax help)
Retirement plans.............3 1Help from Small Business N
Administration..............5 5 Net operating losses...........3 5
Home, business use of.........3 3 SNet profit or loss..............3 5
Salaries....................2 9Nonbusiness bad debt.........2 6
Sale of a business............1 5Nondeductible insuranceI
premiums .................3 0 Sales of assets...............1 4Identification numbers..........5
Nonemployee compensation....1 8 Sales tax...................3 2Income:
Nontaxable exchanges.........1 4 S a mple returns...............3 6Barter....................1 8
Bonus ....................1 8 Not-for-profit activities..........3 5 Schedule C ..................6
Page 58

Page 59 of 59 of Publication 334 7:14 - 23-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule C–E Z ...............6 Tax preparation fees...........3 1 Transportation expenses.......2 7
Section 179 deduction.........2 8 Tax return: Travel expenses ..............3 2
Different ways of filing.........6Self-employed health insurance Truck expenses ........... 26, 27
Due date...................6deduction.................3 0 TTY/TDD information..........5 3
How to file..................6Self-employment tax:
Who must file...............6About .....................6 UTax year....................1 0Deduction for..............3 2 Underpayment of tax penalty.....6Tax rate...................8 Taxes: Uniform capitalization rules......1 3Time limit for posting income....7 Deduction for..............3 1
Employment .............8 ,  3 1Short-term capital gain or loss . . . 15 WExcise..................8 ,  3 2Small Business Administration . . . 55 Wages .....................2 9Fuel .....................3 2Social security coverage.........6 Welfare-to-work credit.........1 7Income .................6 ,  3 1Social security number (SSN).....5 Work opportunity credit.........1 7Paid on certain employee tips . . 16Sole proprietor, defined.........3 Personal property...........3 2Standard mileage rate.........2 7 Real estate................3 2 YStatutory employee.............3 Sales ....................3 2 Your business tax kit..........5 4Suggestions..................3 Self-employment..........6 ,  3 2
ITaxpayer Advocate............5 3
T Taxpayer rights..............5 2
Tax help....................5 3 Tolls.......................2 7
Tax home ................ 27, 32 Trade discount............ 22, 23
Page 59