Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Publication 334
Cat. No. 11063P
Tax Guide for
Small
Business
(For Individuals Who Use
Schedule C or C–EZ)
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


Page 2

Contents
Introduction ........................................................3
Important Changes for 2000.............................3
Important Changes for 2001.............................4
1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes............4
2. Accounting Periods and Methods.............10
3. Dispositions of Business Property...........13
4. General Business Credit............................15
5. Business Income.........................................17
6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold..........22
7. Figuring Gross Profit..................................24
8. Business Expenses ....................................25
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss........................35
10. Sample Returns...........................................35
11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer........................52
12. How To Get More Information...................53
Index ....................................................................57
Introduction
This publication is for small business owners who
complete Schedule C or C–EZ of Form 1040. To use
this publication, you will generally need the following
forms.
 Form 1040 and its instructions.
 Schedule C or C–EZ and its instructions.
See chapter 12 for information on ordering these forms
if you don't already have them.
The purpose of this publication is to provide general
information about the federal tax laws that apply to sole
proprietors and to statutory employees.
A sole proprietor is someone who owns an unin-
corporated business by himself or herself. A statutory
employee has a checkmark in box 15 of his or her Form
W–2, Wage and Tax Statement. Statutory employees
have to use Schedule C or C–EZ to report their wages
and expenses.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in
the following table. (See chapter 12 for information
about ordering forms and publications.)
What you need to know. Table A provides a list of
questions you need to answer to help you meet your
federal tax obligations. After each question is the lo-
cation in this publication where you will find the related
discussion.
IRS mission.Provide America's taxpayers top quality
service by helping them understand and meet their tax
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
and fairness to all.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your
comments about this publication and your suggestions
for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site at
www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore,
it would be helpful if you would include your daytime
phone number, including the area code, in your corre-
spondence.
Important Changes for 2000
The following are some of the tax changes for 2000.
For information on other changes, see Publication 553,
Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes.
Accounting methods. Certain small business tax-
payers may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash
method of accounting and may not be required to ac-
count for inventories. For more information, including
the definition of a small business taxpayer, see Publi-
cation 553.
Health insurance deduction for the self-employed.
For 2000, this deduction is 60% of the amount you paid
for medical insurance for yourself and your family. For
more information, see Insurance in chapter 8.
Paid preparer authorization.Beginning with your re-
turn for 2000, you can check a box and authorize the
IRS to discuss your tax return with the paid preparer
who signed it. If you check the “Yes” box in the signa-
ture area of your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may arise during
the processing of your return. Also, you are authorizing
your paid preparer to perform certain actions. See your
income tax package for details.
Photographs of missing children.The Internal Rev-
enue Service is a proud partner with the National Cen-
ter for Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of
missing children selected by the Center may appear in
this publication on pages that would otherwise be blank.
You can help bring these children home by looking at
If you need information about: You should see:
Partnerships .......................................................... Publication 541
Corporations .......................................................... Publication 542
S corporations ....................................................... Instructions for
Form 1120S
Farming ................................................................. Publication 225
Direct selling .......................................................... Publication 911
Commercial fishing ................................................ Publication 595
Recordkeeping ...................................................... Publication 583
Page 3

Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note: The following is a list of questions you need to answer so you can fill out your federal
income tax return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication. )
What Must I Know Where To Find The Answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them?
What forms must I file?
What must I do if I have employees?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses?
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return?
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return?
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it?
What are my rights as a taxpayer?
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters?
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or may I start it in any
other month?
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses?
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year?
See chapter 1.
See chapter 1.
See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
See chapter 5.
See chapter 8.
See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
See chapter 9.
See chapter 3.
See chapter 11.
See chapter 12.
/H22668/H22668
the photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.
Section 179 deduction.For 2000, the total cost you
can elect to deduct under section 179 of the Internal
Revenue Code is increased to $20,000. For informa-
tion on the section 179 deduction, see Depreciation in
chapter 8.
Self-employment tax. The maximum net self-
employment earnings subject to the social security part
(12.4%) of the self-employment tax increased to
$76,200 for 2000. For more information, see Self-
Employment Tax in chapter 1.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for
the cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel
truck in 2000 is 32
1/2 cents a mile for all business miles.
See Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
Important Changes for 2001
The following are some of the tax changes for 2001.
For information on other changes, see Publication 553.
Section 179 deduction.For 2001, the total cost you
can elect to deduct under section 179 of the Internal
Revenue Code is increased to $24,000. For informa-
tion on the section 179 deduction, see Depreciation in
chapter 8.
Self-employment tax. The maximum net self-
employment earnings subject to the social security part
of the self-employment tax increases to $80,400 for
2001.
1.
Filing and Paying
Business Taxes
Introduction
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have
to pay and the forms you may have to file. It also dis-
cusses taxpayer identification numbers.
Table 1–1 in this chapter lists the federal taxes you
may have to pay, the forms you use to report them, and
their due dates.
Table 1–2 provides checklists that highlight the typi-
cal forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever
go out of business.
TIP
You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Cal-
endars for 2001. It has tax calendars that tell
you when to file returns and make tax pay-
ments.
Page 4 Chapter 1  Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
 Form
/H185541040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
/H185541040–ES  Estimated Tax for Individuals
/H18554Sch C Profit or Loss From Business
/H18554Sch C–EZ  Net Profit From Business
/H18554Sch SE  Self-Employment Tax
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
Identification Numbers
This section explains three types of taxpayer identifi-
cation numbers, who needs them, when to use them,
and how to get them.
Social security number (SSN).You generally use
your SSN as your taxpayer identification number. You
must put this number on each of your individual income
tax forms, such as Form 1040 and its schedules.
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS–5, Application
for a Social Security Card. This form is available from
Social Security Administration (SSA) offices or by call-
ing 1–800–772–1213. It is also available from the SSA's
Internet web site at www.ssa.gov.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).
The IRS will issue an ITIN to an alien who does not
have (and is not eligible to get) a social security number
(SSN). To apply for an ITIN, file Form W–7, Application
for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number, with
the IRS. It usually takes about 30 days to get an ITIN.
Enter the ITIN wherever an SSN is requested on a tax
return. If you must include another person's SSN on
your return and that person does not have and cannot
get an SSN, enter that person's ITIN.
CAUTION
!
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
holder to social security benefits or change the
holder's employment or immigration status un-
der U.S. law.
Employer identification number (EIN).You must also
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number
if you do either of the following.
 Pay wages to one or more employees.
 File pension or excise tax returns.
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your
SSN on your Schedule C or C–EZ.
You can get an EIN either through the mail or by
telephone. But first you must fill out Form SS–4, Ap-
plication for Employer Identification Number. This form
is available from either the SSA or the IRS.
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either
the form or the ownership of your business changes.
For more information, see Publication 1635, Under-
standing Your EIN.
When you need identification numbers of other
persons. In operating your business, you will probably
make certain payments you must report on information
returns. These payments are discussed under Infor-
mation Returns, later in this chapter. You must give the
recipient of these payments (the payee) a statement
showing the total amount paid during the year. You
must include the payee's identification number and your
identification number on the returns and statements.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get
an SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN
of each employee exactly as they are shown on the
employee's social security card. If the employee's name
is not correct as shown on the card, the employee
should request a new card from the SSA. This may
occur if the employee's name was changed due to
marriage or divorce.
If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
should file Form SS–5 with the SSA.
Other payee. If you make payments to someone
who is not your employee and you must report the
payments on an information return, get that person's
SSN. If you must report payments to an organization,
such as a corporation or partnership, you must get its
EIN.
To get the payee's SSN or EIN, use Form W–9,
Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Cer-
tification.
A payee who does not provide you with an identifi-
cation number may be subject to backup withholding.
For information on backup withholding, see the Form
W–9 instructions and the General Instructions for Forms
1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.
Income Tax
This part explains whether you have to file an income
tax return and when you file it. It also explains how you
pay the tax.
Do I Have To File
an Income Tax Return?
You have to file an income tax return for 2000 if your
net earnings from self-employment were $400 or more.
If your net earnings from self-employment were less
than $400, you still have to file an income tax return if
you meet any other filing requirement listed in the Form
1040 instruction booklet.
How Do I File?
File your income tax return on Form 1040 and attach
Schedule C  or Schedule C–EZ.  Enter the net profit
or loss from Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ on page 1
of Form 1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit
or loss from your business. If you operated more than
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

one business as a sole proprietorship, you must attach
a separate Schedule C for each business. You can use
the simpler Schedule C–EZ if you operated only one
business as a sole proprietorship, you did not have a
net loss, and you meet the other requirements listed in
Part I of the schedule. (Part I of Schedule C–EZ is
printed in chapter 10.)
What are my filing options?You may be able to file
a paperless return using IRS e-file (electronic filing).
This includes the following options.
1) Using a tax professional who is an authorized IRS
e-file provider.
2) Using your personal computer.
3) Using a telephone (TeleFile).
For details about IRS e-file, see the Form 1040 in-
structions.
When is my tax return due?Form 1040 for calendar
year 2000 is due by April 16, 2001 (April 15th is a
Sunday). If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter
2), your return is due by the 15th day of the 4th month
after the end of your fiscal year. If you file late, you may
have to pay penalties and interest. If you cannot file
your return on time, use Form 4868, Application for
Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual
Income Tax Return, to request an automatic 4-month
extension.
How Do I Pay the Income Tax?
The federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You
must pay the tax as you earn or receive income during
the year. An employee usually has income tax withheld
from his or her pay. If you do not pay your tax through
withholding, or do not pay enough tax that way, you
might have to pay estimated tax. You generally have
to make estimated tax payments if you expect to owe
taxes, including self-employment tax (discussed later),
of $1,000 or more when you file your return. Use Form
1040–ES to figure and pay the tax. If you do not have
to make estimated tax payments, you may pay any tax
due when you file your return. For more information on
estimated tax, see Publication 505.
Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay
enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2000
by withholding or by making estimated tax payments,
you may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid.
The IRS will figure the penalty for you and send you a
bill. Or you can use Form 2210, Underpayment of
Estimated Tax by Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to
see if you have to pay a penalty and to figure the pen-
alty amount. For more information, see Publication 505.
Self-Employment Tax
The self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security
and Medicare tax for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
taxes withheld from the pay of wage earners.
CAUTION
!
If you earned income as a statutory employee,
you do not pay SE tax on that income.
Social security coverage.Your payments of SE tax
contribute to your coverage under the social security
system. Social security coverage provides you with re-
tirement benefits, disability benefits, survivor benefits,
and hospital insurance (Medicare) benefits. Social se-
curity benefits are available to self-employed persons
just as they are to wage earners.
CAUTION
!
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
come, you could cause your social security
benefits to be lower when you retire.
How to become insured under social security.
You must be insured under the social security system
before you begin receiving social security benefits. You
are insured if you have the required number of credits
(also called quarters of coverage), discussed next.
Earning credits in 2000 and 2001.For 2000, you
received one credit, up to a maximum of four credits,
for each $780 ($830 for 2001) of income subject to
social security. Therefore, for 2000, if you had income
(self-employment and wages) of $3,120 that was sub-
ject to social security taxes, you received four credits
($3,120 ÷ $780).
For an explanation of the number of credits you must
have to be insured, and of the benefits available to you
and your family under the social security program,
consult your nearest Social Security Administration of-
fice.
CAUTION
!
Making false statements to get or to increase
social security benefits may subject you to
penalties.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit
for posting self-employment income. Generally, the
SSA will give you credit only for self-employment in-
come reported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3
months, and 15 days after the tax year you earned the
income. If you file your tax return or report a change
in your self-employment income after this time limit, the
SSA may change its records, but only to remove or
reduce the amount. The SSA will not change its records
to increase your self-employment income.
Who must pay self-employment tax.You must pay
SE tax and file Schedule SE if either of the following
applies.
1) You were self-employed and your net earnings from
self-employment (excluding income described in
(2)) were $400 or more.
2) You performed services for a church as an em-
ployee and received income of $108.28 or more.
CAUTION
!
The SE tax rules apply even if you are fully in-
sured under social security or have started re-
ceiving benefits.
Page 6 Chapter 1  Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Table 1–1. Which Forms Must I File?
If You Are Liable For: Due By:
1
Income tax 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year
File with Form 1040.
15th day of 4th, 6th and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31
4
See Publication 15.
Self-employment tax
Social security and Medicare taxes
and income tax withholding
Providing information on social
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax
Filing information returns for
payments to nonemployees and
transactions with other persons
Excise tax
Estimated tax
1040 and Schedule C
2 
or C-EZ
Schedule SE
1040-ES
941
8109 (to make deposits)
3
W-2 (to employee)
W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security
Administration)
940 or 940-EZ
8109 (to make deposits)
3
See Information Returns.
See Excise Taxes.
January 31
4
Last day of February (March 31 if
filing electronically)
4
January 31
4
April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability
for unpaid tax is more than $100
Forms 1099—to the recipient by
January 31 and to the IRS by
February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically)
See the instructions to the forms.
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
1
If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information,
see Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2001.
2
File a separate schedule for each business.
3
Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
Use Form:
4
See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Methods for figuring net earnings.There are three
ways to figure net earnings from self-employment.
 The regular method
 The nonfarm optional method
 The farm optional method
You must use the regular method unless you are
eligible to use one or both of the optional methods.
Multiply your net SE income by 92.35% (.9235) to get
your net earnings under the regular method.
Why use the optional methods? You can gener-
ally use the optional methods when you have a loss or
a small amount of net income from self-employment
and any one of the following applies.
 You want to receive credit for social security benefit
coverage.
 You incurred child or dependent care expenses for
which you could claim a credit. (An optional method
will increase your earned income, which could in-
crease your credit.)
 You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method will increase your earned income,
which could increase your credit.)
SE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first
$76,200 of your combined wages, tips, and net
earnings in 2000 is subject to any combination of the
12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax,
or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax.
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
2000 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Med-
icare part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad re-
tirement (tier 1) tax.
If your wages and tips are subject to either social
security or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and
total at least $76,200, you do not have to pay the 12.4%
social security part of the SE tax on any of your net
earnings. However, you must pay the 2.9% Medicare
part of the SE tax on all your net earnings.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

TIP
Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjust-
ment to income on line 27 of Form 1040.
More information.For more information on the SE tax,
see Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Employment Taxes
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to
report employment taxes. Employment taxes include
the following items.
 Social security and Medicare taxes.
 Federal income tax withholding.
 Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
For more information, see Publication 15, Circular E,
Employer's Tax Guide. That publication explains your
tax responsibilities as an employer.
To help you determine whether the people working
for you are your employees, see Publication 15–A,
Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication
has information to help you determine whether an indi-
vidual is an independent contractor or an employee.
CAUTION
!
If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
independent contractor, you can be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a
penalty.
An independent contractor is someone who is
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold
or pay any taxes on payments to an independent con-
tractor.
Excise Taxes
This section explains the excise taxes you may have
to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any of
the following.
 Manufacture or sell certain products.
 Operate certain kinds of businesses.
 Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or pro-
ducts.
For more information on excise taxes, see Publication
510, Excise Taxes for 2001.
Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Form
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of
several broad categories, including the following taxes.
 Environmental taxes on ozone-depleting chemicals.
 Communications and air transportation taxes.
 Fuel taxes.
 Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
and tractors.
 Luxury tax on passenger vehicles.
 Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
of different articles.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on certain
trucks, truck tractors, and buses used on public high-
ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable
gross weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax
on Form 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Re-
turn. For more information, see the instructions for Form
2290.
ATF forms. If you produce, sell, or import guns, to-
bacco, or alcohol products, or if you manufacture
equipment for their production, you may be liable for
one or more excise taxes. Report these taxes on forms
filed with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(ATF).
Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterly
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details
on depositing excise taxes, see Publication 510.
Information Returns
If you make or receive payments in your business, you
may have to report them to the IRS on information re-
turns. The IRS compares the payments shown on the
information returns with each person's income tax re-
turn to see if the payments were included in income.
You must give a copy of each information return you
are required to file to the recipient or payer. In addition
to the forms described below, you may have to use
other returns to report certain kinds of payments or
transactions. For more details on information returns
and when you have to file them, see the General In-
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.
Form 1099–MISC.  Use Form 1099–MISC, Miscella-
neous Income, to report certain payments you make in
your business. These payments include the following
items.
 Payments of $600 or more for services performed
for your business by people not treated as your
employees, such as fees to subcontractors, attor-
neys, accountants, or directors.
 Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents
paid to real estate agents.
 Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.
 Royalty payments of $10 or more.
 Payments to certain crew members by operators
of fishing boats.
You also use Form 1099–MISC to report your sales of
$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for re-
sale anywhere other than in a permanent retail estab-
lishment.
Page 8 Chapter 1  Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Table 1–2. Going Out of Business Checklists
Income Tax File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
(Note: The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if
you ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms. )
File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or exchange
property used in your business or in which the business use of certain section 179 or
listed property drops to 50% or less.
File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-Employment Tax File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment Taxes File Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage payments.
Note: Do not forget to check the final return box and enter the date final wages were
paid.
File Form 940 or 940-EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were paid.
Note: Do not forget to check the final return box.
Information Returns Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you make
final wage payments. Note: These forms are generally due by the due date of your
final Form 941.
File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note: These forms are generally due within 1
month after the due date of your final Form 941.
Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least $600
for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in which you go
out of business.
File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
If You Are Liable For: You May Need To:
Form W–2.  You must file Form W–2, Wage and Tax
Statement, to report payments to your employees, such
as wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld in-
come, social security, and Medicare taxes, and ad-
vance earned income credit payments. For more infor-
mation on what to report on Form W–2, see the
Instructions for Forms W–2 and W–3.
Penalties.The law provides for the following penalties
if you do not file Form 1099–MISC or Form W–2 or do
not correctly report the information. For more informa-
tion, see the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W–2G.
 Failure to file information returns. A penalty ap-
plies if you do not file information returns by the due
date, if you do not include all required information,
or if you report incorrect information.
 Failure to furnish correct payee statements. A
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required
statement to a payee by the required date, if you
do not include all required information, or if you re-
port incorrect information.
Waiver of penalty.A penalty will not apply if you
can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include
all the required information, or for including incorrect
information, on a de minimis (small) number of infor-
mation returns if you correct the errors by August 1 of
the year the returns are due. (A de minimis number of
returns is the greater of 10 or 
1/2 of 1% of the total
number of returns you are required to file for the year.)
Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Busi-
ness, if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one
transaction, or two or more related business trans-
actions. Cash includes U.S. and foreign coin and cur-
rency. It also includes certain monetary instruments
such as cashier's and traveler's checks and money or-
ders. For more information, see Publication 1544, Re-
porting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Received in
a Trade or Business).
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties,
including up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300
or for filing (or causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent
form, or for structuring a transaction to evade reporting
requirements.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

2.
Accounting Periods
and Methods
Introduction
You must figure your taxable income and file an income
tax return for an annual accounting period called a “tax
year.” Also, you must consistently use an accounting
method that clearly shows your income and expenses
for the tax year.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
Accounting Periods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
(generally your income tax return), you must use your
books and records for a specific interval of time called
an accounting period. The annual accounting period
for your income tax return is called a “tax year.” You
can use one of the following tax years.
 A calendar tax year.
 A fiscal tax year.
You adopt a tax year when you file your first income tax
return. You must adopt your first tax year by the due
date (not including extensions) for filing a return for that
year.
Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consec-
utive months beginning January 1 and ending Decem-
ber 31.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the
following apply.
 You do not keep adequate records.
 You have no annual accounting period.
 Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal
year.
If you filed your first income tax return using the
calendar tax year and you later begin business as a
sole proprietor, you must continue to use the calendar
tax year unless you get IRS approval to change it. See
Change in tax year, later.
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and
expenses for the period from January 1 through De-
cember 31 of each year.
Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except
December. A 52–53 week tax year is a fiscal tax year
that varies from 52 to 53 weeks.
If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain your
books and records and report your income and ex-
penses using the same tax year.
For more information on a fiscal tax year, including
a 52–53 week tax year, see Publication 538.
Change in tax year.Once you have chosen your tax
year, you must, with certain exceptions, get IRS ap-
proval to change it. To get approval, you must file Form
1128, Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax
Year. You may have to pay a fee. For more information,
see the form instructions.
Accounting Methods
An accounting method is a set of rules used to deter-
mine when and how income and expenses are re-
ported. Your accounting method includes not only the
overall method of accounting you use, but also the ac-
counting treatment you use for any material item.
You choose an accounting method for your business
when you file your first income tax return that includes
a Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want
to change your accounting method, you must generally
get IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method,
later.
Kinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of the
following accounting methods.
 Cash method.
 An accrual method.
 Special methods of accounting for certain items of
income and expenses.
 Combination method using elements of two or more
of the above.
Business and personal items.You can account for
business and personal items under different accounting
methods. For example, you can figure your business
income under an accrual method, even if you use the
cash method to figure personal items.
Two or more businesses. If you have two or more
separate and distinct businesses, you can use a differ-
ent accounting method for each if the method clearly
reflects the income of each business. They are sepa-
rate and distinct only if you maintain complete and
separable books and records for each business.
Page 10 Chapter 2  Accounting Periods and Methods

Cash Method
Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no in-
ventory use the cash method because they find it easier
to keep cash method records. However, if an inventory
is necessary to account for your income, you must use
an accrual method of accounting for sales and pur-
chases. For more information about inventories, see
chapter 6.
Income
Under the cash method, you include in your gross in-
come all items of income you actually or constructively
receive during your tax year. If you receive property or
services, you must include their fair market value in
income.
Example. On December 30, 1999, Mrs. Sycamore
sent you a check for interior decorating services you
provided to her. You received the check on January 2,
2000. You must include the amount of the check in
income for 2000.
Constructive receipt.You have constructive receipt
of income when an amount is credited to your account
or made available to you without restriction. You do not
need to have possession of it. If you authorize someone
to be your agent and receive income for you, you are
treated as having received it when your agent received
it.
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account
in December 2000. You do not withdraw it or enter it
into your passbook until 2001. You must include it in
your gross income for 2000.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold
checks or postpone taking possession of similar prop-
erty from one tax year to another to avoid paying tax
on the income. You must report the income in the year
the property is received or made available to you with-
out restriction.
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was
entitled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in
December 2000. She was told in December that her
payment was available. At her request, she was not
paid until January 2001. She must include this payment
in her 2000 income because it was constructively re-
ceived in 2000.
Checks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the
tax year is constructive receipt of income in that year,
even if you cannot cash or deposit the check until the
following year.
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on
December 31, 2000, from a patient. She could not de-
posit the check in her business account until January
2, 2001. She must include this fee in her income for
2000.
Debts paid by another person or canceled.If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by
your creditors, you may have to report part or all of this
debt relief as income. If you receive income in this way,
you constructively receive the income when the debt is
canceled or paid. See Canceled Debt under Kinds of
Income in chapter 5.
Repayment of income. If you include an amount in
income and in a later year you have to repay all or part
of it, you can usually deduct the repayment in the year
in which you make it. If the amount you repay is over
$3,000, a special rule applies. For details about the
special rule, see Repayments in chapter 13 of Publi-
cation 535, Business Expenses.
Expenses
Under the cash method, you must generally deduct
expenses in the tax year in which you actually pay
them. This includes business expenses for which you
contest liability. However, you may not be able to de-
duct an expense paid in advance or you may be re-
quired to capitalize certain costs, as explained later
under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
Expenses paid in advance.You can deduct an ex-
pense you pay in advance only in the year to which it
applies.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2000 for a business insurance policy ef-
fective for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct
$500 in 2000 and $500 in 2001.
Accrual Method
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
report income in the year earned and deduct or capi-
talize expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of
an accrual method of accounting is to match income
and expenses in the correct year.
Income—General Rule
Under an accrual method, you generally include an
amount in your gross income for the tax year in which
all events that fix your right to receive the income have
occurred, and you can determine the amount with rea-
sonable accuracy.
Example. You are a calendar year, accrual method
taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2000.
You billed the customer in the first week of January
2001, but you did not receive payment until February
2001. You must include the amount received for the
computer in your 2000 income.
Income—Special Rules
The following are special rules that apply to advance
payments, estimating income, and changing a payment
schedule for services.
Estimated income.If you include an amount in gross
income on the basis of a reasonable estimate, and you
later determine the exact amount, take the difference,
if any, into account in the tax year in which you make
the determination.
Change in payment schedule for services.If you
perform services for a basic rate specified in a contract,
you must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 11

you agree to receive payments at a lower rate until you
complete the services and then receive the difference.
Advance payments for services.Generally, you re-
port an advance payment for services to be performed
in a later tax year as income in the year you receive the
payment. However, if you receive an advance payment
for services you agree to perform by the end of the next
tax year, you can choose to postpone including the
advance payment in income until the next tax year.
However, you cannot postpone including any payment
beyond that tax year.
For more information about reporting advance pay-
ments for services, see Publication 538. That publica-
tion also explains special rules for reporting the follow-
ing types of income.
 Advance payments for service agreements.
 Advance payments under guarantee or warranty
contracts.
 Prepaid interest.
 Prepaid rent.
Advance payments for sales.Special rules apply to
including income from advance payments on agree-
ments for future sales or other dispositions of goods you
hold primarily for sale to your customers in the ordinary
course of your business. If the advance payments are
for contracts involving both the sale and service of
goods, it may be necessary to treat them as two
agreements. An agreement includes a gift certificate
that can be redeemed for goods. Treat amounts that
are due and payable as amounts you received.
You generally include an advance payment in in-
come for the tax year in which you receive it. However,
you can use an alternative method. For information
about the alternative method, see Publication 538.
Expenses
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
deduct or capitalize a business expense when the fol-
lowing apply.
1) The all-events test has been met:
a) All events have occurred that fix the fact of li-
ability, and
b) The liability can be determined with reasonable
accuracy.
2) Economic performance has occurred.
Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct
or capitalize a business expense until economic per-
formance occurs. If your expense is for property or
services provided to you, or for your use of property,
economic performance occurs as the property or ser-
vices are provided or as the property is used. If your
expense is for property or services you provide to oth-
ers, economic performance occurs as you provide the
property or services. An exception allows certain re-
curring items to be treated as incurred during a tax year
even though economic performance has not occurred.
For more information on economic performance, see
Publication 538.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use
an accrual method of accounting. You buy office sup-
plies in December 2000. You received the supplies and
the bill in December, but you pay the bill in January
2001. You can deduct the expense in 2000 because
all events that fix the fact of liability have occurred, the
amount of the liability could be reasonably determined,
and economic performance occurred in that year.
Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring ex-
pense. In that case, you can deduct them in 2000, even
if the supplies are not delivered until 2001 (when eco-
nomic performance occurs).
Inventories.You must generally take inventories into
account at the beginning and end of your tax year when
the production, purchase, or sale of merchandise is an
income-producing factor. If you must account for an
inventory in your business, you must use an accrual
method of accounting for your purchases and sales.
For more information about inventories, see chapter 6.
Special rule for related persons.You cannot deduct
business expenses and interest owed to a related per-
son who uses the cash method of accounting until you
make the payment and the corresponding amount is
includible in the related person's gross income. Deter-
mine the relationship, for this rule, as of the end of the
tax year for which the expense or interest would other-
wise be deductible. If a deduction is not allowed under
this rule, the rule will continue to apply even if your
relationship with the person ends before the expense
or interest is includible in the gross income of that per-
son.
Related persons include members of your immediate
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole
or half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-
ants. For a list of other related persons, see Publication
538.
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capi-
talize the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for
production or resale activities. Include these costs in the
basis of property you produce or acquire for resale,
rather than claiming them as a current deduction. You
recover the costs through depreciation, amortization,
or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
dispose of the property.
Activities subject to the rules.You may be subject
to the uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the
following in the course of a business or an activity car-
ried on for profit.
1) Produce real or tangible personal property for use
in the business or activity. For this purpose, tangible
personal property includes a film, sound recording,
video tape, book, or similar property.
2) Produce real or tangible personal property for sale
to customers.
Page 12 Chapter 2  Accounting Periods and Methods

3) Acquire property for resale.
However, these rules do not apply to the following
property.
1) Personal property you acquire for resale if your
average annual gross receipts are $10 million or
less for the 3 prior tax years.
2) Property you produce if you meet either of the fol-
lowing conditions.
a) Your indirect costs of producing the property
are $200,000 or less.
b) You use the cash method of accounting and
do not account for inventories. For more infor-
mation, see Inventories in chapter 6.
Special Methods
There are special methods of accounting for certain
items of income or expense. These include the follow-
ing.
 Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication
535, Business Expenses.
 Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publication
535.
 Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
535.
 Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To
Depreciate Property.
 Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales.
Combination Method
You can generally use any combination of cash, ac-
crual, and special methods of accounting if the combi-
nation clearly shows your income and expenses and
you use it consistently. However, the following re-
strictions apply.
 If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-
come, you must use an accrual method for pur-
chases and sales. You can use the cash method
for all other items of income and expenses. See In-
ventories in the discussion of expenses under Ac-
crual Method, earlier.
 If you use the cash method for figuring your income,
you must use the cash method for reporting your
expenses.
 If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-
penses, you must use an accrual method for figuring
your income.
Change in
Accounting Method
Once you have set up your accounting method, you
must generally get IRS approval before you can change
to another method. A change in your accounting
method includes a change in:
1) Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-
crual method, and
2) Your treatment of any material item.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application
for Change in Accounting Method. You may have to pay
a fee. For more information, see the form instructions.
3.
Dispositions of
Business Property
Introduction
If you dispose of business property, you may have a
gain or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in
some cases you may have a gain that is not taxable
or a loss that is not deductible. This chapter will alert
you to whether you have a disposition, how to figure the
gain or loss, and where to report the gain or loss.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
 Form
/H185544797 Sales of Business Property
/H18554Sch D Capital Gains and Losses
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
What Is a Disposition
of Property?
A disposition of property includes the following trans-
actions.
 You sell business property for cash or other prop-
erty.
 You exchange property for other property.
 You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
of a lease.
 You receive money for granting the exclusive use
of a copyright throughout its life in a particular me-
dium.
 You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
 You abandon property.
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 13

 Your bank or other financial institution forecloses
on your mortgage or repossesses your property.
 Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
you receive property or money in payment.
 Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-
erty or money in payment.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen prop-
erty, see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and
Thefts (Business and Nonbusiness). For details about
the other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publication 544.
Nontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of prop-
erty are not taxable. This means any gain from the ex-
change is not recognized and you cannot deduct any
loss. Your gain or loss will not be recognized until you
sell or otherwise dispose of the property you receive.
Like-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the
exchange of property for the same kind of property. It
is the most common type of nontaxable exchange. To
be a like-kind exchange, the property traded and the
property received must be both of the following.
 Business or investment property.
 Like property.
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form
8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information
about like-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication
544.
Installment sales.An installment sale is a sale of
property where you receive at least one payment after
the tax year of the sale. If you finance the buyer's pur-
chase of your property, instead of having the buyer get
a loan or mortgage from a third party, you probably
have an installment sale.
For more information about installment sales, see
Publication 537, Installment Sales.
Sale of a business.The sale of a business is not
usually a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of
the business are sold. Generally, when this occurs,
each asset is treated as being sold separately for de-
termining the treatment of gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the
sales price among the business assets. Use Form
8594, Asset Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060,
to provide this information. The buyer and seller should
each attach Form 8594 to their federal income tax re-
turn for the year in which the sale occurred.
For more information about the sale of a business,
see chapter 2 of Publication 544.
How Do I Figure
a Gain or Loss?
Table 3–1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
If:
Adjusted basis is more than
amount realized
Amount realized is more than
adjusted basis
You have a loss
You have a gain
Then:The following are definitions of basis, adjusted basis,
amount realized, fair market value, and amount recog-
nized. You need to know these definitions to figure your
gain or loss.
Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually
its basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or
other disposition. However, if you got the property by
gift, inheritance, or in some way other than buying it,
you must use a basis other than its cost. For more in-
formation about basis, see Publication 551, Basis of
Assets.
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is
your original cost or other basis plus certain additions,
and minus certain deductions such as depreciation and
casualty losses.
Amount realized.The amount you realize from a dis-
position is the total of all money you receive plus the
fair market value of all property or services you re-
ceive. The amount you realize also includes any of your
liabilities that were assumed by the buyer and any li-
abilities to which the property you transferred is subject,
such as real estate taxes or a mortgage.
Fair market value.Fair market value is the price
at which the property would change hands between a
buyer and a seller, neither having to buy or sell, and
both having reasonable knowledge of all necessary
facts.
Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from
a disposition of property is usually a recognized gain
or loss for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be
included in gross income. Recognized losses are
deductible from gross income. However, a gain or loss
realized from certain exchanges of property is not rec-
ognized. See Nontaxable exchanges, earlier. Also, you
cannot deduct a loss from the disposition of property
held for personal use.
Is My Gain or Loss
Ordinary or Capital?
You must classify your gains and losses as either or-
dinary or capital gains or losses. You must do this to
figure your net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will
have a capital gain or loss if you dispose of a capital
asset. For the most part, everything you own and use
for personal purposes or investment is a capital asset.
Page 14 Chapter 3  Dispositions of Business Property

Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you
held the property longer than 1 year, you may be able
to treat the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These
gains and losses are called section 1231 gains and
losses.
For more information about ordinary and capital
gains and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication
544.
Is My Capital Gain or Loss
Short Term or Long Term?
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain
or loss is long or short term depends on how long you
own the property before you dispose of it. The time you
own property before disposing of it is called the holding
period.
Table 3–2. Do I Have a Short-Term or
Long-Term Gain or Loss?
If you hold the
property:
1 year or less
More than 1 year
Short-term capital gain
or loss
Long-term capital gain
or loss
Then you have a:
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication
544.
Where Do I Report
Gains and Losses?
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions
on the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms
explain how to fill them out.
Dispositions of business property and depreciable
property.Use Form 4797. If you have a taxable gain,
you may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824, Like-Kind
Exchanges. You may also have to use Form 4797 and
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Installment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale
Income. You may also have to use Form 4797 and
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Casualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties
and Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797.
Condemned property. Use Form 4797. You may also
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
4.
General Business
Credit
Introduction
Your general business credit for the year consists of
your carryforward of business credits from prior years
plus the total of your current year business credits. In
addition, your general business credit for the current
year may be increased later by the carryback of busi-
ness credits from later years. You subtract this credit
directly from your tax.
All of the following credits are part of the general
business credit. The form you use to figure each credit
is shown in parentheses. Be sure you also read How
To Claim the Credit later because you may also have
to fill out Form 3800, General Business Credit, in certain
situations.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554954 Tax Incentives for Empowerment Zones and
Other Distressed Communities
 Form
/H185543800 General Business Credit
/H185546251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
Alcohol fuels credit (Form 6478).This credit applies
to alcohol you sold or used as fuel. Alcohol, for pur-
poses of this credit, includes ethanol and methanol. It
does not include alcohol produced from petroleum, na-
tural gas, coal, or peat. Nor does it include alcohol of
less than 150 proof. For more information, see Form
6478.
Credit for contributions to selected community de-
velopment corporations (Form 8847). This credit
applies to certain contributions made to a selected
community development corporation before June 30,
1999. For more information, see Form 8847.
Credit for taxes paid on certain employee tips (Form
8846). The credit is generally equal to your (employ-
er's) portion of social security and Medicare taxes paid
on tips received by employees of your food and
Chapter 4 General Business Credit Page 15

beverage establishment where tipping is customary.
The credit applies regardless of whether the food is
consumed on or off your business premises. However,
you cannot get credit for your part of social security and
Medicare taxes on those tips that are used to meet the
federal minimum wage rate that applies to the em-
ployee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. For more
information, see Form 8846.
Disabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled
access credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligi-
ble small business that pays or incurs expenses to
provide access to persons who have disabilities. You
must pay or incur the expenses to enable your business
to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990. For more information, see Form 8826.
Empowerment zone employment credit (Form
8844). You may qualify for this credit if you have em-
ployees and are engaged in a business in an em-
powerment zone for which the credit is available. For
more information, see Form 8844 and Publication 954.
Enhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This
credit applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery
costs for the tax year. For more information, see Form
8830.
Indian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit
applies to the part of the qualified wages and health
insurance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid
or incurred during a tax year that is more than the sum
of the comparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid
or incurred during calendar year 1993. The employee
must be an enrolled member, or the spouse of an en-
rolled member, of an Indian tribe. The employee must
perform substantially all of his or her services within an
Indian reservation while living on or near the reserva-
tion. For more information, see Form 8845 and Publi-
cation 954.
Investment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit
is the total of the following three credits.
 Energy credit.
 Reforestation credit.
 Rehabilitation credit.
Energy credit. This credit applies to certain ex-
penses for solar or geothermal energy property you
placed in service during the tax year. For more infor-
mation, see the instructions for Form 3468.
Reforestation credit.The reforestation credit ap-
plies to part of the expenses you incur each year to
forest or reforest property you hold for growing trees for
sale or use in the commercial production of timber
products. For information about these expenses, see
chapter 9 in Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Rehabilitation credit.This credit applies to ex-
penses you incur to rehabilitate certain buildings. For
more information, see the instructions for Form 3468.
Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
generally applies to qualified low-income housing
buildings placed in service after 1986. For more infor-
mation, see Form 8586.
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug
credit applies to qualified expenses incurred in testing
certain drugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases
and conditions.” For more information, see Form 8820.
Renewable electricity production credit (Form
8835). The renewable electricity production credit is
available to sellers of electricity. It is based on electricity
that was sold to unrelated persons and was produced
from qualified energy resources at a qualified facility
during the 10-year period after the facility is placed in
service. For more information, see Form 8835.
Research credit (Form 6765).The research credit is
designed to encourage businesses to increase the
amounts they spend on research and experimental ac-
tivities. The credit is generally 20% of the amount by
which your research expenses for the year are more
than your base amount. However, the credit does not
apply to expenses you pay or incur after June 30, 2004.
For more information, see Form 6765.
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861).The welfare-to-
work credit provides businesses with an incentive to
hire long-term family assistance recipients. However,
the credit does not apply to wages you pay or incur for
qualified long-term family assistance recipients who
begin work for you after December 31, 2001. For more
information, see Form 8861 and Publication 954.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work op-
portunity credit provides businesses with an incentive
to hire individuals from targeted groups that have a
particularly high unemployment rate or other special
employment needs. However, the credit does not apply
to wages you pay or incur for qualified targeted group
members who begin work for you after December 31,
2001. For more information, see Form 5884 and Publi-
cation 954.
How To Claim the Credit
If you meet all the following conditions, use only the
form shown in parentheses with each of the credits
discussed above.
 You have only one current year business credit.
 You have no carryback or carryover credit(s).
 The credit (other than the low-income housing
credit) is not from a passive activity. See Form
8582–CR, Passive Activity Credit Limitations, for
information about passive activity credits.
If you do not meet all these conditions, you must also
fill out Form 3800.
Page 16 Chapter 4  General Business Credit

CAUTION
!
Although the empowerment zone employment
credit (Form 8844) is part of the general busi-
ness credit, never report it on Form 3800.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may
not owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative mini-
mum tax on Form 6251 if you claim a general business
credit. After you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax
return.
5.
Business Income
Introduction
This chapter primarily explains what income is business
income and how to account for it on your tax return. It
also explains what items are not considered income.
If there is a connection between any income you re-
ceive and your business, the income is business in-
come. A connection exists if it is clear that the payment
of income would not have been made if you did not
have the business.
You can have business income even if you are not
involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. In-
come from work you do on the side in addition to your
regular job can be business income.
You report most business income, such as income
from the sale of your products or services, on Schedule
C or C–EZ. But you report the income from the sale
of business assets, such as land and office buildings,
on other forms instead of Schedule C or C–EZ. For
information on selling business assets, see chapter 3.
TIP
Nonemployee compensation. Business in-
come includes amounts you received in your
business that were properly shown on Forms
1099–MISC. This includes amounts reported as non-
employee compensation in box 7 of the form. You can
find more information in the instructions on the back of
the Form 1099–MISC you received.
Kinds of Income
You must report on your tax return all income you re-
ceive from your business unless it is excluded by law.
In most cases, your business income will be in the form
of cash, checks, and credit card charges. But business
income can be in other forms, such as property or ser-
vices. These and other types of income are explained
next.
CAUTION
!
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business in-
come from sources outside the United States
(foreign income), you must report that income
on your tax return unless it is exempt from tax under
U.S. law. If you live outside the United States, you may
be able to exclude part or all of your foreign-source
business income. For details, see Publication 54, Tax
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.
Property or Services (Barter)
Bartering is an exchange of property or services. You
must include in your gross receipts, at the time re-
ceived, the fair market value of property or services you
receive in bartering. If you exchange services with an-
other person and you both have agreed ahead of time
on the value of the services, that value will be accepted
as the fair market value unless the value can be shown
to be otherwise.
Example 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You
perform legal services for a client, a small corporation.
In payment for your services, you receive shares of
stock in the corporation. You must include the fair
market value of the shares in income.
Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of
art to compensate your landlord for the rent-free use
of your apartment. You must include the fair rental value
of the apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord
must include the fair market value of the work of art in
his or her rental income.
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant.
Both you and a house painter are members of a barter
club, an organization that each year gives its members
a directory of members and the services each member
provides. Members get in touch with other members
directly and bargain for the value of the services to be
performed.
In return for accounting services you provided for the
house painter's business, the house painter painted
your home. You must include in gross receipts the fair
market value of the services you received from the
house painter. The house painter must include the fair
market value of your accounting services in his or her
gross receipts.
Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that
uses credit units to credit or debit members' accounts
for goods or services provided or received. As soon as
units are credited to your account, you can use them
to buy goods or services or sell or transfer the units to
other members.
You must include the value of credit units you re-
ceived in your gross receipts for the tax year in which
the units are credited to your account.
The dollar value of units received for services by an
employee of the club, who can use the units in the same
manner as other members, must be included in the
employee's gross income for the tax year in which re-
ceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medi-
care taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes
(FUTA), and income tax withholding. See Publication
15, Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 17

Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and
use the cash method of accounting. You join a barter
club and agree to provide plumbing services to any
member for a specified number of hours. Each member
has access to a directory that lists the members of the
club and the services available.
Members contact each other directly and request
services to be performed. You are not required to pro-
vide services unless requested by another member, but
you can use as many of the offered services as you
wish without paying a fee.
You must include the fair market value of any ser-
vices you receive from club members in your gross re-
ceipts when you receive them even if you have not
provided any services to club members.
Information returns.If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the following
forms.
 Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter
Exchange Transactions.
 Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income.
For information about these forms, see the General In-
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G.
Real Estate Rents
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income
from renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel,
etc., who provides services (maid services, etc.) for
guests, report the rental income and expenses on
Schedule C or C–EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer
or the kind of owner described in the preceding sen-
tence, report the rental income and expenses on
Schedule E, instead of on Schedule C or C–EZ.
Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a
lease that does not put any restriction on their use or
enjoyment are income in the year you receive them.
This is true no matter what accounting method or period
you use.
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for
granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in
your gross receipts in the year it is received.
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you
receive from your lessee for canceling a lease in gross
receipts in the year received.
Payments to third parties.If your lessee makes
payments to someone else under an agreement to pay
your debts or obligations, include the payments in your
gross receipts when the lessee makes the payments.
A common example of this kind of income is a lessee's
payment of your property taxes on leased real property.
Settlement payments. Payments you receive in
settlement of a lessee's obligation to restore the leased
property to its original condition are income in the
amount that the payments exceed the adjusted basis
of the leasehold improvements destroyed, damaged,
removed, or disconnected by the lessee.
Personal Property Rents
If you are in the business of renting personal property
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the
rental amount you receive in your gross receipts on
Schedule C or C–EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments
described in the preceding Real Estate Rents dis-
cussion can also be received for renting personal
property. If you receive any of those payments, include
them in your gross receipts as explained in that dis-
cussion.
Interest and Dividend Income
Interest and dividends may be considered business in-
come.
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that you
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is
business income. Interest received on loans is business
income if you are in the business of lending money.
Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you be-
comes uncollectible during the tax year and you use
an accrual method of accounting, you must include in
gross income interest accrued up to the time the loan
became uncollectible. If the accrued interest later be-
comes uncollectible, you may be able to take a bad
debt deduction. See Bad Debts in chapter 8.
Unstated interest.If little or no interest is charged
on an installment sale, a part of each payment may be
treated as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest and
Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income
to dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and
statutory employees, however, dividends are nonbusi-
ness income. If you hold stock as a personal invest-
ment separately from your business activity, the divi-
dends from the stock are nonbusiness income.
If you receive dividends from business insurance
premiums you deducted in an earlier year, you must
report all or part of the dividend as business income
on your return. To find out how much you have to
report, see Recovery of items previously deducted un-
der Other Income, later.
Canceled Debt
The following explains the general rule for including
canceled debt in income and the exceptions to the
general rule.
General Rule
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other
than as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the
canceled amount in your gross income for tax pur-
poses. Report the canceled amount on line 9 of
Schedule C if you incurred the debt in your business.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the canceled
amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Example. You got a mortgage loan on your home
several years ago at a relatively low rate of interest.
This year, in return for your paying off the loan early,
Page 18 Chapter 5  Business Income

the lending institution cancels part of the remaining
principal. You must include the amount canceled in
gross income.
Exceptions
The following discussion covers some exceptions to the
general rule for canceled debt.
Price reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to
the seller for property you bought, and the seller re-
duces the amount you owe, you generally do not have
income from the reduction. Unless you are in bank-
ruptcy or are insolvent, treat the amount of the reduction
as a purchase price adjustment and reduce your basis
in the property.
Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a
canceled debt to the extent the payment of the debt
would have led to a deduction.
Example. You get accounting services for your
business on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your
business debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent.
Your accountant forgives part of the amount you owe
for the accounting services. How you treat the canceled
debt depends on your method of accounting.
 Cash method – You do not include the canceled
debt in income because payment of the debt would
have been deductible as a business expense.
 Accrual method – You include the canceled debt in
income because the expense was deductible when
you incurred the debt.
For information on the cash and accrual methods of
accounting, see chapter 2.
Exclusions
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following
situations. However, you may be required to file Form
982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of
Indebtedness. For more information, see Form 982.
1) The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case
under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-
ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax
Guide.
2) The cancellation takes place when you are insol-
vent. You can exclude the canceled debt to the
extent you are insolvent. See Publication 908.
3) The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to
a qualified person. See chapter 4 in Publication
225, Farmer's Tax Guide.
4) The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-
ness debt. This situation is explained later.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in sit-
uations (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place
when you are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3)
and (4) do not apply to the extent you are insolvent.
Debt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes
any debt for which you are liable or which attaches to
property you hold.
Qualified real property business debt.You can
choose to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation
of qualified real property business debt. If you make the
choice, you must reduce the basis of your depreciable
real property by the amount excluded. Make this re-
duction at the beginning of your tax year following the
tax year in which the cancellation occurs. However, if
you dispose of the property before that time, you must
reduce its basis immediately before the disposition.
Cancellation of qualified real property business
debt. Qualified real property business debt is debt
(other than qualified farm debt) that meets all the fol-
lowing conditions.
1) It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
property used in a trade or business.
2) It was secured by such real property.
3) It was incurred or assumed at either of the following
times.
a) Before January 1, 1993.
b) After December 31, 1992, if incurred or as-
sumed to acquire, construct, or substantially
improve the real property.
4) It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
Qualified real property business debt includes refi-
nancing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the
extent it does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
You cannot exclude more than either of the following
amounts.
1) The excess (if any) of:
a) The outstanding principal of qualified real
property business debt (immediately before the
cancellation), over
b) The fair market value (immediately before the
cancellation) of the business real property that
is security for the debt, reduced by the out-
standing principal amount of any other qualified
real property business debt secured by this
property immediately before the cancellation.
2) The total adjusted bases of depreciable real prop-
erty held by you immediately before the cancella-
tion. These adjusted bases are determined after
any basis reduction due to a cancellation in bank-
ruptcy, insolvency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not
take into account depreciable real property acquired
in contemplation of the cancellation.
Choice. To make this choice, complete Form 982
and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year
in which the cancellation occurs. You must file your
return by the due date (including the extensions). If you
timely filed your return for the year without making the
choice, you can still make the choice by filing an
amended return within six months of the due date of the
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 19

return (excluding extensions). For more information,
see When to file in the form instructions.
Other Income
The following discussion explains how to treat other
types of business income you may receive.
Restricted property.Restricted property is property
that has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you
receive restricted stock or other property for services
performed, the fair market value of the property in ex-
cess of your cost is included in your income on
Schedule C or C–EZ when the restriction is lifted.
However, you can choose to be taxed in the year you
receive the property. For more information on including
restricted property in income, see Publication 525,
Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or
C–EZ a gain or loss from the disposition of property that
is neither stock in trade nor held primarily for sale to
customers. Instead, you must report these gains and
losses on other forms. For more information, see
chapter 3.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and other
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange
of property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale
to customers on Schedule C or C–EZ. In general, you
report them at their stated principal amount (minus any
unstated interest) when you receive them.
Lost income payments. If you reduce or stop your
business activities, report on Schedule C or C–EZ any
payment you receive for the lost income of your busi-
ness from insurance or other sources. Report it on
Schedule C or C–EZ even if your business is inactive
when you receive the payment.
Damages.  You must include in gross income compen-
sation you receive during the tax year as a result of any
of the following injuries connected with your business.
 Patent infringement.
 Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
 Antitrust injury.
Economic injury. You may be entitled to a de-
duction against the income if it compensates you for
actual economic injury. Your deduction is the smaller
of the following amounts.
 The amount you receive or accrue for damages in
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur
in the tax year to recover that amount.
 Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
ducted.
Punitive damages.You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them
in your income on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, do
not include them if you properly treat them as a re-
duction of a related expense item, cost of goods sold,
or a capital expenditure.
Recovery of items previously deducted.If you re-
cover a bad debt or any other item deducted in a pre-
vious year, include the recovery in income on Schedule
C or C–EZ. However, if all or part of the deduction in
earlier years did not reduce your tax, do not include all
of the recovery. Exclude the part that did not reduce
your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from in-
come, you must include with your return a computation
showing how you figured the exclusion.
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross
income of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and
other allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had
personal exemptions of $5,600. He would not pay in-
come tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt.
Therefore, he will not report as income any part of the
$300 he may recover in any future year.
Exception for depreciation.This rule does not
apply to depreciation. You recover depreciation using
the rules explained next.
Recapture of depreciation.In the following situations,
you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. This
means that you include in income part or all of the de-
preciation you deducted in previous years.
Business use of listed property that falls to 50%
or less. If your business use of listed property (ex-
plained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50%
or less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the
property in service, you may have to recapture part of
the depreciation deduction. You do this by including in
income on Schedule C part of the depreciation you
deducted in previous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797,
Sales of Business Property, to figure the amount to in-
clude on Schedule C. See Applying the Predominant
Use Test in chapter 4 of Publication 946, How To De-
preciate Property. That chapter explains how to deter-
mine whether property is used more than 50% in your
business.
Property not predominantly used in business.If
you take a section 179 deduction (explained in chapter
8 under Depreciation) for an asset and before the end
of the asset's recovery period it is not used predomi-
nantly in business, you must recapture part of the sec-
tion 179 deduction. You do this by including in income
on Schedule C part of the deduction you took. Use Part
IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to include on
Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to find
out when you recapture the deduction.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.If you
sell or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you
may have to report as income all or part of the gain due
to depreciation. You figure the income due to depreci-
ation recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more in-
formation, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and
Other Dispositions of Assets.
Page 20 Chapter 5  Business Income

Items That Are Not Income
In some cases the property or money you receive is
not income.
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is
not income.
Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are
not income until you realize the increases through a
sale or other taxable disposition.
Leasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings
or makes improvements to your property, the increase
in the value of the property due to the improvements is
not income to you. However, if the facts indicate that
the improvements are a payment of rent to you, then
the increase in value would be income.
Exchange of property for like property.If you ex-
change your business property or property you hold for
investment solely for property of a like kind to be used
in your business or to be held for investment, no gain
or loss is recognized. This means that the gain is not
taxable and the loss is not deductible. A common type
of nontaxable exchange is the trade-in of a business
automobile for another business automobile. See Non-
taxable exchanges in chapter 3.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to oth-
ers to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise
remains with you, the consignor, even after the con-
signee possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you
ship goods on consignment, you have no profit or loss
until the consignee sells the merchandise. Merchan-
dise you have shipped out on consignment is included
in your inventory until it is sold.
Do not include merchandise you receive on
consignment in your inventory. Include your profit or
commission on merchandise consigned to you in your
income when you sell the merchandise or when you
receive your profit or commission, depending upon the
method of accounting you use.
Construction allowances.If you enter into a lease
after August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the
construction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent
reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both
the following conditions.
 Under a short-term lease of retail space.
 For the purpose of constructing or improving qual-
ified long-term real property for use in your busi-
ness at that retail space.
Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the
construction allowance to the extent that it does not
exceed the amount you spent for construction or im-
provements.
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (or
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space
for 15 years or less. The following rules apply in deter-
mining whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
 Take options to renew into account when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not
take into account any option to renew at fair market
value determined at the time of renewal.
 Two or more successive leases that are part of the
same transaction (or a series of related trans-
actions) for the same or substantially similar retail
space are treated as one lease.
Retail space.Retail space is real property leased,
occupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
business of selling tangible personal property or ser-
vices to the general public.
Qualified long-term real property.Qualified long-
term real property is nonresidential real property that is
part of, or otherwise present at, your retail space and
that reverts to the landlord when the lease ends.
Accounting for Your Income
Accounting for your income for income tax purposes
differs at times from accounting for financial purposes.
This section discusses some of the more common dif-
ferences that may affect business transactions.
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax
year and according to your regular method of account-
ing (see chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an
income-producing factor in your business, you usually
have to use inventories to clearly show your income.
Dealers in real estate are not allowed to use invento-
ries. For more information on inventories, see chapter
6.
Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the in-
come paid to a third party.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your
son. The amount paid to your son is gross income to
you.
Cash discounts. These are amounts that the seller
permits you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt
payment. For income tax purposes you can use either
of the following two methods to account for cash dis-
counts.
 Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line
36 Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for
Personal Use in chapter 6).
 Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
count.
You must use the chosen method every year for all
your purchase discounts.
If you use the second method, the credit balance in
the account at the end of your tax year is business
income. Under this method, you do not reduce the cost
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

of goods sold by the cash discounts you received.
When valuing your closing inventory, you cannot reduce
the invoice price of merchandise on hand at the close
of the tax year by the average or estimated discounts
received on the merchandise.
Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or
catalog prices and usually are not written into the in-
voice or charged to the customer. Do not enter these
discounts on your books of account. Instead, use only
the net amount as the cost of the merchandise pur-
chased. See Trade discounts in chapter 6.
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your
property places part or all of the purchase price in
escrow, you do not include any part of it in gross sales
until you actually or constructively receive it. However,
upon completion of the terms of the contract and the
escrow agreement, you will have taxable income, even
if you do not accept the money until the next year.
Insurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or an-
other type of reimbursement for your casualty or theft
loss, you must subtract it from the loss when you figure
your deduction. You cannot deduct the reimbursed part
of a casualty or theft loss.
For information on casualty or theft losses, see
Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness).
Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow
customers for returned merchandise and any other al-
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an
accrual method of accounting for payments received in
advance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual
Method.
6.
How To Figure
Cost of Goods Sold
Introduction
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the
cost of goods sold from your gross receipts on Sched-
ule C. However, to determine these costs, you may
need to value your inventory at the beginning and end
of each tax year.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,
wholesaler, or retailer, or if you are engaged in any
business that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce
income. This chapter does not apply to personal service
businesses, such as those of doctors, lawyers, car-
penters, and painters. However, if those working in
personal service businesses also sell or charge for the
materials and supplies that are normally used in their
businesses, this chapter applies to them.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
Inventories
You must generally take inventories into account at the
beginning and end of your tax year when the pro-
duction, purchase, or sale of merchandise is an
income-producing factor in your business. However,
certain small business taxpayers may be able to adopt
or change to the cash method of accounting and may
not be required to account for inventories. For more
information, including the definition of a small business
taxpayer, see Publication 553, Highlights of 2000 Tax
Changes.
If you are required to account for inventories, include
the following items when accounting for your inventory.
 Merchandise or stock in trade.
 Raw materials.
 Work in process.
 Finished products.
 Supplies that physically become a part of the item
intended for sale.
You must value your inventory at the beginning and end
of each tax year to determine your cost of goods sold
(Schedule C, line 42). To determine the value of your
inventory, you need a method for identifying the items
in your inventory and a method for valuing these items.
Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all
kinds of businesses. The method you use to value your
inventory must conform to generally accepted ac-
counting principles for similar businesses and must
clearly reflect income. Your inventory practices must
be consistent from year to year.
For more information about inventories, see Publi-
cation 538.
CAUTION
!
If you must account for an inventory in your
business, you must use an accrual method of
accounting for your purchases and sales. See
chapter 2.
Page 22 Chapter 6  How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Schedule C
Lines 35 – 42
Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35–42
of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and
are explained in the discussion that follows.
Line 35
Inventory at Beginning of Year
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost
of merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year
that you will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer
or producer, it includes the total cost of raw materials,
work in process, finished goods, and materials and
supplies used in manufacturing the goods (see Inven-
tories earlier in this chapter).
Opening inventory usually will be identical with the
closing inventory of the year before. You must explain
any difference in a schedule attached to your return.
Donation of inventory.If you donate any inventory
item to a charitable organization, the amount of your
deductible contribution is the fair market value of the
item minus the amount that would be ordinary income
if you had sold the item at its fair market value on the
date of the gift.
You must remove from opening inventory the costs
and expenses for the contributed property that you in-
curred in earlier years. They are not a part of cost of
goods sold for figuring gross income for the year of the
contribution. Costs and expenses for the contributed
property incurred in the year of the contribution are
deductible as part of cost of goods sold for that year if
this treatment of costs and expenses is proper under
your accounting method. If you take such a deduction,
those costs and expenses are not treated as resulting
in a basis for the contributed property.
Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who
uses an accrual method of accounting. In 2000, you
contributed property from inventory to a church. It had
a fair market value of $600. The closing inventory at the
end of 1999 properly included $400 of costs due to the
acquisition of the property, and in 1999, you properly
deducted $50 of administrative and other expenses at-
tributable to the property as business expenses. The
amount of the charitable contribution allowed for 2000
is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the amount that
would be ordinary income if you had sold the contrib-
uted inventory at fair market value on the date of the
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining
gross income for 2000 must not include the $400. You
remove that amount from opening inventory for 2000.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the con-
tributed property in 2000 at a cost of $400, you would
include the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost
of goods sold for 2000 and deduct the $50 of adminis-
trative and other expenses attributable to the property
for that year. You would not be allowed any charitable
contribution deduction for the contributed property.
Line 36
Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal Use
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise
you bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, this includes the cost of all raw materials or parts
purchased for manufacture into a finished product.
Trade discounts.The differences between the stated
prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them
are called trade discounts. You must use the prices
you pay (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of
purchases. Do not show the discount amount sepa-
rately as an item in gross income.
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car
in inventory reduced by a manufacturer's rebate that
represents a trade discount.
Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your
suppliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices
for prompt payments. There are two methods of ac-
counting for cash discounts. You may either credit them
to a separate discount account or deduct them from
total purchases for the year. Whichever method you
use, you must be consistent. If you want to change your
method of figuring inventory cost, you must file Form
3115. For more information, see Change in Accounting
Method in chapter 2.
If you credit cash discounts to a separate account,
you must include this credit balance in your business
income at the end of the tax year. If you use this
method, do not reduce your cost of goods sold by the
cash discounts.
Purchase returns and allowances.You must deduct
all returns and allowances from your total purchases
during the year.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw
merchandise for your personal or family use, you must
exclude this cost from the total amount of merchandise
you bought for sale. You do this by crediting the pur-
chases or sales account with the cost of merchandise
you withdraw for personal use. You should charge the
amount to your drawing account.
A drawing account is a separate account you
should keep to record the business income you with-
draw to pay for personal and family expenses. As stated
above, you also use it to record withdrawals of mer-
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year's
closing inventory, attach explanation ..............................
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to
yourself ............................................................................
38 Materials and supplies ....................................................
39 Other costs ......................................................................
40 Add lines 35 through 39 .................................................
41 Inventory at end of year ..................................................
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ...................
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 23

chandise for personal or family use. This account is also
known as a withdrawals account or personal account.
Line 37
Cost of Labor
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods
sold only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small
merchandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do
not have labor costs that can properly be charged to
cost of goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor
costs that are properly allocable to the cost of goods
sold include both the direct and indirect labor used in
fabricating the raw material into a finished, saleable
product.
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay
to those employees who spend all their time working
directly on the product being manufactured. They also
include a part of the wages you pay to employees who
work directly on the product part time if you can deter-
mine that part of their wages.
Indirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you
pay to employees who perform a general factory func-
tion that does not have any immediate or direct con-
nection with making the saleable product, but that is a
necessary part of the manufacturing process.
Other labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable
to the cost of goods sold may be deducted as selling
or administrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds
of labor costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods
sold are the direct or indirect labor costs, and certain
other costs treated as overhead expenses properly
charged to the manufacturing process, as discussed
later under Line 39 Other Costs.
Line 38
Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemi-
cals, used in manufacturing goods are charged to cost
of goods sold. Those that are not used in the manu-
facturing process are treated as deferred charges. You
deduct them as a business expense when you use
them. Business expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Line 39
Other Costs
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing
or mining process that you charge to your cost of goods
sold are as follows.
Containers.Containers and packages that are an in-
tegral part of the product manufactured are a part of
your cost of goods sold. If they are not an integral part
of the manufactured product, their costs are shipping
or selling expenses.
Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on
raw materials, supplies you use in production, and
merchandise you purchase for sale are all part of cost
of goods sold.
Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include
expenses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance,
depreciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and super-
vision. The overhead expenses you have as direct and
necessary expenses of the manufacturing operation are
included in your cost of goods sold.
Line 40
Add Lines 35 through 39
The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the
goods available for sale during the year.
Line 41
Inventory at End of Year
Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including,
as appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw
materials and supplies, direct labor, and overhead ex-
penses) from line 40. Your ending inventory will usually
become the beginning inventory of your next tax year.
Line 42
Cost of Goods Sold
When you subtract your closing inventory from the cost
of goods available for sale, the remainder is your cost
of goods sold during the tax year. When you subtract
your cost of goods sold from your adjusted gross re-
ceipts, the remainder is your gross profit from sales.
7.
Figuring Gross Profit
Introduction
After you have figured the gross receipts from your
business (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold
(chapter 6), you are ready to figure your gross profit.
You must determine gross profit before you can deduct
any business expenses. These expenses are discussed
in chapter 8.
If you are filing Schedule C–EZ, your gross profit is
your gross receipts plus certain other amounts, ex-
plained later under Additions to Gross Profit.
If you are filing Schedule C, you figure your gross
profit by first figuring your net receipts. Do this on
Schedule C by subtracting any returns and allowances
(line 2) from gross receipts (line 1). Returns and allow-
ances include cash or credit refunds you make to cus-
tomers, rebates, and other allowances off the actual
sales price.
Page 24 Chapter 7  Figuring Gross Profit

Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from
net receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from
your business.
You do not have to figure the cost of goods sold if
the sale of merchandise is not an income-producing
factor for your business. Your gross profit is the same
as your net receipts—gross receipts minus any refunds,
rebates, or other allowances. Most professions and
businesses that sell services rather than products can
figure gross profit directly from net receipts in this way.
Illustration.This illustration of the gross profit section
of the income statement of a retail business shows how
gross profit is figured.
The cost of goods sold for this business is figured
as follows:
Items To Check
Consider the following items before figuring your gross
profit.
Gross receipts. At the end of each business day,
make sure your records balance with your actual cash
and credit receipts for the day. You may find it helpful
to use cash registers to keep track of receipts. You
should also use a proper invoicing system and keep a
separate bank account for your business.
Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your records
show the correct sales tax collected.
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure
with last year's ending inventory. The two amounts
should usually be the same.
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your
personal use — use them yourself, provide them to your
family, or give them as personal gifts, etc. — be sure
to remove them from the cost of goods sold. For details
on how to adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise
withdrawn from sale in chapter 6.
Inventory at end of year.Check to make sure your
procedures for taking inventory are adequate. These
procedures should provide a way of making sure all
items have been included in the inventory and proper
pricing techniques have been used.
Avoid using adding machine tapes as the only evi-
dence for your inventory. Inventory forms are available
at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value
of each inventory item. Each page has space to record
who made the physical count, who priced the items,
who made the extensions, and who proofread the cal-
culations. These forms will help satisfy you that the total
inventory is accurate. They will also provide you with a
permanent record to support its validity.
Inventories are discussed in chapter 6.
Testing Gross
Profit Accuracy
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can
check the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First,
divide gross profit by net receipts. The resulting per-
centage measures the average spread between the
merchandise cost of goods sold and the selling price.
Next, compare this percentage to your markup pol-
icy. Little or no difference between these two percent-
ages shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A
large difference between these percentages may show
that you did not accurately figure sales, purchases, in-
ventory, or other items of cost. You should determine
the reason for the difference.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On
the average, he marks up his merchandise so that he
will realize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net
receipts (gross receipts minus returns and allowances)
shown on his income statement is $300,000. His cost
of goods sold is $200,000. This results in a gross profit
of $100,000 ($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accu-
racy of this year's results, Joe divides gross profit
($100,000) by net receipts ($300,000). The resulting
33
1 / 3% confirms his markup policy of 331 / 3%.
Additions to Gross Profit
If your business has income from a source other than
its regular business operations, enter the income on line
6 of Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result
is gross business income. If you use Schedule C–EZ,
include the income on line 1 of the schedule. Some
examples are income from an interest-bearing checking
account, income from scrap sales, and amounts re-
covered from bad debts.
8.
Business Expenses
Introduction
You can deduct the costs of running your business.
These costs are known as business expenses. These
are costs you do not have to capitalize or include in the
cost of goods sold.
Income Statement
Year Ended December 31, 2000
Gross receipts ..................................................................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances .......................................... 14,940
Net receipts ......................................................................... $385,060
Minus: Cost of goods sold .................................................. 288,140
Gross profit ........................................................................$96,920
Inventory at beginning of year ............................................ $37,845
Plus: Purchases .................................................. $285,900
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use ........... 2,650
283,250
Goods available for sale ..................................................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year .......................................... 32,955
Cost of goods sold ...........................................................$288,140
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 25

To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one
that is common and accepted in your field of business.
A necessary expense is one that is helpful and ap-
propriate for your business. An expense does not have
to be indispensable to be considered necessary.
For more information about the general rules for de-
ducting business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 535, Business Expenses.
TIP
If you have an expense that is partly for busi-
ness and partly personal, separate the personal
part from the business part.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554 535 Business Expenses
See chapter 12 for information about getting publi-
cations and forms.
Bad Debts
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, you
have a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad
debts—business bad debts and nonbusiness bad
debts.
A business bad debt is generally one that comes
from operating your trade or business. You can deduct
business bad debts as an expense on your business
tax return.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debts and
deductible as short-term capital losses on Schedule D
(Form 1040). For more information on nonbusiness
bad debts, see Publication 550, Investment Income and
Expenses.
Business bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss
from the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the
following.
1) Created or acquired in your business.
2) Closely related to your business when it became
partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit
sales to customers. They can also be the result of loans
to suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods
and services customers have not paid for are shown in
your books as either accounts receivable or notes
receivable. If you are unable to collect any part of these
accounts or notes receivable, the uncollectible part is
a business bad debt.
CAUTION
!
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if the
amount owed you was included in your gross
income either for the year the deduction is claimed or
for a prior year.
Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of
accounting, you normally report income as you earn it.
You can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible
receivable if you have included the uncollectible amount
in income.
Cash method. If you use the cash method of ac-
counting, you normally report income when you receive
payment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for
amounts owed to you that you have not received and
cannot collect if you never included those amounts in
income.
More information.For more information about busi-
ness bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.
Car and Truck Expenses
If you use your car or truck in your business, you may
be able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining
your vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other
costs of local transportation and traveling away from
home overnight on business.
TIP
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an elec-
tric vehicle or a deduction from gross income
for a part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you
place in service during the year. The vehicle must meet
certain requirements, and you do not have to use it in
your business to qualify for the credit or the deduction.
For more information, see chapter 12 in Publication
535.
Local transportation expenses.Local transportation
expenses include the ordinary and necessary costs of
all the following.
 Getting from one workplace to another in the course
of your business or profession when you are trav-
eling within the city or general area that is your tax
home. Tax home is defined later.
 Visiting clients or customers.
 Going to a business meeting away from your regular
workplace.
 Getting from your home to a temporary workplace
when you have one or more regular places of work.
These temporary workplaces can be either within
the area of your tax home or outside that area.
Local business transportation does not include ex-
penses you have while traveling away from home
overnight. Those expenses are deductible as travel
expenses and are discussed later under Travel, Meals,
and Entertainment. However, if you use your car while
traveling away from home overnight, use the rules in
this section to figure your car expense deduction.
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of
business, regardless of where you maintain your family
home. It includes the entire city or general area in which
your business or work is located.
Page 26 Chapter 8  Business Expenses

Example. You operate a printing business out of
rented office space. You use your van to deliver com-
pleted jobs to your customers. You can deduct the cost
of round-trip transportation between your customers
and your print shop.
CAUTION
!
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car
or truck between your home and your main or
regular workplace. These costs are personal
commuting expenses.
Office in the home.Your workplace can be your
home if you have an office in your home that qualifies
as your principal place of business. See Business
Use of Your Home, later.
Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate
your business out of your home. Your home qualifies
as your principal place of business. You occasionally
have to drive to your clients to deliver your completed
work. You can deduct the cost of the round-trip trans-
portation between your home and your clients.
Methods for Deducting
Car and Truck Expenses
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or
truck, you generally can use one of the following
methods to figure your expenses.
 Standard mileage rate.
 Actual expenses.
Standard mileage rate.You may be able to use the
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for
business purposes. For 2000, the standard mileage rate
is 32
1 / 2 cents a mile for all business miles.
CAUTION
!
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate
for a year, you cannot deduct your actual ex-
penses for that year except for business-related
parking fees and tolls.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you want
to use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you
own, you must choose to use it in the first year the car
is available for use in your business. In later years, you
can choose to use either the standard mileage rate or
actual expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate for a
car you lease, you must choose to use it for the entire
lease period. For leases that began on or before De-
cember 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate must be
used for the entire portion of the lease period (including
renewals) after that date.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot
use the standard mileage rate if you:
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
2) Operate two or more cars at the same time,
3) Claimed a depreciation deduction using ACRS or
MACRS in an earlier year,
4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,
5) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 for a car
you leased, or
6) Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified
reimbursement.
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the
standard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-
related parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to
park your car at your place of work are nondeductible
commuting expenses.)
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the
standard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your
actual car or truck expenses.
TIP
If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
deduction both ways to see which gives you a
larger deduction.
Actual car expenses include the costs of the follow-
ing items.
If you use your vehicle for both business and per-
sonal purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween business and personal use. You can divide
based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower
shop. You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year.
16,000 miles were for delivering flowers to customers
and 4,000 miles were for personal use. You can claim
only 80% (16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating
your van as a business expense.
More information. For more information about the
rules for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publi-
cation 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Ex-
penses.
Reimbursing Your Employees
for Expenses
You generally can deduct the amount you reimburse
your employees for car and truck expenses. The re-
imbursement you deduct and the manner in which you
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse the
expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccount-
able plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication
535. That chapter explains accountable and nonac-
countable plans and tells you whether to report the re-
imbursement on your employee's Form W–2, Wage and
Tax Statement.
Depreciation Lease payments Registration fees
Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 27

Depreciation
If property you acquire to use in your business is ex-
pected to last more than one year, you generally cannot
deduct the entire cost as a business expense in the
year you acquire it. You must spread the cost over more
than one tax year and deduct part of it each year on
Schedule C or C–EZ. This method of deducting the
cost of business property is called depreciation.
The discussion here is brief. You will find more in-
formation about depreciation in Publication 946, How
To Depreciate Property.
What can be depreciated.You can depreciate prop-
erty if it meets all the following requirements.
 It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come.
 It must be expected to last more than one year. In
other words, it must have a useful life that extends
substantially beyond the year it is placed in service.
 It must be something that wears out, decays, gets
used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from
natural causes.
What cannot be depreciated.You cannot depreciate
any of the following items.
 Property placed in service and disposed of in the
same year.
 Inventory (explained in chapter 6).
 Land.
 Repairs and replacements that do not increase the
value of your property, make it more useful, or
lengthen its useful life. You can deduct these
amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C–EZ.
Depreciation method. The method for depreciating
most tangible property placed in service after 1986 is
called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(MACRS). (Tangible property is property you can see
or touch.) MACRS is discussed in detail in Publication
946.
Section 179 deduction.You can choose to deduct a
limited amount (for 2000, up to $20,000) of the cost of
certain depreciable property in the year you buy it for
use in your business. This deduction is known as the
“section 179 deduction.” For more information, see
Publication 946. It explains what costs you can and
cannot deduct, how to figure the deduction, and when
to recapture the deduction.
Listed property.Listed property is any of the following.
 Most passenger automobiles.
 Most other property used for transportation.
 Any property of a type generally used for enter-
tainment, recreation, or amusement.
 Certain computer and related peripheral equipment.
 Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommuni-
cations equipment).
 You must follow additional rules and recordkeeping
requirements when depreciating listed property. For
more information about listed property, see Publication
946.
Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and
Amortization, to report depreciation and the section 179
deduction. Use it if you are claiming any of the follow-
ing.
 Depreciation on property placed in service during
the tax year.
 A section 179 deduction.
 Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
when it was placed in service).
CAUTION
!
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C–EZ.
Employees' Pay
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you
give your employees for the services they perform for
your business. The pay may be in cash, property, or
services.
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be an
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet
both the following tests.
 The pay must be reasonable.
 The pay must be for services performed.
Chapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these
requirements.
You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
withdrawals you make from your business. You are not
an employee of the business.
CAUTION
!
If you had employees during the year, you must
use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule
C –EZ.
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay
to your employees are listed below. For an explanation
of each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
 Awards.
 Bonuses.
 Education expenses.
 Fringe benefits (discussed later).
 Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
to repay if they are for personal services actually
performed.
Page 28 Chapter 8  Business Expenses

 Property you transfer to an employee as payment
for services.
 Reimbursements for employee business expenses.
 Sick pay.
 Vacation pay.
Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay
provided to any person for the performance of services
by that person. The following are examples of fringe
benefits.
 Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
 Meals and lodging.
 The use of a car.
 Flights on airplanes.
 Discounts on property or services.
 Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
 Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.
Employee benefit programs include the following.
 Accident and health plans.
 Adoption assistance.
 Cafeteria plans.
 Dependent care assistance.
 Educational assistance.
 Group-term life insurance coverage.
 Welfare benefit funds.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits
you provide on your Schedule C in whatever category
the cost falls. For example, if you allow an employee
to use a car or other property you lease, deduct the cost
of the lease as a rent or lease expense. If you own the
property, include your deduction for its cost or other
basis as a section 179 deduction or a depreciation de-
duction.
TIP
You may be able to exclude all or part of the
fringe benefits you provide from your employ-
ees' wages. For more information about fringe
benefits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication
15–B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Insurance
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the
following kinds of insurance related to your business.
1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
2) Credit insurance on losses from unpaid debts.
3) Group hospitalization and medical insurance for
employees, including long-term care insurance.
 4) Liability insurance.
5) Malpractice insurance that covers your personal li-
ability for professional negligence resulting in injury
or damage to patients or clients.
6) Workers' compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-
related diseases suffered by employees in your
business, regardless of fault.
7) Contributions to a state unemployment insurance
fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered
taxes under state law.
8) Overhead insurance that pays you for business
overhead expenses you have during long periods
of disability caused by your injury or sickness.
9) Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehi-
cles used in your business for liability, damages,
and other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for
personal use, you can deduct only the part of your
insurance premiums that applies to the business
use of the vehicle. If you use the standard mileage
rate to figure your car expenses, you cannot deduct
any car insurance premiums.
10) Life insurance covering your employees if you are
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the
contract.
11) Use and occupancy and business interruption in-
surance that pays you for lost profits if your busi-
ness is shut down due to a fire or other cause.
You cannot deduct premiums on the following kinds
of insurance.
1) Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct
amounts credited to a reserve you set up for self-
insurance. This applies even if you cannot get
business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deduct-
ible. See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,
and Thefts (Business and Nonbusiness).
2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for
a policy that pays for your lost earnings due to
sickness or disability. However, see item (8) in the
previous list.
3) Certain life insurance and annuities. For contracts
issued before June 9, 1997, you cannot deduct the
premiums on a life insurance policy covering your-
self, an employee, or any person with a financial
interest in your business if you are directly or indi-
rectly a beneficiary of the policy. You are included
among possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
policy owner is obligated to repay a loan from you
using the proceeds of the policy. A person has a
financial interest in your business if the person is
an owner or part owner of the business or has lent
money to the business.
For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you
generally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
insurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity
contract if you are directly or indirectly a beneficiary.
The disallowance applies without regard to whom
the policy covers.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 29

4) Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy
on your life or on the life of another person with a
financial interest in your business to get or protect
a business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums
as a business expense. Nor can you deduct the
premiums as interest on business loans or as an
expense of financing loans.
Health insurance deduction for the self-employed.
You can deduct up to 60% of the amount you paid
during 2000 for medical insurance and qualified long-
term care insurance for yourself and your family.
How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can
use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-
ure your deduction. However, if any of the following
apply, you must use the worksheet in chapter 7 of
Publication 535.
 You have more than one source of income subject
to self-employment tax.
 You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (relating to
foreign earned income).
 You are using amounts paid for long-term care in-
surance to figure the deduction.
Cash or accrual method prepayments.You cannot
deduct in one year the entire premium for an insurance
policy that covers more than one year. You can deduct
only the part of the premium that applies to that year.
For each later tax year, you can deduct the part that
applies to that tax year.
More information. For more information about de-
ducting insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.
Interest
You can generally deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ all
interest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts
related to your business. Interest relates to your busi-
ness if you use the proceeds of the loan for a business
expense. It does not matter what type of property se-
cures the loan. You can deduct interest on a debt only
if you meet all of the following requirements.
 You are legally liable for that debt.
 Both you and the lender intend that the debt be
repaid.
 You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor re-
lationship.
You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the in-
terest you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part
business and part personal, you must divide the interest
between the personal part and the business part.
Example. In 2000, you paid $600 interest on a car
loan. During 2000, you used the car 60% for business
and 40% for personal purposes. You are claiming ac-
tual expenses on the car. You can only deduct $360
(60% of $600) for 2000 on Schedule C or C–EZ. The
remaining interest of $240 is a nondeductible personal
expense.
More information. For more information about de-
ducting interest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That
chapter explains the following items.
 Interest you can deduct.
 Interest you cannot deduct.
 How to allocate interest between personal and
business use.
 When to deduct interest.
 The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This
is a loan on which no interest is charged or on which
interest is charged at a rate below the applicable
federal rate.)
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deduct-
ible on Schedule C or C–EZ. However, you usually
cannot deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business
assets. Add them to the basis of the property.
If the fees include payments for work of a personal
nature (such as making a will), you can take a business
deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
business. The personal portion of legal fees for
producing or collecting taxable income, doing or keep-
ing your job, or for tax advice may be deductible on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deductions. For
more information, see Publication 529, Miscellaneous
Deductions.
Tax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule
C or C–EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax
return relating to your business as a sole proprietor.
You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule A
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ the
amount you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax defi-
ciencies for your business as a sole proprietor or stat-
utory employee.
Pension Plans
You can set up and maintain the following small busi-
ness retirement plans for yourself and your employees.
 SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
 SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Em-
ployees) plans.
 Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement.
You can deduct contributions you make to the plan for
your employees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a
sole proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make
to the plan for yourself on line 29 of Form 1040. You
can also deduct trustees' fees if contributions to the
plan do not cover them. Earnings on the contributions
Page 30 Chapter 8  Business Expenses

are generally tax free until you or your employees re-
ceive distributions from the plan in later years.
Under some plans, employees can have you con-
tribute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan.
These amounts (and earnings on them) are generally
tax free until your employees receive distributions from
the plan in later years.
For more information on retirement plans for small
business, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for
Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
TIP
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and Educa-
tion IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways to
save for retirement.
Rent Expense
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you
do not own. In general, you can deduct rent on
Schedule C or C–EZ only if the rent is for property you
use in your business. If you have or will receive equity
in or title to the property, you cannot deduct the rent.
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental de-
duction for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue
of reasonableness arises only if you and the lessor are
related. Rent paid to a related person is reasonable if
it is the same amount you would pay to a stranger for
use of the same property. Rent is not unreasonable just
because it is figured as a percentage of gross receipts.
Related persons include members of your immediate
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole
or half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-
ants. For a list of other related persons, see Publication
538, Accounting Periods and Methods.
Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use
part of it as your place of business, you may be able
to deduct the rent you pay for that part. You must meet
the requirements for business use of your home. For
more information, see Business Use of Your Home,
later.
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your
business is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If
you pay rent in advance, you can deduct only the
amount that applies to your use of the rented property
during the tax year. You can deduct the rest of your
payment only over the period to which it applies.
More information.For more information about rent,
see chapter 4 in Publication 535.
Taxes
You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ various fed-
eral, state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable
to your business.
Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
C–EZ a state tax on gross income (as distinguished
from net income) directly attributable to your business.
You can deduct other state and local income taxes on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
Do not deduct federal income tax.
Employment taxes. You can deduct the social secu-
rity, Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes
you paid out of your own funds as an employer. Em-
ployment taxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You
can also deduct payments you made as an employer
to a state unemployment compensation fund or to a
state disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments as
taxes.
Self-employment tax. You can deduct half of your
self-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. Self-
employment tax is explained in chapter 1.
Personal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule
C or C–EZ any tax imposed by a state or local gov-
ernment on personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to
use property within a state or local area.
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car
7,000 business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles.
They had to pay $25 for their state license tags and $20
for their city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in
city personal property tax on the car, for a total of $280.
They are claiming their actual car expenses. Because
they used the car 70% for business, they can deduct
70% of the $280, or $196, as a business expense.
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or
C–EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
property. Deductible real estate taxes are any state,
local, or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the
general public welfare. The taxes must be based on the
assessed value of the real estate and must be charged
uniformly against all property under the jurisdiction of
the taxing authority.
For more information about real estate taxes, see
chapter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains
special rules for deducting the following items.
 Taxes for local benefits, such as those for side-
walks, streets, and water and sewerage systems.
 Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
during the year.
 Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of
accounting.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service
or on the purchase or use of property as part of the cost
of the service or property. If the service or the cost or
use of the property is a deductible business expense,
you can deduct the tax as part of that service or cost.
If the property is merchandise bought for resale, the
sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If the
property is depreciable, add the sales tax to the basis
for depreciation. For information on the basis of prop-
erty, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.
CAUTION
!
Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and
pay over to the state or local government. Do
not include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.
Excise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C–EZ
all excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary ex-
penses of carrying on your business. Excise taxes are
discussed briefly in chapter 1.
Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually in-
cluded as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct
these taxes as a separate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes.
For more information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax
Credits and Refunds.
Travel, Meals,
and Entertainment
This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and
entertainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule
C or C–EZ.
Travel expenses.These are the ordinary and neces-
sary expenses of traveling away from home for your
business. You are traveling away from home if both the
following conditions are met.
1) Your duties require you to be away from the general
area of your tax home (defined later) substantially
longer than an ordinary day's work.
2) You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
of your work while away from home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of
business, regardless of where you maintain your family
home. It includes the entire city or general area in which
your business is located.
The following is a brief summary of the expenses you
can deduct.
Transportation.You can deduct the cost of travel
by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and
your business destination.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can de-
duct fares for these and other types of transportation
between the airport or station and your hotel, or be-
tween the hotel and your work location away from
home.
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost
of sending baggage and sample or display material
between your regular and temporary work locations.
Car or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating
and maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from
home on business. You can deduct actual expenses
or the standard mileage rate (discussed earlier under
Car and Truck Expenses), as well as business-related
tolls and parking. If you rent a car while away from
home on business, you can deduct only the business-
use portion of the expenses.
Meals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of
meals and lodging if your business trip is overnight or
long enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to
properly perform your duties. In most cases, you can
deduct only 50% of meal expenses.
Cleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning
and laundry while on your business trip.
Telephone. You can deduct the cost of business
calls while on your business trip, including business
communication by fax machine or other communication
devices.
Tips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any ex-
penses listed above.
More information. For more information about
travel expenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Enter-
tainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct
business-related entertainment expenses for entertain-
ing a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you
can deduct only 50% of these expenses.
Examples of entertainment expenses are those for
the following.
 Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs,
theaters, or sporting events.
 Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
customers or their families.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules
listed in Table 8–1. For details about these rules, see
Publication 463.
Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You
generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your
employees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which
you deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse
the expenses under an accountable plan or a nonac-
countable plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publica-
tion 535. That chapter explains accountable and non-
accountable plans and tells you whether to report the
reimbursement on your employee's Form W–2, Wage
and Tax Statement.
Page 32 Chapter 8  Business Expenses

Table 8–1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
( The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details about these
rules, see Publication 463. )
General Rule
Definitions
Tests To Be Met
Other Rules
You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the
associated test.
●
Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide
entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to
a customer or client.
● An
ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of
business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not
necessarily indispensable, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment
period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some
other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if
you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment
expenses.
Business Use
of Your Home
To deduct expenses related to the business use of part
of your home, you must meet specific requirements.
Even then, your deduction may be limited.
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
home, you must meet the following tests.
1) Your use of the business part of your home must
be:
a) Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclu-
sive use, later),
 b) Regular,
c) For your business, AND
2) The business part of your home must be one of the
following:
a) Your principal place of business,
b) A place where you meet or deal with patients,
clients, or customers in the normal course of
your business, or
c) A separate structure (not attached to your
home) you use in connection with your busi-
ness.
Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,
you must use a specific area of your home only for your
business. The area used for business can be a room
or other separately identifiable space. The space does
not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.
You do not meet the requirements of the exclusive
use test if you use the area in question both for busi-
ness and for personal purposes.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Example. You are an attorney and use a den in your
home to write legal briefs and prepare clients' tax re-
turns. Your family also uses the den for recreation.
Since the den is not used exclusively in your profession,
you cannot claim a business deduction for its use.
Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to
meet the exclusive use test if you use part of your home
in either of the following ways.
1) For the storage of inventory or product samples.
2) As a day-care facility.
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by
Day-Care Providers).
Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, you
must use a specific area of your home for business on
a continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your
business use of the area is only occasional or inci-
dental, even if you do not use that area for any other
purpose.
Principal place of business.You can have more than
one business location, including your home, for a single
business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for the
business use of your home under the principal place
of business test, your home must be your principal
place of business for that business. To determine your
principal place of business, you must consider all the
facts and circumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place
of business for deducting expenses for its use if you
meet the following requirements.
 You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.
 You have no other fixed location where you conduct
substantial administrative or management activities
of your business.
Alternatively, if you do business at more than one
location, and your home office does not qualify as your
principal place of business based on the previous rules,
you determine your principal place of business based
on the following factors.
1) The relative importance of the activities performed
at each location.
2) If the relative importance factor does not determine
your principal place of business, you can also con-
sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your
home cannot be identified as your principal place of
business, you cannot deduct home office expenses.
However, for other ways to qualify to deduct home of-
fice expenses, see Publication 587.
Deduction limit.If your gross income from the busi-
ness use of your home equals or exceeds your total
business expenses (including depreciation), you can
deduct all your business expenses. If your gross in-
come from that use is less than your total business
expenses, your deduction for certain expenses for the
business use of your home is limited.
Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible ex-
penses, such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation
(with depreciation taken last), allocable to the business
is limited to the gross income from the business use
of your home minus the sum of the following.
1) The business part of expenses you could deduct
even if you did not use your home for business
(such as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and
casualty and theft losses).
2) The business expenses that relate to the business
activity in the home (for example, salaries or sup-
plies), but not to the use of the home itself.
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for half of
your self-employment tax.
Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction.
More information.For more information on deducting
expenses for the business use of your home, see
Publication 587.
Other Expenses
You Can Deduct
You may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
them.
 Advertising.
 Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property.
 Donations to business organizations.
 Educational expenses.
 Environmental cleanup costs.
 Impairment-related expenses.
 Interview expense allowances.
 Licenses and regulatory fees.
 Moving machinery.
 Outplacement services.
 Penalties and fines you pay for late performance
or nonperformance of a contract.
 Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
operating condition.
 Repayments of income.
 Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
 Supplies and materials.
 Utilities.
Page 34 Chapter 8  Business Expenses

Expenses You Cannot Deduct
You usually cannot deduct the following as business
expenses. For more information, see Publication 535.
 Bribes and kickbacks.
 Demolition expenses or losses.
 Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-
ing, airline, and hotel clubs.
 Lobbying expenses.
 Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental
agency or instrumentality because you broke the
law.
 Political contributions.
 Repairs that add to the value of your property or
significantly increase its life.
9.
Figuring Net Profit
or Loss
Introduction
After figuring your business income and expenses, you
are ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your
business. You do this by subtracting business ex-
penses from business income. If your expenses are
less than your income, the difference is net profit and
becomes part of your income on page 1 of Form 1040.
If your expenses are more than your income, the dif-
ference is a net loss. You usually can deduct it from
gross income on page 1 of Form 1040. But in some
situations your loss is limited. This chapter briefly ex-
plains two of those situations. Other situations that may
limit your loss are explained in the instructions for line
G and line 32 of Schedule C.
CAUTION
!
If you have more than one business, you must
figure your net profit or loss for each business
on a separate Schedule C.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)
If your deductions for the year are more than your in-
come for the year (line 37 of your Form 1040 is a neg-
ative number), you may have a net operating loss
(NOL). You can use an NOL by deducting it from your
income in another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from:
 Your trade or business.
 Your work as an employee.
 A casualty or theft.
 Moving expenses.
 Rental property.
A loss from operating a business is the most com-
mon reason for an NOL.
For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net
Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and
Trusts. It explains how to figure an NOL, when to use
it, how to claim an NOL deduction, and how to figure
an NOL carryover.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business to make a profit,
there is a limit on the deductions you can take. You
cannot use a loss from the activity to offset other in-
come. Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport
or recreation, come under this limit.
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter
1 in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter
explains how to determine whether your activity is car-
ried on to make a profit and how to figure the amount
of loss you can deduct.
10.
Sample Returns
This chapter shows how two sole proprietors fill out
their income tax returns. Susan J. Brown reports her
net profit from her business on Schedule C. She cannot
use Schedule C–EZ. Stanley Price reports his net profit
from his business on Schedule C–EZ.
Preparing the Return
for Susan J. Brown
Susan J. Brown owns and operates Family Fashions,
a ready-to-wear clothing shop. She uses an accrual
method of accounting and files her return on a calendar
year basis.
Five employees worked in her shop during the year.
She filed all the necessary employment tax forms and
made the required tax deposits. See Publication 15,
Circular E, Employer's Tax Guide.
Schedule C
First, Susan fills in the information required at the top
of Schedule C. She starts by entering her name and
social security number. Then she completes lines A
through H.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 35

Line A. She enters her principal business.
Line B. She enters 448140, which is the 6-digit busi-
ness code for a family clothing shop. She found the
code on page C–8 of the instructions for Schedule C.
Susan locates the major business category that de-
scribes her business. She reads down the items under
“Retail Trade” to find 448140—“Family clothing
stores.”
Line C.She enters the name of her business—“Family
Fashions.”
Line D.She enters her employer identification number
(EIN). She has to have an EIN because she has em-
ployees. For information about EINs, see Identification
Numbers in chapter 1.
Line E.She enters her business address.
Line F. She checks box 2 for accrual method of ac-
counting.
Line G. Susan checks “Yes” because she materially
participated in her business during the year. The ma-
terial participation rules are explained in the instructions
for Schedule C.
Line H.She leaves the box blank because she did not
start or acquire her business during the year.
Part I—Income and
Part III—Cost of Goods Sold
Susan enters items of income in Part I.
Line 1. Susan enters her total sales of $397,742 for
the year.
Line 2. She enters the refunds she gave on mer-
chandise her customers returned, as well as other ad-
justments she made to customers' purchases. They
total $1,442.
Line 4.Susan uses Part III on page 2 of Schedule C
to figure her cost of goods sold.
Part III, line 35.Her inventory at the beginning of
the year, $42,843, is the same as her inventory at the
end of last year. This figure matches the amount on
Part III, line 41 of her last year's Schedule C.
Part III, line 36.The total cost of goods she bought
to sell to customers, minus the cost of the goods she
returned to her suppliers, was $241,026. From this
stock, she withdrew clothing and accessories for her
own use that cost $774. She subtracts the cost of these
items from her total purchases to figure net purchases
of $240,252.
Part III, line 40.She adds her net purchases to her
beginning inventory. This sum is the total goods Susan
had available for sale during the year.
Part III, line 41.Susan's inventory at the end of the
year was $43,746.
Part III, line 42.Susan subtracts her inventory at the
end of the year (line 41) from the goods that were
available for sale (line 40) to get the cost of goods sold
during the year. For more information on inventories
and cost of goods sold, see chapter 6.
Line 5.Susan's gross profit, $156,951, is the difference
between her net sales (line 3) and the cost of goods
sold (line 4).
Line 7. Because Susan did not have any income to
report on line 6, the gross income is the same as the
gross profit (line 5).
Part II—Expenses
Susan enters her expense items in Part II.
Line 8.Susan paid $3,500 for ads.
Line 9. During the year, Susan determined that she
would not be able to collect $479 from bad checks and
deducted this amount as bad debts. See Bad Debts in
chapter 8.
Line 10. She used her van 75% for business during
the year. She spent a total of $3,000 for gas and oil.
She can deduct 75% of $3,000 or $2,250 for gas and
oil. Other van expenses include $713 (75% of $950) for
insurance, $812 (75% of $1,083) for repairs and up-
keep, and $75 (75% of $100) for tags. She enters the
total, $3,850, on line 10. See Car and Truck Expenses
in chapter 8.
Line 13. Susan enters the $4,277 depreciation from
Form 4562, discussed later.
Line 15. Susan's $238 deduction is for insurance on
her business property (van insurance is included in line
10). The deduction is only for premiums that give her
coverage for the year. See Insurance in chapter 8.
Line 16b. Susan had borrowed money to use in her
business. The interest on these loans was $2,633 for
the year. See Interest in chapter 8.
Line 18.The $216 Susan paid for postage during the
year is her only office expense.
Line 20b.Her rent for the store was $1,000 a month,
or $12,000 for the year. See Rent Expense in chapter
8.
Line 21. She had her store counters refinished and
other painting was done at a total cost of $964.
Line 22.She spent $1,203 on supplies.
Line 23.Susan renewed her business license and paid
property tax on her store fixtures. She also paid the
employer's share of social security and Medicare taxes
for her employees, and paid state and federal unem-
ployment taxes. She enters the total of all these taxes,
$5,727, on this line. See Taxes in chapter 8.
Line 25. Susan's total expense for heat, light, and
telephone for the year is $3,570.
Page 36 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Line 26.Susan paid her employees a total of $59,050
for the year. She does not include in wages any
amounts she paid to herself or withdrew from the busi-
ness for her own use. See Employees' Pay in chapter
8.
Line 27.Susan enters the total of her other business
expenses on this line. These expenses are not included
on lines 8–26. She lists the type and amount of the
expenses separately in Part V of page 2, and carries
the total entered on line 48 to line 27. See chapter 8 for
expenses you can or cannot deduct.
Line 28. Susan adds all her deductions listed in Part
II and enters the total on this line.
Line 29. She subtracts her total deductions (line 28)
from her gross income (line 7). Susan has a tentative
profit of $51,166.
Line 30. Susan did not use any part of her home for
business, so she does not make an entry here. For
information about business use of the home, see Busi-
ness Use of Your Home in chapter 8.
Line 31. Susan has a net profit of $51,166 (line 29
minus line 30). She enters her net profit here, on line
12 of Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A of Schedule
SE (Form 1040).
Line 32.Susan does not have a loss, so she skips this
line. If she had a loss and she was not “at risk” for all
her investment in the business, the amount of loss she
could enter on line 12 of Form 1040 might be limited.
For an explanation of an investment “at risk,” see the
Schedule C instructions for line 32.
Form 4562—Depreciation
and Amortization
Susan figures her depreciation for the year on Form
4562.
Lines 1 through 13.On May 19, Susan bought a $200
adding machine and placed it in service on that same
day. She chose to deduct its cost as a section 179
deduction. See Depreciation in chapter 8.
Line 15b.On May 19, Susan also bought and placed
in service some clothing racks. They cost $800. She
uses the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System
(MACRS) to figure depreciation. The racks are 5-year
property. Susan figures depreciation using the half-year
convention and the 200% declining balance method.
See Publication 946 for information about MACRS.
Line 19.Susan enters $1,117 for depreciation on as-
sets she purchased before 1987. For items bought after
1980 and before 1987, she uses the regular Acceler-
ated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) percentages. For
items bought before 1981, she uses the straight-line
method. See Publication 534, Depreciating Property
Placed in Service Before 1987, for information about
ACRS.
Line 20. Susan enters the depreciation on listed
property from line 26 (explained next).
Lines 24 and 26.On March 20, Susan bought a van
that she placed in service in her business. The van
weighs over 6,000 pounds; therefore, it is not a pas-
senger automobile for the special deduction limits. The
van is 5-year property. She figures depreciation using
the 200% declining balance method and applying the
half-year convention under MACRS. The van cost
$18,667. Her basis for depreciation is 75% of $18,667,
or $14,000, because only 75% of the total miles she
drove during the year were business miles. Susan does
not choose to deduct any part of the cost of the van as
a section 179 deduction.
Lines 28 through 34.Because Susan is a sole pro-
prietor, she must complete lines 28 through 34.
Line 21. Susan has a total depreciation deduction of
$4,277. She enters her deduction here and on line 13
of Schedule C.
Schedule SE—Self-Employment Tax
After Susan prepares Schedule C, she fills out Sched-
ule SE. She starts by entering her name and social
security number at the top of the schedule. Then she
reads the chart on page 1 of the schedule which tells
her she can use Section A— Short Schedule SE to fig-
ure her self-employment tax. She fills out the following
lines in Section A.
Lines 2 and 3. She enters $51,166. This is her net
profit from line 31 of Schedule C.
Line 4.She multiplies $51,166 by .9235 to get her net
earnings from self-employment ($47,252). This is her
net profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than
$76,200, Susan multiplies the amount on line 4
($47,252) by .153 to get her self-employment tax of
$7,230. She enters that amount here and on line 52 of
Form 1040.
Line 6. She multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to
get her deduction for one-half of self-employment tax
of $3,615. She enters that amount here and on line 27
of Form 1040.
Form 1040
Susan fills out Form 1040 as follows:
Name, address, and social security number.Susan
enters her name, home address, and social security
number.
Presidential election campaign fund. Susan
chooses to have $3 go to this fund. She checks the box
under “Yes.”
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 37

Line 1.Susan checks the box on this line because she
is filing as single.
Lines 6a and 6d. Susan claims an exemption for
herself. She checks the box next to “Yourself” and en-
ters “1” in the far right-hand entry space. She also en-
ters “1” in the box on line 6d.
Line 8a.Susan enters $398 of taxable interest credited
to her personal savings account for the year.
Line 9.Susan enters $390 of dividends she received
from CBA Corporation.
Line 12.She enters her business net profit of $51,166
from line 31 of Schedule C.
Line 22. Susan adds the amounts on lines 7 through
21 and enters the total, $51,954.
Line 27.Susan enters one-half of her self-employment
tax. She got this amount from line 6 in Section A of
Schedule SE.
Line 28.Susan enters $1,440 as her deduction for her
health insurance. This is 60% of her $2,400 in health
insurance premiums for the year.
Line 29.Susan enters her simplified employee pension
(SEP) deduction of $2,264. She figures her deduction
by using Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Line 32.Susan adds the amounts on lines 23 through
31a and enters the total, $7,319.
Line 33.Susan subtracts the amount on line 32 from
the amount on line 22 to arrive at her adjusted gross
income, $44,635. She also enters this amount on line
34.
Line 36. She enters $4,400. This is the standard de-
duction for a single filer.
Line 37. Susan subtracts line 36 from line 34 to get
$40,235.
Line 38. She multiplies $2,800 by the number of ex-
emptions claimed on line 6d to get her total exemptions,
$2,800.
Line 39. Susan subtracts line 38 from line 37 to get
her taxable income, $37,435.
Line 40.Susan uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040
instructions to figure her income tax. In the Tax Table
she looks for the income bracket that includes $37,435.
She finds the bracket for incomes of at least $37,400,
but less than $37,450 and sees that the tax for a person
filing as single is $7,067. She enters this amount here.
Lines 41 and 42.Because she does not owe alterna-
tive minimum tax, she enters -0- on line 41 and $7,067
on line 42.
Lines 50 and 51.Because Susan does not have any
of the credits listed on lines 43 through 49, she enters
-0- on line 50 and $7,067 on line 51.
Line 52. She enters $7,230 from line 5 in Section A
of Schedule SE.
Line 57.Susan adds the amounts on lines 51 through
56 and enters the total, $14,297.
Line 59. She enters $14,267 of estimated tax pay-
ments she made for the year.
Line 65.She enters $14,267.
Line 69.Susan subtracts line 65 from line 57 to get the
amount of tax she owes, $30. She writes a check pay-
able to the United States Treasury for $30. On the
check she writes her social security number, her day-
time telephone number, and “2000 Form 1040.” Her
name and address are printed on the check. She sends
her payment with Form 1040–V, Payment Voucher (not
illustrated). She fills out that form and sends it to the
IRS with her check and tax return.
Signing and assembling the return.She signs her
name and enters the date signed, her occupation, and
a daytime telephone number. She assembles her ori-
ginal Form 1040, Schedules C and SE, and Form 4562
in that order. (See “Attachment Sequence Number” in
the upper right corner of each schedule or form.) Then
she makes a copy of the return for her records. Finally,
she mails it to the IRS.
Page 38 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Proof as of
October 25, 2000(subject to change)
SUSAN J BROWN
1313 EMPIRE BLVD
FRANKLIN, NY 18725
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
1
1
398 00
390
51,166
51,954
3,615
1,440
2,264
7,319
44,635
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2000, or other tax year beginning , 2000, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
(See page 19.)
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
3
Check only
one box.
4
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year spouse died /H17075). (See page 19.)5
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 20)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than six
dependents,
see page 20.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 22)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bTotal IRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 23)15a
16b16aTotal pensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 23)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 25)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
23IRA deduction (see page 27)23
Medical savings account deduction. Attach Form 8853 2525
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
26
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 29)
26
2727
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
2828
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
2929
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
32Add lines 23 through 31a
30
Subtract line 32 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31a
Adjusted
Gross
Income
33
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 21. Form
Married filing separate return. Enter spouse ’s social security no. above and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2000)
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 19.) If the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent,
enter this child’s name here. /H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 25)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24 24
(99)
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 56.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of your
children on 6c
who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
entered on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 20)
32
31a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 27)
30
33
/H17073/H17073
2000
Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 39

Proof as of
October 25, 2000(subject to change)
44,635 00
4,400
40,235
2,800
37,435
7,067
- 0 -
7,067
7,230
14,297
14,267
14,267
30
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/27/01 Retail shop owner
Susan J. Brown
Enter your itemized deductions from Schedule A, line 28, or standard deduction shown
on the left. But see page 31 to find your standard deduction if you checked any box on
line 35a or 35b or if someone can claim you as a dependent
Add lines 58, 59, 60a, and 61 through 64. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2000)
Amount from line 33 (adjusted gross income)34 34
Check if:35aTax and
Credits 35aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single:
$4,400
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075
b
35b
36
36
37Subtract line 36 from line 3437
38
If line 34 is $96,700 or less, multiply $2,800 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 34 is over $96,700, see the worksheet on page 32 for the amount to enter
38
39Taxable income. Subtract line 38 from line 37. If line 38 is more than line 37, enter -0-39
40 40
43
44
46
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
47
48
Other. Check if from
49
50
51
Add lines 43 through 49. These are your total credits
49
52
Subtract line 50 from line 42. If line 50 is more than line 42, enter -0- /H17075
50
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
51
Other
Taxes
53
52
66
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
55
Tax on IRAs, other retirement plans, and MSAs. Attach Form 5329 if required54
56
Add lines 51 through 56. This is your total tax /H1707557 57
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109958 58
592000 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 1999 return59
Payments
60a
63Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 50)
62
61Excess social security and RRTA tax withheld (see page 50)
63
65
Other payments. Check if from64
67a67a
68 68
If line 65 is more than line 57, subtract line 57 from line 65. This is the amount you overpaid
69
69
Amount of line 66 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
70
Amount of line 66 you want applied to your 2001 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty. Also include on line 69
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
70
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800 b Form 8396
c Form 8801 d Form (specify)
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
55
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H 56
64
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
May the IRS discuss this return with the preparer
shown below (see page 52)?
Tax (see page 32). Check if any tax is from
If line 57 is more than line 65, subtract line 65 from line 57. This is the amount you owe .
For details on how to pay, see page 51 /H17075
b
Have it
directly
deposited!
See page 50
and fill in 67b,
67c, and 67d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking SavingsType:
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
65
45
47
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
53
54
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
66
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 36)
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
46
48
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
61
62
Head of
household:
$6,450
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er):
$7,350
Married
filing
separately:
$3,675
Standard
Deduction
for Most
People
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
b
and type /H17075
Nontaxable earned income: amount /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
41
42
43
Alternative minimum tax. Attach Form 6251
Add lines 40 and 41 /H17075
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
44
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
41
42
60a
Yes No
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2000)
- 0 -
7,067 00
555 735-0001
Page 40 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
8140
1012345 67
Susan J. Brown
Retail, Family clothing
Family Fashions
725 Big Sur Drive
Franklin, NY 18725
397,742
1,442
396,300
239,349
156,951
156,951
00
00
00
00
00
00
3,500
479
3,850
4,277
238
2,633
216
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
12,000
964
1,203
5,727
3,570
59,050
8,078
105,785
51,166
51,166
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
44
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C
(Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or Form 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
A Principal business or profession, including product or service (see page C-1 of the instructions) B Enter code from pages C-7 & 8
/H17075
D Employer ID number (EIN), if anyBusiness name. If no separate business name, leave blank.C
Accounting method:
E
F
Yes NoG
H
Did you “materially participate” in the operation of this business during 2000? If “No,” see page C-2 for limit on losses
If you started or acquired this business during 2000, check here /H17075
Income
Gross receipts or sales. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the“Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see page C-2 and check here /H17075
1
1
22 Returns and allowances
33 Subtract line 2 from line 1
44 Cost of goods sold (from line 42 on page 2)
5Gross profit. Subtract line 4 from line 35
6Other income, including Federal and state gasoline or fuel tax credit or refund (see page C-2)6
7 Gross income. Add lines 5 and 6 /H170757
Expenses. Enter expenses for business use of your home only on line 30.
8
21Repairs and maintenance21
Advertising8
22Supplies (not included in Part III)22
Bad debts from sales or
services (see page C-3)
9
23
9
Taxes and licenses23
10
Travel, meals, and entertainment:24
Car and truck expenses
(see page C-3)
10
24a
11
Travela
Commissions and fees11
12Depletion12
Meals and
entertainment
b
Depreciation and section 179
expense deduction (not included
in Part III) (see page C-3)
13
Enter nondeduct-
ible amount in-
cluded on line 24b
(see page C-5)
c
13
14 Employee benefit programs
(other than on line 19)
24d
14
Subtract line 24c from line 24bd
25
15
Utilities25
Insurance (other than health)15
26Wages (less employment credits)26
Interest:16
16aMortgage (paid to banks, etc.)a
Other expenses (from line 48 on
page 2)
27
16bOtherb
17
Legal and professional
services
17
18Office expense18
19Pension and profit-sharing plans19
Rent or lease (see page C-4):20
20aVehicles, machinery, and equipmenta
b Other business property 20b
Total expenses before expenses for business use of home. Add lines 8 through 27 in columns /H1707528 28
31
31
All investment is at risk.32a
32
Some investment is not
at risk.
32b
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2000For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
(1) Cash (2) Accrual (3) Other (specify) /H17075
Business address (including suite or room no.) /H17075
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
Cat. No. 11334P
29
30
Tentative profit (loss). Subtract line 28 from line 7
Expenses for business use of your home. Attach Form 8829
29
30
/H20854
Part I
Part II
27
Net profit or (loss). Subtract line 30 from line 29.
● If a profit, enter on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2 (statutory employees,
see page C-5). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If a loss, you must go to line 32.
If you have a loss, check the box that describes your investment in this activity (see page C-5).
● If you checked 32a, enter the loss on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2
(statutory employees, see page C-5). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If you checked 32b, you must attach Form 6198.
/H20854
(99)
2000
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 41

42,843
240,252
283,095
43,746
239,349
00
00
00
00
00
180
60
6,000
1,600
238
8,078
00
00
00
00
00
00
Bank service charges
Chamber of Commerce
Free Credit Card Co.
Trash removal
Window washing
Page 2Schedule C (Form 1040) 2000
Cost of Goods Sold (see page C-6)
35Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year ’s closing inventory, attach explanation
33
36Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
34
37Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to yourself
35
38Materials and supplies
36
39Other costs
37
40Add lines 35 through 39
38
41Inventory at end of year
39
Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4
40
42
Part IV
Part III
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on
line 10 and are not required to file Form 4562 for this business. See the instructions for line 13 on page
C-3 to find out if you must file.
41
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .
42
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2000, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting c Other
45 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
46 Was your vehicle available for use during off-duty hours?
47a Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes No
Other Expenses. List below business expenses not included on lines 8 –26 or line 30.
48 Total other expenses. Enter here and on page 1, line 27
//
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
48
Part V
Method(s) used to
value closing inventory: Cost b Other (attach explanation)
Was there any change in determining quantities, costs, or valuations between opening and closing inventory? If
“Yes,” attach explanation
Lower of cost or market ca
NoYes
43
44
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2000
Page 42 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Susan J. Brown 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
51,166
47,252
7,230
3,615
00
00
00
00
51,166 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE Self-Employment Tax
(Form 1040)
/H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 52.
Section A— Short Schedule SE. Caution: Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2000
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 27
● $76,200 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 52.
● More than $76,200, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $9,448.80 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 52.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2000?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $76,200?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2000
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 43

Susan J. Brown Family Fashions 1 1 1 - 00 - 1 1 1 1
200
- 0 -
20,000
200
200
- 0 -
20,000
200
Adding machine 200 200
800 5 HY 200 DB 160
1,1 1 7
2,800
4,277
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Tangible Property (Section 179)
Note: If you have any “listed property,” complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$20,0001Maximum dollar limitation. If an enterprise zone business, see page 2 of the instructions1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service. See page 2 of the instructions2
$200,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married
filing separately, see page 2 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter amount from line 277
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from 1999. See page 3 of the instructions10
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2001. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property (automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones,
certain computers, or property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement). Instead, use Part V for listed property.
MACRS Depreciation for Assets Placed in Service Only During Your 2000 Tax Year (Do not include
listed property.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only— see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B— General Depreciation System (GDS) (See page 3 of the instructions.)
3-year property15a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C— Alternative Depreciation System (ADS) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
S/L16a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
GDS and ADS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200017 17
18Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election18
ACRS and other depreciation19 19
Summary (See page 6 of the instructions.)
2020 Listed property. Enter amount from line 26
Total. Add deductions from line 12, lines 15 and 16 in column (g), and lines 17 through 20. Enter
here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations — see instructions
21
21
22 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 22
Form 4562 (2000)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 9 of the instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach this form to your return.
39 yrs.
(99)
Section A— General Asset Account Election
14 If you are making the election under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax year into one
or more general asset accounts, check this box. See page 3 of the instructions /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
2000
Page 44 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

7,500
2,025
475
10,000
USA 280 VAN 3-20-00 75 18,667 14,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY 2,800 - 0 -
- 0 -
2,800
Page 2Form 4562 (2000)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
23a, 23b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A— Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 7 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
23b23a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (See page 6 of the instructions.):24
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (See page 6 of the instructions.):25
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
26 Add amounts in column (h). Enter the total here and on line 20, page 1 26
Add amounts in column (i). Enter the total here and on line 7, page 127 27
Section B— Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven during
the year ( do not include commuting miles —
see page 1 of the instructions)
28
Total commuting miles driven during the year29
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
30
Total miles driven during the year.
Add lines 28 through 30
31
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYes
Was the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
32
Was the vehicle used primarily by a
more than 5% owner or related person?
33
Is another vehicle available for
personal use?
34
Section C— Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYes
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
35
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 8 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
36
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?37
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
38
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? See page 8 of the instructions39
Note: If your answer to 35, 36, 37, 38, or 39 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
40 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2000 tax year (See page 8 of the instructions.):
41 Amortization of costs that began before 2000 41
42 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 9 of the instructions for where to report 42
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who
are not more than 5% owners or related persons. See page 8 of the instructions.
Form 4562 (2000)
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 45

Preparing the Return
for Stanley Price
Stanley Price owns and operates Stan's Barber Shop.
He has been in business for 32 years. Stanley uses the
cash method of accounting and files his return on a
calendar year basis.
Schedule C–EZ
Stanley uses Schedule C–EZ to report the net profit
from his business because he meets all of the require-
ments listed in Part I of the schedule. Stanley enters
his name and social security number at the top of the
schedule.
Part I–General Information
Stanley fills out Part I as follows:
Line A. He enters his principal business.
Line B.He enters 812111, which is the 6-digit business
code for a barber shop. He found the code on page
C–8 of the instructions for Schedule C. Stanley locates
the major business category that describes his busi-
ness. He reads down the items under “Other Services”
to find 812111—“Barber shops.”
Line C. He enters the name of his business—“Stan's
Barber Shop.”
Line D. Stanley leaves this line blank. He does not
have an employer identification number (EIN) because
he is not required to have one. For information about
EINs, see Identification Numbers in chapter 1.
Line E.He enters his business address.
Part II–Figure Your Net Profit
Stanley fills out Part II as follows:
Line 1–Gross receipts.Stanley enters his gross re-
ceipts from cutting hair. They include the amounts he
charged for haircuts and all the tips received from his
customers. The total for the year was $27,000.
Line 2–Total expenses.Stanley enters his expenses
for the year. They total $2,330 and consist of the fol-
lowing:
 Advertising in the local newspaper—$145
 Supplies—$475
 Business licenses—$150
 Utilities (electricity and water)—$360
 Rent—$1,200
Line 3–Net profit.Stanley subtracts his total expenses
($2,330) from his gross receipts ($27,000) to get his
net profit of $24,670. He enters his net profit here, on
line 12 of Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A of
Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Part III–Information on Your Vehicle
Stanley leaves this part blank because he is not de-
ducting car or truck expenses.
Schedule SE—Self-Employment Tax
After Stanley prepares Schedule C–EZ, he fills out
Schedule SE. He starts by entering his name and so-
cial security number at the top of the schedule. Then
he reads the chart on page 1 of the schedule which tells
him he can use Section A— Short Schedule SE to figure
his self-employment tax. He fills out the following lines
in Section A.
Lines 2 and 3.He enters $24,670. This is his net profit
from line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
Line 4. He multiplies $24,670 by .9235 to get his net
earnings from self-employment ($22,783). This is his
net profit subject to self-employment tax.
Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than
$76,200, Stanley multiplies the amount on line 4
($22,783) by .153 to get his self-employment tax of
$3,486. He enters that amount here and on line 52 of
Form 1040.
Line 6.He multiplies the amount on line 5 by .5 to get
his deduction for one-half of self-employment tax of
$1,743. He enters that amount here and on line 27 of
Form 1040.
Form 1040
Stanley fills out Form 1040 as follows:
Name, address, and social security number.Stanley
enters his name, home address, and social security
number.
Presidential election campaign fund. Stanley
chooses to have $3 go to this fund. He checks the box
under “Yes.”
Line 1. Stanley checks the box on this line because
he is filing as single.
Lines 6a and 6d. Stanley claims an exemption for
himself. He checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters
“1” in the far right-hand entry space. He also enters
“1” in the box on line 6d.
Line 8a.Stanley enters $295 of taxable interest cred-
ited to his personal savings account for the year.
Line 9. Stanley enters $145 of dividends he received
from ABC Corporation.
Line 12. He enters his business net profit of $24,670
from line 3 of Schedule C–EZ.
Line 22.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 7 through
21 and enters the total, $25,110.
Page 46 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Line 23. Stanley enters the $2,000 contribution he
made for the year to his individual retirement arrange-
ment (IRA). According to the Form 1040 instructions,
he can deduct this amount.
Line 27. Stanley enters one-half of his self-employ-
ment tax. He got this amount from line 6 in Section A
of Schedule SE.
Line 32.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 23 through
31a and enters the total, $3,743.
Line 33.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 32 from
the amount on line 22 to arrive at his adjusted gross
income, $21,367. He also enters this amount on line
34.
Line 36. He enters $4,400. This is the standard de-
duction for a single filer.
Line 37. Stanley subtracts line 36 from line 34 to get
$16,967.
Line 38. He multiplies $2,800 by the number of ex-
emptions claimed on line 6d to get his total exemptions,
$2,800.
Line 39. Stanley subtracts line 38 from line 37 to get
his taxable income, $14,167.
Line 40.Stanley uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040
instructions to figure his income tax. In the Tax Table
he looks for the income bracket that includes $14,167.
He finds the bracket for incomes of at least $14,150,
but less than $14,200 and sees that the tax for a person
filing as single is $2,126. He enters this amount here.
Lines 41 and 42.Because he does not owe alternative
minimum tax, he enters -0- on line 41 and $2,126 on
line 42.
Lines 50 and 51.Because Stanley does not have any
of the credits listed on lines 43 through 49, he enters
-0- on line 50 and $2,126 on line 51.
Line 52.He enters $3,486 from line 5 in Section A of
Schedule SE.
Line 57.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 51 through
56 and enters the total, $5,612.
Line 59.He enters $6,000 of estimated tax payments
he made for the year.
Line 65.He enters $6,000.
Lines 66 and 67a.Stanley subtracts line 57 from line
65 to arrive at the amount he overpaid, $388. He wants
this amount refunded to him and also enters it on line
67a. The IRS will send him a check for this amount
provided he owes no other taxes. If Stanley wanted the
refund deposited directly into his checking or savings
account, he would have had to complete lines 67b, c,
and d.
Signing and assembling the return.He signs his
name and enters the date signed, his occupation, and
a daytime telephone number. He assembles his original
Form 1040, Schedules C–EZ and SE in that order. (See
“Attachment Sequence Number” in the upper right cor-
ner of each schedule or form.) Then he makes a copy
of the return for his records. Finally, he mails it to the
IRS.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 47

Proof as of
October 25, 2000(subject to change)
STANLEY PRICE
99 OAK ST
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
000 00 0000
1
1
295 00
145
24,670
25,110
1,743
2,000
3,743
21,367
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2000, or other tax year beginning , 2000, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
(See page 19.)
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
3
Check only
one box.
4
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (year spouse died /H17075). (See page 19.)5
6a Yourself. If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent on his or her tax
return, do not check box 6aExemptions
Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 20)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than six
dependents,
see page 20.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach 
Forms W-2 and
W-2G here.
Also attach
Form(s) 1099-R
if tax was
withheld.
99 Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 22)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bTotal IRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 23)15a
16b16aTotal pensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 23)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 25)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
23IRA deduction (see page 27)23
Medical savings account deduction. Attach Form 8853 2525
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
26
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 29)
26
2727
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
2828
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
2929
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
32Add lines 23 through 31a
30
Subtract line 32 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
31a
Adjusted
Gross
Income
33
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 21. Form
Married filing separate return. Enter spouse ’s social security no. above and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2000)
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 19.) If the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent,
enter this child’s name here. /H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 25)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
24 24
(99)
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 56.
No. of boxes
checked on
6a and 6b
No. of your
children on 6c
who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers
entered on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 20)
32
31a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 27)
30
33
/H17073/H17073
2000
Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
Page 48 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Proof as of
October 25, 2000(subject to change)
21,367 00
4,400
16,967
2,800
14,167
2,126
- 0 -
2,126
3,486
5,612
6,000
388
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
3/15/01 Barber
388 00
6,000
Stanley Price
Enter your itemized deductions from Schedule A, line 28, or standard deduction shown
on the left. But see page 31 to find your standard deduction if you checked any box on
line 35a or 35b or if someone can claim you as a dependent
Add lines 58, 59, 60a, and 61 through 64. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2000)
Amount from line 33 (adjusted gross income)34 34
Check if:35aTax and
Credits 35aAdd the number of boxes checked above and enter the total here /H17075
Single:
$4,400
If you are married filing separately and your spouse itemizes deductions, or
you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075
b
35b
36
36
37Subtract line 36 from line 3437
38
If line 34 is $96,700 or less, multiply $2,800 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 34 is over $96,700, see the worksheet on page 32 for the amount to enter
38
39Taxable income. Subtract line 38 from line 37. If line 38 is more than line 37, enter -0-39
40 40
43
44
46
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
47
48
Other. Check if from
49
50
51
Add lines 43 through 49. These are your total credits
49
52
Subtract line 50 from line 42. If line 50 is more than line 42, enter -0- /H17075
50
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
51
Other
Taxes
53
52
66
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
55
Tax on IRAs, other retirement plans, and MSAs. Attach Form 5329 if required54
56
Add lines 51 through 56. This is your total tax /H1707557 57
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109958 58
592000 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 1999 return59
Payments
60a
63Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 50)
62
61Excess social security and RRTA tax withheld (see page 50)
63
65
Other payments. Check if from64
67a67a
68 68
If line 65 is more than line 57, subtract line 57 from line 65. This is the amount you overpaid
69
69
Amount of line 66 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
70
Amount of line 66 you want applied to your 2001 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty. Also include on line 69
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
70
You were 65 or older, Blind; Spouse was 65 or older, Blind.
a Form 3800 b Form 8396
c Form 8801 d Form (specify)
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
55
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H 56
64
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
May the IRS discuss this return with the preparer
shown below (see page 52)?
Tax (see page 32). Check if any tax is from
If line 57 is more than line 65, subtract line 65 from line 57. This is the amount you owe .
For details on how to pay, see page 51 /H17075
b
Have it
directly
deposited!
See page 50
and fill in 67b,
67c, and 67d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking SavingsType:
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
65
45
47
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
53
54
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
66
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 36)
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
45
46
48
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
61
62
Head of
household:
$6,450
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er):
$7,350
Married
filing
separately:
$3,675
Standard
Deduction
for Most
People
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
b
and type /H17075
Nontaxable earned income: amount /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
41
42
43
Alternative minimum tax. Attach Form 6251
Add lines 40 and 41 /H17075
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
44
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
41
42
60a
Yes No
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2000)
735-0002555
2,126 00
- 0 -
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 49

Stanley Price 000 00 0000
2 111Barber Shop
Stan’s Barber Shop
1001 Maple Ave.
Anytown, TX 70000
27,000
2,330
24,670
00
00
00
18
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C-EZ
(Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09A/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1041. /H17075See instructions on back.
Business name. If no separate business name, leave blank. D Employer ID number (EIN), if any
Business address (including suite or room no.). Address not required if same as on Form 1040, page 1.
C
E
Gross receipts. Caution: If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the“Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see Statutory Employees in the instructions for
Schedule C, line 1, on page C-2 and check here /H170751
22 Total expenses. If more than $2,500, you must use Schedule C. See instructions
3
3 Net profit. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If less than zero, you must use Schedule C. Enter on
Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2. (Statutory employees do not report this
amount on Schedule SE, line 2. Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.)
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 2000For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 14374D
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
You May Use
Schedule C-EZ
Instead of
Schedule C
Only If You:
And You:
● Use the cash method of accounting.
● Had only one business as a sole
proprietor.
● Had business expenses of $2,500 or
less. ● Are not required to file Form 4562,
Depreciation and Amortization, for
this business. See the instructions
for Schedule C, line 13, on page
C-3 to find out if you must file.
● Do not deduct expenses for
business use of your home.
● Do not have prior year unallowed
passive activity losses from this
business.
/H17075 /H17075
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
General Information
A Principal business or profession, including product or service B Enter code from pages C-7 & 8
/H17075
Figure Your Net Profit
Part I
Part II
● Did not have a net loss from your
business.
● Had no employees during the year.
1
● Did not have an inventory at any
time during the year.
Yes NoDo you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?6
Yes NoDo you have evidence to support your deduction?8a
Yes NoIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes NoWas your vehicle available for use during off-duty hours?7
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2000, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:5
Business b Commuting c Other
4
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on line 2.Part III
a
b
(99)
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .//
2000
Page 50 Chapter 10  Sample Returns

Stanley Price 000 00 0000
24,670
22,783
3,486
1,743
00
00
00
00
24,670 00
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE Self-Employment Tax
(Form 1040)
/H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 52.
Section A— Short Schedule SE. Caution: Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F , line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), line 15a
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
line 15a (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and members
of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2 for other
income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2000
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income. See page SE-1.
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 27
● $76,200 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 52.
● More than $76,200, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $9,448.80 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 52.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2000?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $76,200?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on the Back
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE. See page SE-3.
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2000
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 51

11.
Your Rights
as a Taxpayer
The first part of this chapter explains some of your
most important rights as a taxpayer. The second part
explains the examination, appeal, collection, and refund
processes.
Declaration of
Taxpayer Rights
Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
contact with us.
Privacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose
to anyone the information you give us, except as au-
thorized by law. You have the right to know why we are
asking you for information, how we will use it, and what
happens if you do not provide requested information.
Professional and courteous service.If you believe
that an IRS employee has not treated you in a profes-
sional, fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that
employee's supervisor. If the supervisor's response is
not satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for
your area or the center where you filed your return.
Representation. You may either represent yourself
or, with proper written authorization, have someone
else represent you in your place. Your representative
must be a person allowed to practice before the IRS,
such as an attorney, certified public accountant, or en-
rolled agent. If you are in an interview and ask to con-
sult such a person, then we must stop and reschedule
the interview in most cases.
You can have someone accompany you at an inter-
view. You may make sound recordings of any meetings
with our examination, appeal, or collection personnel,
provided you tell us in writing 10 days before the
meeting.
Payment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax
due under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay
all of your tax when it is due, you may be able to make
monthly installment payments.
Help with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer
Advocate Service can help you if you have tried un-
successfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your
local Taxpayer Advocate can offer you special help if
you have a significant hardship as a result of a tax
problem. For more information, call toll free
1–877–777–4778 (1–800–829–4059 for TTY/TDD) or
write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS office that
last contacted you.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain col-
lection actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals
Office to review your case. You may also ask a court
to review your case.
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS
will waive penalties when allowed by law if you can
show you acted reasonably and in good faith or relied
on the incorrect advice of an IRS employee. We will
waive interest that is the result of certain errors or de-
lays caused by an IRS employee.
Examinations, Appeals,
Collections, and Refunds
Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers'
returns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select
it for examination, it does not suggest that you are dis-
honest. The inquiry or examination may or may not re-
sult in more tax. We may close your case without
change; or, you may receive a refund.
The process of selecting a return for examination
usually begins in one of two ways. First, we use com-
puter programs to identify returns that may have incor-
rect amounts. These programs may be based on infor-
mation returns, such as Forms 1099 and W–2, on
studies of past examinations, or on certain issues
identified by compliance projects. Second, we use in-
formation from outside sources that indicates that a
return may have incorrect amounts. These sources may
include newspapers, public records, and individuals. If
we determine that the information is accurate and reli-
able, we may use it to select a return for examination.
Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
procedures that we follow in examinations. The follow-
ing sections give an overview of how we conduct ex-
aminations.
By mail. We handle many examinations and in-
quiries by mail. We will send you a letter with either a
request for more information or a reason why we be-
lieve a change to your return may be needed. You can
respond by mail or you can request a personal interview
with an examiner. If you mail us the requested infor-
mation or provide an explanation, we may or may not
agree with you, and we will explain the reasons for any
changes. Please do not hesitate to write to us about
anything you do not understand.
By interview.If we notify you that we will conduct
your examination through a personal interview, or you
request such an interview, you have the right to ask that
the examination take place at a reasonable time and
place that is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our
examiner proposes any changes to your return, he or
she will explain the reasons for the changes. If you do
not agree with these changes, you can meet with the
examiner's supervisor.
Page 52 Chapter 11  Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Repeat examinations.If we examined your return
for the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact
us as soon as possible so we can see if we should
discontinue the examination.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner's pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals
Office of IRS. Most differences can be settled without
expensive and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal
rights are explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your
Appeal Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You
Don't Agree, and Publication 556, Examination of Re-
turns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or dis-
agree with its findings, you may be able to take your
case to the U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal
Claims, or the U.S. District Court where you live. If you
take your case to court, the IRS will have the burden
of proving certain facts if you kept adequate records to
show your tax liability, cooperated with the IRS, and
meet certain other conditions. If the court agrees with
you on most issues in your case and finds that our
position was largely unjustified, you may be able to re-
cover some of your administrative and litigation costs.
You will not be eligible to recover these costs unless
you tried to resolve your case administratively, including
going through the appeals system, and you gave us the
information necessary to resolve the case.
Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection
Process, explains your rights and responsibilities re-
garding payment of federal taxes. It describes:
 What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what
to do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
your bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
payments, delaying collection action, and submitting
an offer in compromise.
 IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing a
lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and
release of property.
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail
in Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
Innocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for
paying the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties
due on your joint return. However, if you qualify for in-
nocent spouse relief, you may not have to pay the tax,
interest, and penalties related to your spouse (or former
spouse). For information on innocent spouse relief and
two other ways to get relief, see Publication 971, Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, and Form 8857, Request for In-
nocent Spouse Relief (And Separation of Liability and
Equitable Relief).
Refunds. You may file a claim for refund if you think
you paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim
within 3 years from the date you filed your original re-
turn or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-
ever is later. The law generally provides for interest on
your refund if it is not paid within 45 days of the date
you filed your return or claim for refund. Publication 556,
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for
Refund, has more information on refunds.
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return,
you must file within 3 years from the date the return
was originally due to get that refund.
12.
How To Get More
Information
This section describes the help that the IRS and
other federal agencies offer to taxpayers who operate
their own businesses.
Internal Revenue Service
The following describes assistance provided by the IRS.
You can order free publications and forms, ask tax
questions, and get more information from the IRS in
several ways. By selecting the method that is best for
you, you will have quick and easy access to tax help.
See Free tax services, later.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you have
attempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully,
you should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests
and concerns within the IRS by protecting your rights
and resolving problems that have not been fixed
through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates
cannot change the tax law or make a technical tax de-
cision, they can clear up problems that resulted from
previous contacts and ensure that your case is given
a complete and impartial review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in
your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication 1546, The
Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.
Small Business Tax Education Program. Small
business owners and other self-employed individuals
can learn about business taxes through a unique part-
nership between the IRS and local organizations.
Through workshops or in-depth tax courses, instructors
provide training on starting a business, recordkeeping,
preparing business tax returns, self-employment tax
issues, and employment taxes.
Some courses are offered free as a community ser-
vice. Courses given by an educational facility may in-
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 53

clude costs for materials and tuition. Other courses may
have a nominal fee to offset administrative costs of
sponsoring organizations.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
Monday through Friday during regular business hours
and ask for your Taxpayer Education Coordinator.
Check your telephone book for the local number of the
IRS office closest to you or you can call
1–800–829–1040.
Your Business Tax Kit.Your Business Tax Kit is an
assortment of IRS forms and publications to help tax-
payers who operate their own businesses. To order the
kit, see Free tax services, later. The kit consists of the
following items.
Forms:
 SS–4, Application for Employer Identification Num-
ber
 1040–ES, Estimated Tax for Individuals
 9779, EFTPS Business Enrollment Form
Publications:
 509, Tax Calendars for 2001
 583, Starting a Business and Keeping Records
 594, The IRS Collection Process
 910, Guide to Free Tax Services
 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000
(Received in a Trade or Business)
Free tax services. To find out what services are
available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Ser-
vices. It contains a list of free tax publications and an
index of tax topics. It also describes other free tax in-
formation services, including tax education and assist-
ance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the IRS on
the Internet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our
web site, you can select:
 Small Business Corner (located under Tax Info For
Business) to get information on starting and oper-
ating a small business.
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located under
Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find answers to questions
you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and publications
or search for forms and publications by topic or
keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms & Pubs) to enter
information while the form is displayed and then
print the completed form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Revenue Bulletins
published in the last few years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations and the
Internal Revenue Code (under United States Code
(USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net (both lo-
cated under Tax Info For Business) to receive our
electronic newsletters on hot tax issues and news.
You can also reach us with your computer using File
Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached to
your fax machine, you can receive forms and
instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Follow
the directions from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you need. The
items you request will be faxed to you.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call
1–800–829–3676 to order current and prior year
forms, instructions, and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax
questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to
TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask
tax questions or to order forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services.
To ensure that IRS representatives give accurate,
courteous, and professional answers, we evaluate the
quality of our telephone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes monitors
live telephone calls. That person only evaluates the
IRS assistor and does not keep a record of any
taxpayer's name or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to evaluate
IRS assistors objectively. We hold these recordings
no longer than one week and use them only to
measure the quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions. Throughout this
year, we will be surveying our customers for their
opinions on our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain
forms, instructions, and publications. Also,
some libraries and IRS offices have:
 An extensive collection of products available to print
from a CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible
proofs.
Page 54 Chapter 12  How To Get More Information

 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal
Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-
able for research purposes.
Mail. You can send your order for forms, in-
structions, and publications to the Distribution
Center nearest to you and receive a response
within 10 workdays after your request is received. Find
the address that applies to your part of the country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. IRS Publication 3207, The Business
Resource Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains the following important information for
small businesses.
 Business tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 A discussion of a wide range of topics, from pre-
paring a business plan and keeping records to ob-
taining financing and setting up a retirement plan.
 Tutorials, updates, and a multi-agency electronic
newsletter.
 Internet links to various regulatory agencies.
The CD is available in mid-February. You can get
one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676 or visiting the
IRS web site at www.irs.gov/prod/bus_info/sm_bus/
smbus-cd.html.
IRS Publication 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, is a CD-ROM that contains:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in electron-
ically, printed out for submission, and saved for
recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
This CD-ROM can be purchased from National
Technical Information Service (NTIS) by calling
1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at www.irs.gov/
cdorders. The first release is available in mid-
December and the final release is available in late
January.
Your comments on IRS enforcement actions.The
Small Business and Agriculture Regulatory Enforce-
ment Ombudsman and 10 Regional Fairness Boards
were established to receive comments from small
business about federal agency enforcement actions.
The Ombudsman will annually evaluate the enforce-
ment activities and rate each agency's responsiveness
to small business. If you wish to comment on the
enforcement actions of the IRS, call 1–888–REG–FAIR
(1–888–734–3247).
Small Business
Administration
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
and educational programs, counseling services, finan-
cial programs, and contract assistance for small busi-
ness owners. The SBA also has publications and vid-
eos on a variety of business topics. The following briefly
describes assistance provided by the SBA.
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical ser-
vices to current and prospective small business owners
who cannot afford the services of a private consultant.
Help is available when beginning, improving, or ex-
panding a small business.
Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer a
small business reference library, management video
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a busi-
ness. BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individ-
uals who are in business or are interested in starting a
business can use BICs as often as they wish at no
charge.
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
SCORE provides small business counseling and train-
ing to current and prospective small business owners.
SCORE is made up of current and former business
people who offer their expertise and knowledge to help
people start, manage, and expand a small business.
SCORE also offers a variety of small business work-
shops.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the SBA on
the Internet at www.sba.gov. While visiting the
SBA web site, you can find a variety of information of
interest to small business owners.
Phone. Call the SBA Answer Desk at 1–800–
UASK-SBA for general information about pro-
grams available to assist small business own-
ers.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 55

Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
Development Center or Business Information
Center to request assistance with your small
business. To find the location nearest you, access the
SBA on the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk.
Other Federal Agencies
Other federal agencies also publish publications and
pamphlets to assist small businesses. Most of these
are available from the Superintendant of Documents
at the Government Printing Office. You can get infor-
mation about and order these publications and pam-
phlets in several ways.
Personal computer. With your personal com-
puter and modem, you can access the GPO on
the Internet at www.access.gpo.gov/su_docs/
sale.html.
Phone. Call the GPO at 1–202–512–1800. This
is not a toll-free call.
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954
Page 56 Chapter 12  How To Get More Information

Index
A
 Accounting method:
 Accrual ............................... 11
 Cash ................................... 11
 Change in .......................... 13
 Combination ....................... 13
 Accounting period .................. 10
Accrual method of accounting 11
Adjusted basis of property .... 14
Alcohol fuels credit ................ 15
 Appeal rights ......................... 53
Assistance (See More information)
 Audits ..................................... 52
B
 Bad debts .............................. 26
 Barter income ........................ 17
Basis of property ................... 14
 Business expenses ............... 25
 Business income ................... 17
Business tax kit ..................... 54
C
Calendar tax year defined ..... 10
 Canceled debt ....................... 18
Capital gain or loss ............... 14
 Car expenses ........................ 26
 Cash discounts ................ 21, 23
Cash method of accounting .. 11
Claim for refund ..................... 53
Clean-fuel vehicle credit ........ 26
Collection of tax ..................... 53
Combination method of ac-
counting ............................. 13
 Comments ............................... 3
 Condemned property ............. 15
 Consignments ........................ 21
 Construction allowances ....... 21
Contributions to selected com-
munity development corpo-
rations, credit for ................ 15
Cost of goods sold ................ 22
 Credit:
 Alcohol fuels ...................... 15
 Clean-fuel vehicle .............. 26
Contributions to selected
community development
corporations .................... 15
 Disabled access ................. 16
 Electric vehicle ................... 26
Empowerment zone employ-
ment ............................... 16
 Energy ................................ 16
Enhanced oil recovery ....... 16
 General business ............... 15
 Indian employment ............ 16
 Investment ......................... 16
 Low-income housing .......... 16
 Orphan drug ....................... 16
 Reforestation ...................... 16
 Rehabilitation ..................... 16
Renewable electricity pro-
duction ............................ 16
 Research ............................ 16
Taxes paid on certain em-
ployee tips ...................... 15
 Welfare-to-work .................. 16
 Work opportunity ................ 16
D
Damages as income ............. 20
 Debt:
 Bad ..................................... 26
 Cancellation of ................... 18
Qualified real property busi-
ness ................................ 19
 Depreciation:
 Deduction ........................... 28
 Recapture .......................... 20
Disabled access credit .......... 16
Dispositions of business prop-
erty ..................................... 13
 Dividend income .................... 18
Donation of inventory ............ 23
 Drawing account .................... 23
E
Electric vehicle credit ............ 26
Employee benefit programs .. 29
 Employees' pay ..................... 28
Employer identification number
(EIN) ..................................... 5
 Employment taxes:
 About .................................... 8
 Deduction for ..................... 31
Empowerment zone employ-
ment credit ......................... 16
 Energy credit ......................... 16
Enhanced oil recovery credit . 16
 Entertainment expenses ........ 32
Escrow, payments placed in . 22
 Estimated tax ........................... 6
 Examinations (audits) ............ 52
 Excise taxes:
 About .................................... 8
 Deduction for ..................... 32
F
Fair market value defined ..... 14
Fiscal tax year defined .......... 10
 Form:
 720 ....................................... 8
 982 ..................................... 19
 1040 ..................................... 5
 1040–ES .............................. 6
 1040–V ............................... 38
 1099–B ............................... 18
 1099–MISC .................... 8, 18
 1128 ................................... 10
 2210 ..................................... 6
 2290 ..................................... 8
 3115 ................................... 13
 3468 ................................... 16
 3800 ................................... 16
 4562 ................................... 28
 4684 ................................... 15
 4797 ................................... 15
 4868 ..................................... 6
 5884 ................................... 16
 6251 ................................... 17
 6252 ................................... 15
 6478 ................................... 15
 6765 ................................... 16
 8300 ..................................... 9
 8582–CR ............................ 16
 8586 ................................... 16
 8594 ................................... 14
 8820 ................................... 16
 8824 ............................. 14, 15
 8826 ................................... 16
 8829 ................................... 34
 8830 ................................... 16
 8835 ................................... 16
 8844 ................................... 16
 8845 ................................... 16
 8846 ................................... 15
 8847 ................................... 15
 8857 ................................... 53
 8861 ................................... 16
 Schedule C .......................... 5
 Schedule C–EZ .................... 5
 SS–4 .................................... 5
 SS–5 .................................... 5
 W–2 ...................................... 9
 W–7 ...................................... 5
 W–9 ...................................... 5
Free tax services ................... 54
 Fringe benefits ....................... 29
 Fuel taxes .............................. 32
G
General business credit ........ 15
 Gross profit ............................ 24
H
Health insurance, deduction for
self-employed ..................... 30
Help (See More information)       
Help from Small Business Ad-
ministration ......................... 55
Home, business use of ......... 33
I
 Identification numbers ............. 5
 Income tax:
 About .................................... 5
 Deduction for ..................... 31
Page 57

 Independent contractor ........... 8
Indian employment credit ...... 16
Individual taxpayer identification
number (ITIN) ...................... 5
 Information returns .................. 8
Innocent spouse relief ........... 53
 Installment sales .................... 14
 Insurance:
 Expense ............................. 29
 Proceeds ............................ 22
 Interest:
 Expense ............................. 30
 Income ............................... 18
 Inventories ............................. 22
 Investment credit ................... 16
 IRS mission ............................. 3
K
 Kickbacks .............................. 20
L
 Legal fees .............................. 30
 Like-kind exchanges .............. 14
 Listed property ....................... 28
Local transportation expenses 26
 Lodging .................................. 32
Long-term capital gain or loss 15
 Lost income ........................... 20
Low-income housing credit ... 16
M
 Meals ..................................... 32
Mileage rate for vehicles ....... 27
 More information ................... 53
N
Net operating losses ............. 35
 Nonemployee compensation . 17
 Nontaxable exchanges .......... 14
 Not-for-profit activities ........... 35
O
Ordinary gain or loss ............. 14
Orphan drug credit ................ 16
P
 Parking fees .......................... 27
Paying business taxes ............ 4
Paying income tax ................... 6
 Penalty:
Failure to file information re-
turns ................................. 9
Failure to furnish correct payee
statements ........................ 9
Underpayment of tax ........... 6
 Pension plans ........................ 30
Personal property tax ............ 31
 Prepaid expenses:
 Insurance ........................... 30
 Rent ................................... 31
 Professional fees ................... 30
 Promissory notes ................... 20
Publications (See More
information)                               
Q
Qualified real property business
debt .................................... 19
R
Real estate rents ................... 18
Real estate taxes .................. 31
Recovery of deductions ......... 20
 Reforestation credit ............... 16
Refund, claim for ................... 53
 Rehabilitation credit ............... 16
 Related persons:
 Special rule ........................ 12
 Unreasonable rent ............. 31
Renewable electricity pro-
duction credit ..................... 16
 Rent expense ........................ 31
 Rental income ....................... 18
Repayment of income ........... 11
 Research credit ..................... 16
 Restricted property ................ 20
 Retirement plans ................... 30
S
 Salaries .................................. 28
Sale of a business ................. 14
Sales of assets ...................... 13
 Sales tax ................................ 32
 Sample returns ...................... 35
 Schedule C .............................. 5
 Schedule C–EZ ....................... 5
Section 179 deduction ........... 28
Self-employed health insurance
deduction ........................... 30
 Self-employment tax:
 About .................................... 6
 Deduction for ..................... 31
Short-term capital gain or loss 15
Small Business Administration 55
Social security coverage ......... 6
Social security number (SSN) . 5
Standard mileage rate ........... 27
 Statutory employee ................. 3
 Suggestions ............................. 3
T
Tax help (See More information)
 Tax home ........................ 26, 32
Tax preparation fees ............. 30
Taxes paid on certain employee
tips, credit for ..................... 15
 Taxes:
 Deduction for ..................... 31
 Employment ................... 8, 31
 Excise ............................ 8, 32
 Fuel .................................... 32
 Income ........................... 5, 31
 Personal property .............. 31
 Real estate ......................... 31
 Sales .................................. 32
 Self-employment ............ 6, 31
 Taxpayer Advocate ............... 53
 Taxpayer rights ...................... 52
 Tolls ....................................... 27
 Trade discounts ............... 22, 23
 Transportation expenses ....... 26
 Travel expenses .................... 32
 Truck expenses ..................... 26
 TTY/TDD information ............ 53
U
Underpayment of tax penalty .. 6
Uniform capitalization rules ... 12
W
 Wages ................................... 28
 Welfare-to-work credit ........... 16
Work opportunity credit ......... 16
Y
Your business tax kit ............. 54
/H18549
Page 58