Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 10  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 30  8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 504
Divorced
or Separated
Individuals
For use in preparing
2025 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to 
Pub. 504, such as legislation enacted after this publication 
was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub504.
Reminders
Change of withholding.  The Form W -4 no longer uses 
personal allowances to calculate your income tax with-
holding. If you have been claiming a personal allowance 
for your spouse, and you divorce or legally separate, you 
must give your employer a new Form W -4, Employee’s 
Withholding Certificate, within 10 days after the divorce or 
separation. For more information on withholding and when 
you must furnish a new Form W-4, see Pub. 505.
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, one spouse 
may be relieved of joint liability for tax, interest, and penal-
ties on a joint tax return. For more information, see Relief 
from joint liability under Married Filing Jointly.
Social security numbers for dependents. Y ou must in-
clude on your tax return the taxpayer identification number 
(generally, the social security number (SSN)) of every de-
pendent you claim. See Dependents, later.
Using and getting an Individual Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number.  The Individual T axpayer Identification 
Number (ITIN) is entered wherever an SSN is requested 
on a tax return. If you’re required to include another per-
son’s SSN on your return and that person doesn’t have 
and can’t get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN. The IRS 
will issue an ITIN to a nonresident or resident alien who 
doesn’t have and isn’t eligible to get an SSN. T o apply for 
an ITIN, file Form W -7, Application for IRS Individual T ax-
payer Identification Number, with the IRS. Allow 7 weeks 
for the IRS to notify you of your ITIN application status (9 
to 11 weeks if you submit the application during peak pro-
cessing periods (January 15 through April 30) or if you’re 
filing from overseas). If you haven’t received your ITIN at 
the end of that time, you can call the IRS to check the sta-
tus of your application. For more information, go to 
IRS.gov/FormW7.
Change of address. If you change your mailing address, 
be sure to notify the IRS. Y ou can use Form 8822, Change 
of Address.
Change of name.  If you change your name, be sure to 
notify the Social Security Administration using Form SS -5, 
Application for a Social Security Card. Y ou may be able to 
request your name change online at SSA.gov. Or you can 
get Form SS -5 online at SSA.gov/Forms/SS-5.pdf, from 
your local SSA office, or by calling the SSA at 
800-772-1213.
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. Y ou can help bring 
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
Publication 504 (2025)  Catalog Number 15006I
Nov 13, 2025 Department of the T reasury  Internal Revenue Service  www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
calling 800-THE-LOST (800-843-5678) if you recognize a 
child.
Introduction
This publication explains tax rules that apply if you are di-
vorced or separated from your spouse. It covers general 
filing information and can help you choose your filing sta-
tus. It can also help you decide which benefits you are en-
titled to claim.
The publication also discusses payments and transfers 
of property that often occur as a result of divorce and how 
you must treat them on your tax return. Examples include 
alimony, child support, other court -ordered payments, 
property settlements, and transfers of individual retirement 
arrangements. In addition, this publication also explains 
deductions allowed for some of the costs of obtaining a di-
vorce and how to handle tax withholding and estimated 
tax payments.
The publication also explains special rules that may ap-
ply to persons who live in community property states.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments. Or, you can write to the Internal Revenue 
Service, T ax Forms and Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication or the How 
T o Get T ax Help section at the end of this publication, go 
to the IRS Interactive T ax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the search 
feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publications
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, and Filing 
Information
  501 
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
555 Community Property
590-A Contributions to Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs)
590-B Distributions from Individual Retirement 
Arrangements (IRAs)
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
974 Premium T ax Credit (PTC)
Forms (and Instructions)
8332 Release/Revocation of Release of Claim to 
Exemption for Child by Custodial Parent
8379 Injured Spouse Allocation
8857 Request for Innocent Spouse Relief
See How T o Get T ax Help near the end of this publication 
for information about getting publications and forms.
Filing Status
Y our filing status is used in determining whether you must 
file a return, your standard deduction, and the correct tax. 
It may also be used in determining whether you can claim 
certain other deductions and credits. The filing status you 
can choose depends partly on your marital status on the 
last day of your tax year.
Marital status. If you are unmarried, your filing status is 
single or, if you meet certain requirements, head of house-
hold or qualifying surviving spouse. If you are married, 
your filing status is either married filing jointly or married 
filing separately. See the exception under Married per-
sons, later. For information about the single and qualifying 
surviving spouse filing statuses, see Pub. 501.
Unmarried persons.  Y ou’re unmarried for the whole 
year if either of the following applies.
• Y ou have obtained a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the last day of your tax year. Y ou 
must follow your state law to determine if you’re di-
vorced or legally separated.
Exception. If you and your spouse obtain a di-
vorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing tax re-
turns as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to remarry each other and do so in 
the next tax year, you and your spouse must file as 
married individuals. 
• Y ou have obtained a decree of annulment, which 
holds that no valid marriage ever existed. Y ou must file 
amended returns (Form 1040-X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income T ax Return) for all tax years affected by 
the annulment that aren’t closed by the statute of limi-
tations for filing a return. Generally, for a credit or re-
fund, you must file Form 1040-X within 3 years (includ-
ing extensions) after the date you file your original 
return or within 2 years after the date you pay the tax, 
whichever is later. On the amended return, you will 
  544 
  555 
  590-A 
  590-B 
  971 
  974 
  8332 
  8379 
  8857 
2 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 3 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change your filing status to single or, if you meet cer-
tain requirements, head of household. 
Married persons. Y ou are married for the whole year if 
you are separated but you haven’t obtained a final decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance by the last day of your 
tax year. An interlocutory decree isn’t a final decree. How-
ever, individuals who have entered into a registered do-
mestic partnership, civil union, or other similar relationship 
that isn’t called a marriage under state (or foreign) law 
aren’t married for federal tax purposes. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 501.
Exception. If you live apart from your spouse, under 
certain circumstances, you may be considered unmarried 
and can file as head of household. See Head of House-
hold, later.
Premium Tax Credit.  If you purchase health insurance 
coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace, you 
may get advance payments of the premium tax credit in 
2025. If you do, you should report changes in circumstan-
ces to your Marketplace throughout the year. Changes to 
report include a change in marital status, a name change, 
and a change in your income or family size. By reporting 
changes, you will help make sure that you get the proper 
type and amount of financial assistance. This will also 
help you avoid getting too much or too little credit in ad-
vance.
If you divorced or are legally separated during the tax 
year and are enrolled in the same qualified health plan, 
you and your former spouse must allocate policy amounts 
on your separate tax returns to figure your premium tax 
credit and reconcile any advance payments made on your 
behalf. The Instructions for Form 8962, Premium T ax 
Credit (PTC), has more information about allocating policy 
amounts.
Married Filing Jointly
If you and your spouse choose to file a joint return, you 
both must include all your income, deductions, and credits 
on that return. Generally, you can file a joint return even if 
one of you had no income or deductions.
If both you and your spouse have income, you 
should usually figure your tax on both a joint re-
turn and separate returns (using the filing status of 
married filing separately) to see which gives the two of you 
the lower combined tax.
Nonresident alien.  T o file a joint return, at least one of 
you must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of 
the tax year. If either of you was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the tax year, you can file a joint return only if 
you agree to treat the nonresident spouse as a resident of 
the United States. This means that your combined world-
wide incomes are subject to U.S. income tax. These rules 
are explained in Pub. 519.
Signing a joint return.  Both you and your spouse must 
generally sign the return, or it won’t be considered a joint 
return.
TIP
Joint and individual liability. Both you and your spouse 
may be held responsible, jointly and individually, for the 
tax and any interest or penalty due on your joint return. 
This means that one spouse may be held liable for all the 
tax due even if all the income was earned by the other 
spouse.
Divorced taxpayers. If you’re divorced, you’re jointly 
and individually responsible for any tax, interest, and pen-
alties due on a joint return for a tax year ending before 
your divorce. This responsibility applies even if your di-
vorce decree states that your former spouse will be re-
sponsible for any amounts due on previously filed joint re-
turns.
Relief from joint liability.  In some cases, a spouse 
may be relieved of the tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return. Y ou can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
• Innocent spouse relief.
• Separation of liability (available only to joint filers 
whose spouse has died, or who are divorced, who are 
legally separated, or who haven’t lived together for the 
12 months ending on the date the election for this re-
lief is filed).
• Equitable relief.
Married persons who live in community property states, 
but who didn’t file joint returns, may also qualify for relief 
from liability for tax attributable to an item of community in-
come or for equitable relief. See Relief from liability for tax 
attributable to an item of community income , later, under 
Community Property.
Each kind of relief has different requirements. Y ou must 
file Form 8857 to request relief under any of these catego-
ries. Pub. 971 explains these kinds of relief and who may 
qualify for them. Y ou can also find information on our web-
site at IRS.gov by entering “joint liability relief” in the 
search box.
Tax refund applied to spouse’s debts.  The overpay-
ment shown on your joint return may be used to pay the 
past-due amount of your spouse’s debts. This includes 
your spouse’s federal tax, state income tax, child or 
spousal support payments, or a federal nontax debt, such 
as a student loan. Y ou can get a refund of your share of 
the overpayment if you qualify as an injured spouse.
Injured spouse. Y ou’re an injured spouse if you file a 
joint return and all or part of your share of the overpayment 
was, or is expected to be, applied against your spouse’s 
past-due debts. An injured spouse can get a refund for 
their share of the overpayment that would otherwise be 
used to pay the past-due amount.
T o be considered an injured spouse, you must:
1. Have made and reported tax payments (such as fed-
eral income tax withheld from wages or estimated tax 
payments), or claimed a refundable tax credit, such 
as the earned income credit or additional child tax 
credit on the joint return; and
Publication 504 (2025) 3

Page 4 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Not be legally obligated to pay the past-due amount.
If the injured spouse’s permanent home is in a com-
munity property state, then the injured spouse must only 
meet (2). For more information, see Pub. 555.
If you’re an injured spouse, you must file Form 8379 to 
have your portion of the overpayment refunded to you. 
Follow the instructions for the form.
If you haven’t filed your joint return and you know that 
your joint refund will be offset, file Form 8379 with your re-
turn. Y ou should receive your refund within 14 weeks from 
the date the paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from 
the date the return is filed electronically.
If you filed your joint return and your joint refund was 
offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When filed after offset, it 
can take up to 8 weeks to receive your refund. Don’t at-
tach the previously filed tax return, but do include copies 
of all Forms W -2, Wage and T ax Statement, and W -2G, 
Certain Gambling Winnings, for both spouses and any 
Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld.
An injured spouse claim is different from an inno-
cent spouse relief request. An injured spouse 
uses Form 8379 to request an allocation of the tax 
overpayment attributed to each spouse. An innocent 
spouse uses Form 8857 to request relief from joint liability 
for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return for items of 
the other spouse (or former spouse) that were incorrectly 
reported on or omitted from the joint return. For informa-
tion on innocent spouses, see Relief from joint liability , 
earlier.
Married Filing Separately
If you and your spouse file separate returns, you should 
each report only your own income, deductions, and cred-
its on your individual return. Y ou can file a separate return 
even if only one of you had income.
Community or separate income.  If you live in a com-
munity property state and file a separate return, your in-
come may be separate income or community income for 
income tax purposes. For more information, see Com-
munity Income under Community Property, later.
Separate liability. If you and your spouse file separately, 
you each are responsible only for the tax due on your own 
return.
Itemized deductions. If you and your spouse file sepa-
rate returns and one of you itemizes deductions, the other 
spouse can’t use the standard deduction and should also 
itemize deductions.
Dividing itemized deductions.  Y ou may be able to 
claim itemized deductions on a separate return for certain 
expenses that you paid separately or jointly with your 
spouse. See T able 1.
Separate returns may give you a higher tax.  Some 
married couples file separate returns because each wants 
to be responsible only for their own tax. There is no joint 
liability. But in almost all instances, if you file separate re-
CAUTION
!
turns, you will pay more combined federal tax than you 
would with a joint return. This is because the following 
special rules apply if you file a separate return.
1. Y our tax rate is generally higher than it would be on a 
joint return.
2. Y our exemption amount for figuring the alternative 
minimum tax is half of that allowed on a joint return.
3. Y ou can’t take the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses in most cases, and the amount you can ex-
clude from income under an employer’s dependent 
care assistance program is limited to $2,500 (instead 
of $5,000 on a joint return). If you’re legally separated 
or living apart from your spouse, you may be able to 
file a separate return and still take the credit. See Pub. 
503 for more information.
4. Y ou can’t take the earned income credit unless you 
have a qualifying child.
5. Y ou can’t take the exclusion or credit for adoption ex-
penses in most cases.
6. Y ou can’t exclude the interest from qualified savings 
bonds that you used for higher education expenses.
7. If you lived with your spouse at any time during the tax 
year:
a. Y ou can’t claim the credit for the elderly or the dis-
abled, and
b. Y ou will have to include in income a higher per-
centage (up to 85%) of any social security or 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits you re-
ceived.
8. The following credits and deductions are reduced at 
income levels that are half those for a joint return.
a. The child tax credit.
b. The retirement savings contributions credit.
9. Y our capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 (instead of 
$3,000 on a joint return).
10. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you can’t claim 
the standard deduction. If you can claim the standard 
deduction, your basic standard deduction is half the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
11. Y ou can’t take the education credits (the American op-
portunity and lifetime learning credits) or the deduc-
tion for student loan interest.
Joint return after separate returns. If either you or your 
spouse (or both of you) file a separate return, you can 
generally change to a joint return within 3 years from the 
due date (not including extensions) of the separate return 
or returns. This applies to a return either of you filed claim-
ing married filing separately, single, or head of household 
filing status. Use Form 1040-X to change your filing status.
Separate returns after joint return.  After the due date 
of your return, you and your spouse can’t file separate re-
turns if you previously filed a joint return.
4 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 5 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. A personal representative for a decedent 
can change from a joint return elected by the surviving 
spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The per-
sonal representative has 1 year from the due date (includ-
ing extensions) of the joint return to make the change. See 
Pub. 559 for more information on filing income tax returns 
for a decedent.
Head of Household
Filing as head of household has the following advantages.
• Y ou can claim the standard deduction even if your 
spouse files a separate return and itemizes deduc-
tions.
• Y our standard deduction is higher than is allowed if 
you claim a filing status of single or married filing sep-
arately.
• Y our tax rate will usually be lower than it is if you claim 
a filing status of single or married filing separately.
• Y ou may be able to claim certain credits (such as the 
dependent care credit) you can’t claim if your filing sta-
tus is married filing separately.
• Income limits that reduce your child tax credit and your 
retirement savings contributions credit, for example, 
are higher than the income limits if you claim a filing 
status of married filing separately.
Requirements. Y ou may be able to file as head of house-
hold if you meet all of the following requirements.
• Y ou are unmarried or “considered unmarried” on the 
last day of the year.
• Y ou paid more than half the cost of keeping up a home 
for the year.
• A “qualifying person” lived with you in the home for 
more than half the year (except for temporary absen-
ces, such as school). However, if the “qualifying per-
son” is your dependent parent, they don’t have to live 
with you. See Special rule for parent, later, under 
Qualifying person.
Itemized Deductions on Separate Returns
This table shows itemized deductions you can claim on your married filing separate return whether you paid the 
expenses separately with your own funds or jointly with your spouse.
Caution: If you live in a community property state, these rules don’t apply. See Community Property.
IF you paid... AND you...
THEN you can deduct on your 
separate federal return...
medical expenses paid with funds deposited in a joint checking 
account in which you and your spouse have 
an equal interest
half of the total medical expenses, 
subject to certain limits, unless you can 
show that you alone paid the expenses. 
state income tax file a separate state income tax return the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year.
file a joint state income tax return and you and 
your spouse are jointly and individually liable 
for the full amount of the state income tax 
the state income tax you alone paid 
during the year.
file a joint state income tax return and you’re 
liable for only your own share of state income 
tax
the smaller of:
• the state income tax you alone 
paid during the year; or
• the total state income tax you and 
your spouse paid during the year 
multiplied by the following fraction. 
The numerator is your gross 
income and the denominator is 
your combined gross income.
property tax paid the tax on property held as tenants by 
the entirety
the property tax you alone paid.
mortgage interest paid the interest on a qualified home1 held as 
tenants by the entirety 
the mortgage interest you alone paid.
casualty loss have a casualty loss2 resulting from a 
federally declared disaster on a home you 
own as tenants by the entirety 
half of the loss, subject to the 
deduction limits. Neither spouse may 
report the total casualty loss. 
1 For more information on a qualified home and deductible mortgage interest, see Pub. 936.
2 For more information on casualty losses, see Pub. 547.
T able 1.
Publication 504 (2025) 5

Page 6 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Considered unmarried.  Y ou are considered unmarried 
on the last day of the tax year if you meet all of the follow-
ing tests.
• Y ou file a separate return. A separate return includes a 
return claiming married filing separately, single, or 
head of household filing status.
• Y ou paid more than half the cost of keeping up your 
home for the tax year.
• Y our spouse didn’t live in your home during the last 6 
months of the tax year. Y our spouse is considered to 
live in your home even if your spouse is temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances. See T emporary 
absences, later.
• Y our home was the main home of your child, stepchild, 
or foster child for more than half the year. (See Quali-
fying person, later, for rules applying to a child’s birth, 
death, or temporary absence during the year.)
• Y ou must be able to claim the child as a dependent. 
However, you meet this test if you can’t claim the child 
as a dependent only because the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child. The general rules for claiming a 
dependent are shown in T able 3.
If you were considered married for part of the year 
and lived in a community property state  (one of 
the states listed later under Community Property), 
special rules may apply in determining your income and 
expenses. See Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse was a non-
resident alien at any time during the tax year, and you 
haven’t chosen to treat your spouse as a resident alien, 
you’re considered unmarried for head of household purpo-
ses. However, your spouse isn’t a qualifying person for 
head of household purposes. Y ou must have another qual-
ifying person and meet the other requirements to file as 
head of household.
Keeping up a home.  Y ou’re keeping up a home only if 
you pay more than half the cost of its upkeep for the year. 
This includes rent, mortgage interest, real estate taxes, in-
surance on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home. This doesn’t include the cost of clothing, educa-
tion, medical treatment, vacations, life insurance, or trans-
portation for any member of the household.
Qualifying person. T able 2 shows who can be a qualify-
ing person. Any person not described in T able 2 isn’t a 
qualifying person.
Generally, the qualifying person must live with you for 
more than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying person is 
your parent, you may be eligible to file as head of house-
hold even if your parent doesn’t live with you. However, 
you must be able to claim your parent as a dependent. 
Also, you must pay more than half the cost of keeping up a 
home that was the main home for the entire year for your 
parent.
CAUTION
!
Y ou’re keeping up a main home for your parent if you 
pay more than half the cost of keeping your parent in a 
rest home or home for the elderly.
Death or birth.  If the person for whom you kept up a 
home was born or died in 2025, you may still be able to file 
as head of household. If the person is your qualifying 
child, the child must have lived with you for more than half 
the part of the year the child was alive. If the person is 
anyone else, see Pub. 501.
Temporary absences. Y ou and your qualifying person 
are considered to live together even if one or both of you 
are temporarily absent from your home due to special cir-
cumstances such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile facility. It 
must be reasonable to assume that the absent person will 
return to the home after the temporary absence. Y ou must 
continue to keep up the home during the absence.
Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file as head 
of household even if the child who is your qualifying per-
son has been kidnapped. Y ou can claim head of house-
hold filing status if all of the following statements are true.
• The child is presumed by law enforcement authorities 
to have been kidnapped by someone who isn’t a 
member of your family or the child’s family.
• In the year of the kidnapping, the child lived with you 
for more than half the part of the year before the kid-
napping.
• In the year of the child’s return, the child lived with you 
for more than half the part of the year following the 
date of the child’s return.
• Y ou would have qualified for head of household filing 
status if the child hadn’t been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the earliest of:
1. The year there is a determination that the child is 
dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached age 18.
For more information on filing as head of household, 
see Pub. 501.
Dependents
Qualifying Child or Qualifying 
Relative
The term “dependent” means:
• A qualifying child, or
• A qualifying relative.
T able 3 shows the tests that must be met to be either a 
qualifying child or qualifying relative, plus the additional re-
quirements for claiming a dependent. For detailed infor-
mation, see Pub. 501.
6 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 7 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou may be entitled to a child tax credit for each 
qualifying child who was under age 17 at the end 
of the year if you claimed that child as a depend-
ent. If you can’t claim the child tax credit for a child who is 
an eligible dependent, you may be able to claim the credit 
for other dependents instead. See the Instructions for 
Form 1040 for details.
Children of Divorced or Separated Parents 
(or Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, because of the residency test (see item 3 
under T ests T o Be a Qualifying Child in T able 3), a child of 
divorced or separated parents is the qualifying child of the 
custodial parent. However, the child will be treated as the 
TIP
qualifying child of the noncustodial parent if all four of the 
following statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year, whether or not they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of the support for the year 
from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for 
more than half of the year.
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution: See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing 
status.
IF the person is your... AND... THEN that person is...
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who lived 
with you more than half the year 
and meets certain other tests)2
the child is single a qualifying person, whether or not the 
child meets the Citizen or Resident 
T est, described in Pub. 501.
the child is married and you can claim the child 
as a dependent
a qualifying person.
the child is married and you can’t claim the 
child as a dependent
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your 
father or mother
you can claim your parent as a dependent5 a qualifying person.6
you can’t claim your parent as a dependent not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your 
father or mother (such as a 
grandparent, brother, or sister who 
meets certain tests)
your relative lived with you more than half the 
year, and your relative is related to you in one 
of the ways listed under Relatives who don’t 
have to live with you in Pub. 501 and you can 
claim your relative as a dependent5
a qualifying person.
your relative didn’t live with you more than half 
the year
not a qualifying person.
your relative isn’t related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to 
live with you in Pub. 501 and is your qualifying 
relative only because your relative lived with 
you all year as a member of your household
not a qualifying person.
you can’t claim your relative as a dependent not a qualifying person.
1 A person can’t qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 See T able 3 for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying child. Note: If you’re a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of 
household filing status doesn’t include a child who is your qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of Divorced or 
Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), later. If you’re the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is generally your qualifying child 
for head of household filing status even though you can’t claim the child as a dependent.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can’t claim them as a dependent is because you can be claimed as a dependent on 
someone else’s return.
4 See T able 3 for the tests that must be met to be a qualifying relative.
5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn’t a qualifying person. See Multiple Support 
Agreement in Pub. 501.
6 See Special rule for parent.
T able 2.
Publication 504 (2025) 7

Page 8 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Either of the following applies.
a. The custodial parent signs a written declaration, 
discussed later, that they won’t claim the child as a 
dependent for the year, and the noncustodial pa-
rent attaches this written declaration to their re-
turn. (If the decree or agreement went into effect 
after 1984, see Divorce decree or separation 
agreement that went into effect after 1984 and be-
fore 2009, or Post-2008 divorce decree or separa-
tion agreement, later).
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or separate mainte-
nance or written separation agreement that ap-
plies to 2025 states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, the decree or 
agreement wasn’t changed after 1984 to say the 
noncustodial parent can’t claim the child as a de-
pendent, and the noncustodial parent provides at 
least $600 for the child’s support during the year. 
See Child support under pre-1985 agreement, 
later.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.  The 
custodial parent is the parent with whom the child lived for 
the greater number of nights during the year. The other 
parent is the noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during the year and 
the child lived with both parents before the separation, the 
custodial parent is the one with whom the child lived for 
the greater number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a night if the 
child sleeps:
• At that parent’s home, whether or not the parent is 
present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the child doesn’t 
sleep at a parent’s home (for example, the parent and 
child are on vacation together).
Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent
Caution: This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see Pub. 501.
• Y ou can’t claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer 
unless that taxpayer files a return only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
• Y ou can’t claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
• Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
• Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1.
 
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
 
 
5.
 
The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them. 
 
The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), (b) 
under age 24 at the end of the year, a student, and younger 
than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), or (c) any age if 
permanently and totally disabled. 
 
The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 
year.2
 
The child must not have provided more than half of the 
child’s own support for the year. 
 
The child must not be filing a joint return for the year 
(unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid).
 
A child isn’t a qualifying child unless the child meets items 
(1) through (5). 
1.
 
 
 
2.
 
 
 
 
 
3.
 
 
4.
The person can’t be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of anyone else. 
 
 
The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live with you 
in Pub. 501, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of 
your household 2 (and your relationship must not violate 
local law).
 
The person’s gross income for the year must be less than 
$5,200.3
 
Y ou must provide more than half of the person’s total 
support for the year.4
 
A person isn’t a qualifying relative unless the person meets 
items (1) through (4). 
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than 
one person, only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, 
later, to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the 
child as a qualifying child. 
1 An exception exists for certain adopted children.
2 Exceptions exist for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children who were adopted or lawfully placed for 
adoption during the year, children who are eligible foster children placed during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart), and kidnapped children. See Pub. 501.
3 An exception exists for persons who are disabled and have income from a sheltered workshop.
4 Exceptions exist for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped children. 
See Pub. 501.
T able 3.
8 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 9 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived with each 
parent for an equal number of nights during the year, the 
custodial parent is the parent with the higher adjusted 
gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is treated as 
part of the year in which it begins. For example, the night 
of December 31, 2025, is treated as part of 2025.
Emancipated child.  If a child is emancipated under 
state law, the child is treated as not living with either pa-
rent. See Examples 5 and 6, later.
Absences. If a child wasn’t with either parent on a par-
ticular night (because, for example, the child was staying 
at a friend’s house), the child is treated as living with the 
parent with whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can’t be deter-
mined with which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child wouldn’t have lived with either parent 
that night, the child is treated as not living with either pa-
rent that night.
Parent works at night.  If, due to a parent’s nighttime 
work schedule, a child lives for a greater number of days 
but not nights with the parent who works at night, that pa-
rent is treated as the custodial parent. On a school day, 
the child is treated as living at the primary residence regis-
tered with the school.
Example 1 —child lived with one parent for a 
greater number of nights.  Y ou and your child’s other 
parent are divorced. In 2025, your child lived with you 210 
nights and with the other parent 155 nights. Y ou’re the 
custodial parent.
Example 2 —child is away at camp.  In 2025, your 
child lives with each parent for alternate weeks. In the 
summer, the child spends 6 weeks at summer camp. Dur-
ing the time the child is at camp, the child is treated as liv-
ing with you for 3 weeks and with the other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how long the child 
would have lived with each parent if the child hadn’t atten-
ded summer camp.
Example 3 —child lived same number of nights 
with each parent.  Y our child lived with you 180 nights 
during the year and lived the same number of nights with 
the other parent, your ex -spouse. Y our adjusted gross in-
come is $40,000. Y our ex-spouse’s adjusted gross income 
is $25,000. Y ou’re treated as your child’s custodial parent 
because you have the higher adjusted gross income.
Example 4 —child is at parent’s home but with 
other parent.  Y our child normally lives with you during 
the week and with the other parent, your ex -spouse, every 
other weekend. Y ou become ill and are hospitalized. Y our 
ex-spouse lives in your home with your child for 10 con-
secutive days while you’re in the hospital. Y our child is 
treated as living with you during this 10 -day period be-
cause the child was living in your home.
Example 5—child emancipated in May.  When your 
child turned age 18 in May 2025, the child became 
emancipated under the law of the state where the child 
lives. As a result, the child isn’t considered in the custody 
of the parents for more than half of the year. The special 
rule for children of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart) doesn’t apply.
Example 6 —child emancipated in August.  Y our 
child lives with you from January 1, 2025, until May 31, 
2025, and lives with the other parent, your ex -spouse, 
from June 1, 2025, through the end of the year. The child 
turns 18 and is emancipated under state law on August 1, 
2025. Because the child is treated as not living with either 
parent beginning on August 1, the child is treated as living 
with you the greater number of nights in 2025. Y ou are the 
custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent must use 
either Form 8332, Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by Custodial Parent, or a 
similar statement (containing the same information re-
quired by the form) to make a written declaration to re-
lease a claim to an exemption for a child to the noncusto-
dial parent. Although the exemption amount is zero for tax 
year 2025, this release allows the noncustodial parent to 
claim the child tax credit, additional child tax credit, and 
credit for other dependents, if applicable, for the child. The 
noncustodial parent must attach a copy of the form or 
statement to their tax return each year the custodial parent 
releases their claims.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number of specified 
years (for example, alternate years), or for all future years, 
as specified in the declaration.
Form 8332 doesn’t apply to other tax benefits, 
such as the earned income credit, dependent 
care credit, or head of household filing status. See 
Pub. 501.
Divorce decree or separation agreement that went 
into effect after 1984 and before 2009.  If the divorce 
decree or separation agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent may be 
able to attach certain pages from the decree or agreement 
instead of Form 8332. The decree or agreement must 
state all three of the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the child as a de-
pendent without regard to any condition, such as pay-
ment of support.
2. The custodial parent won’t claim the child as a de-
pendent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial parent, rather 
than the custodial parent, can claim the child as a de-
pendent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of the following 
pages of the decree or agreement to their tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent’s SSN on this 
page).
• The pages that include all of the information identified 
in items (1) through (3) above.
CAUTION
!
Publication 504 (2025) 9

Page 10 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The signature page with the other parent’s signature 
and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation agree-
ment. If the decree or agreement went into effect after 
2008, a noncustodial parent claiming a child as a depend-
ent can’t attach pages from a divorce decree or separation 
agreement instead of Form 8332. The custodial parent 
must sign either a Form 8332 or a similar statement. The 
only purpose of this statement must be to release the cus-
todial parent’s claim to an exemption. The noncustodial 
parent must attach a copy to their return. The form or 
statement must release the custodial parent’s claim to the 
child without any conditions. For example, the release 
must not depend on the noncustodial parent paying sup-
port.
The noncustodial parent must attach the required 
information even if it was filed with a return in an 
earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an exemption. 
The custodial parent can revoke a release of claim to an 
exemption that they previously released to the noncusto-
dial parent. For the revocation to be effective for 2025, the 
custodial parent must have given (or made reasonable ef-
forts to give) written notice of the revocation to the non-
custodial parent in 2024 or earlier. The custodial parent 
can use Part III of Form 8332 for this purpose and must at-
tach a copy of the revocation to their return for each tax 
year the custodial parent claims the child as a dependent 
as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent.  If you remarry, the support provi-
ded by your new spouse is treated as provided by you.
Child support under pre -1985 agreement. All child 
support payments actually received from the noncustodial 
parent under a pre -1985 agreement are considered used 
for the support of the child.
Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, the noncusto-
dial parent provides $1,200 for the child’s support. This 
amount is considered support provided by the noncusto-
dial parent even if the $1,200 was actually spent on things 
other than support.
Parents who never married. This rule for divorced or 
separated parents also applies to parents who never mar-
ried and lived apart at all times during the last 6 months of 
the year.
Alimony. Payments to your spouse that are includible 
in their gross income as either alimony, separate mainte-
nance payments, or similar payments from an estate or 
trust aren’t treated as a payment for the support of a de-
pendent.
CAUTION
!
Qualifying Child of More Than One Person
If your qualifying child isn’t a qualifying child of 
anyone else, this topic doesn’t apply to you and 
you don’t need to read about it. This is also true if 
your qualifying child isn’t a qualifying child of anyone else 
except your spouse with whom you plan to file a joint re-
turn.
If a child is treated as the qualifying child of the 
noncustodial parent under the rules for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who 
Live Apart), earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker rules to di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) , 
later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests to be a qualifying 
child of more than one person. (For a description of these 
tests, see list items 1 through 5 under T ests T o Be a Quali-
fying Child in T able 3). Although the child meets the condi-
tions to be a qualifying child of each of these persons, 
only one person can actually claim the child as a qualify-
ing child to take the following tax benefits (provided the 
person is eligible).
1. The child tax credit, the credit for other dependents, 
and the additional child tax credit.
2. Head of household filing status.
3. The credit for child and dependent care expenses.
4. The exclusion from income for dependent care bene-
fits.
5. The earned income credit.
In other words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. T o determine which person can treat 
the child as a qualifying child to claim these tax benefits, 
the following tiebreaker rules apply. For purposes of these 
tiebreaker rules, the term "parent" means a biological or 
adoptive parent of an individual. It does not include a step-
parent or foster parent unless that person has adopted the 
individual.
• If only one of the persons is the child’s parent, the 
child is treated as the qualifying child of the parent.
• If the parents file a joint return together and can claim 
the child as a qualifying child, the child is treated as 
the qualifying child of the parents.
• If the parents don’t file a joint return together but both 
parents claim the child as a qualifying child, the IRS 
will treat the child as the qualifying child of the parent 
with whom the child lived for the longer period of time 
during the year.
• If the parents don’t file a joint return together but both 
can claim the child as a qualifying child and the child 
lived with each parent for the same amount of time, 
the IRS will treat the child as the qualifying child of the 
TIP
CAUTION
!
10 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 11 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
parent who had the higher adjusted gross income 
(AGI) for the year.
• If no parent can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of the person 
who had the highest AGI for the year.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualifying child but 
no parent claims the child, the child is treated as the 
qualifying child of the person who had the highest AGI 
for the year, but only if that person’s AGI is higher than 
the highest AGI of any of the child’s parents who can 
claim the child. See Pub. 501 for details.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the other per-
son may be able to choose which of you claims the child 
as a qualifying child.
Y ou may be able to qualify for the earned income credit 
under the rules for taxpayers without a qualifying child if 
you have a qualifying child for the earned income credit 
who is claimed as a qualifying child by another taxpayer. 
For more information, see Pub. 596.
Example 1 —separated parents.  Y ou, your spouse, 
and your 10 -year-old child lived together until August 1, 
2025, when your spouse moved out of the household. In 
August and September, your child lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your child lived with your spouse, the 
child’s other parent. Y our child is a qualifying child of both 
you and your spouse because your child lived with each of 
you for more than half the year and because the child met 
the relationship, age, support, and joint return tests for 
both of you. At the end of the year, you and your spouse 
still weren’t divorced, legally separated, or separated un-
der a written separation agreement, so the rule for chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live 
apart) doesn’t apply.
Y ou and your spouse will file separate returns. Y our 
spouse agrees to let you treat your child as a qualifying 
child. This means, if your spouse doesn’t claim your child 
as a qualifying child, you can claim your child as a de-
pendent and treat your child as a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit and exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
if you qualify for each of those tax benefits. However, you 
can’t claim head of household filing status because you 
and your spouse didn’t live apart the last 6 months of the 
year. As a result, your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, you can’t claim the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses.
Example 2 —separated parents claim same child. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that you 
and your spouse both claim your child as a qualifying 
child. In this case, only your spouse will be allowed to treat 
your child as a qualifying child. This is because, during 
2025, the child lived with the other parent longer than with 
you. If you claimed the child tax credit for your child, the 
IRS will disallow your claim to the child tax credit. If you 
don’t have another qualifying child or dependent, the IRS 
will also disallow your claim to the exclusion for dependent 
care benefits. In addition, because you and your spouse 
didn’t live apart the last 6 months of the year, your spouse 
can’t claim head of household filing status. As a result, 
your spouse’s filing status is married filing separately so 
your spouse can’t claim the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or separa-
ted parents (or parents who live apart).  If a child is 
treated as the qualifying child of the noncustodial parent 
under the rules for children of divorced or separated pa-
rents (or parents who live apart) described earlier, only the 
noncustodial parent can claim the child tax credit or the 
credit for other dependents for the child. However, the 
custodial parent, if eligible, or other eligible person can 
claim the child as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, and 
the earned income credit. If the child is a qualifying child 
of more than one person for these benefits, then the tie-
breaker rules determine whether the custodial parent or 
another eligible person can treat the child as a qualifying 
child.
Example 1. Y ou and your 5-year-old child lived all year 
with your parent, who paid the entire cost of keeping up 
the home. Y our AGI is $10,000. Y our parent’s AGI is 
$25,000. Y our child’s other parent doesn’t live with you or 
your child.
Under the rules for children of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart), your child is treated as 
the qualifying child of the other parent, who can claim the 
child tax credit for the child if the other parent meets all the 
requirements to do so. Because of this, you can’t claim the 
child tax credit for your child. However, your child’s other 
parent can’t claim your child as a qualifying child for head 
of household filing status, the credit for child and depend-
ent care expenses, the exclusion for dependent care ben-
efits, or the earned income credit.
Y ou and your parent didn’t have any childcare expen-
ses or dependent care benefits, but the child is a qualify-
ing child of both you and your parent for head of house-
hold filing status and the earned income credit because 
the child meets the relationship, age, residency, support, 
and joint return tests for both you and your parent. ( Note: 
The support test doesn’t apply for the earned income 
credit.) However, you agree to let your parent claim your 
child. This means your parent can claim the child for head 
of household filing status and the earned income credit if 
your parent qualifies for each and if you don’t claim the 
child as a qualifying child for the earned income credit. 
(Y ou can’t claim head of household filing status because 
your parent paid the entire cost of keeping up the home.)
Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that your AGI is $25,000 and your parent’s AGI is 
$21,000. Y our parent can’t claim your child as a qualifying 
child for any purpose because your parent’s AGI isn’t 
higher than yours.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except that you and your parent both claim your child as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. Y our parent 
also claims your child as a qualifying child for head of 
household filing status. Y ou, as the child’s parent, will be 
Publication 504 (2025) 11

Page 12 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the only one allowed to claim your child as a qualifying 
child for the earned income credit. The IRS will disallow 
your parent’s claim to the earned income credit and head 
of household filing status unless your parent has another 
qualifying child.
Alimony
Amounts paid as alimony or separate mainte-
nance payments under a divorce or separation in-
strument executed after 2018 won’t be deductible 
by the payer. Such amounts also won’t be includible in the 
income of the recipient. The same is true of alimony paid 
under a divorce or separation instrument executed before 
2019 and modified after 2018, if the modification ex-
pressly states that the alimony isn’t deductible to the payer 
or includible in the income of the recipient. See Certain 
Rules for Instruments Executed or Modified After 2018 , 
later.
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or former 
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument. It 
doesn’t include voluntary payments that aren’t made un-
der a divorce or separation instrument.
Although this discussion is generally written for the 
payer of the alimony, the recipient can also use the infor-
mation to determine whether an amount received is ali-
mony.
T o be alimony, a payment must meet certain require-
ments. There are some differences between the require-
ments that apply to payments under instruments executed 
after 1984 and to payments under instruments executed 
before 1985. General alimony requirements and specific 
requirements that apply to post -1984 instruments (and, in 
certain cases, some pre -1985 instruments) are discussed 
in this publication. See Instruments Executed Before 
1985, later, if you’re looking for information on where to 
find the specific requirements that apply to pre -1985 in-
struments.
Spouse or former spouse. Unless otherwise stated, the 
term “spouse” includes former spouse.
Divorce or separation instrument. The term “divorce or 
separation instrument” means:
• A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a writ-
ten instrument incident to that decree;
• A written separation agreement; or
• A decree or any type of court order requiring a spouse 
to make payments for the support or maintenance of 
the other spouse. This includes a temporary decree, 
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a decree of ali-
mony pendente lite (while awaiting action on the final 
decree or agreement).
Invalid decree. Payments under a divorce decree can 
be alimony even if the decree’s validity is in question. A di-
vorce decree is valid for tax purposes until a court having 
proper jurisdiction holds it invalid.
CAUTION
!
Amended instrument.  An amendment to a divorce 
decree may change the nature of your payments. Amend-
ments aren’t ordinarily retroactive for federal tax purposes. 
However, a retroactive amendment to a divorce decree 
correcting a clerical error to reflect the original intent of the 
court will generally be effective retroactively for federal tax 
purposes.
Example 1.  A court order retroactively corrected a 
mathematical error under your divorce decree to express 
the original intent to spread the payments over more than 
10 years. This change is also effective retroactively for 
federal tax purposes.
Example 2. Y our original divorce decree didn’t fix any 
part of the payment as child support. T o reflect the true in-
tention of the court, a court order retroactively corrected 
the error by designating a part of the payment as child 
support. The amended order is effective retroactively for 
federal tax purposes.
Deducting alimony paid.  Alimony is deductible by the 
payer, and the recipient must include it in income if you 
entered into a divorce or separation agreement on or be-
fore December 31, 2018. Alimony paid is not deductible if 
you entered into a divorce or separation agreement on or 
before December 31, 2018, and the agreement is 
changed after December 31, 2018, to expressly provide 
that alimony received is not included in your former spou-
se’s income. Alimony paid is not deductible if you entered 
into a divorce or separation agreement after December 
31, 2018.
Y ou must use Form 1040 or 1040-SR to deduct alimony 
you paid. Y ou can’t use Form 1040-NR.
Enter the amount of alimony you paid on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 19a. In the space provided on line 19b, 
enter your recipient’s SSN or ITIN. On line 19c, enter the 
month and year of your original divorce or separation 
agreement that relates to the deduction for alimony paid.
If you paid alimony to more than one person, enter the 
SSN or ITIN of one of the recipients. Show the SSN or 
ITIN and amount paid to each other recipient on an at-
tached statement. Enter your total payments on line 19a.
If you don’t provide your spouse’s SSN or ITIN, 
you may have to pay a $50 penalty and your de-
duction may be disallowed.
Reporting alimony received. If your alimony is included 
in your income, and you file Form 1040 or 1040-SR, report 
alimony you received on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a. 
On line 2b, enter the month and year of your original di-
vorce or separation agreement that relates to the alimony 
payment. If you file Form 1040 -NR, report alimony you re-
ceived on Schedule NEC (Form 1040-NR).
Y ou must give the person who paid the alimony 
your SSN or ITIN. If you don’t, you may have to 
pay a $50 penalty.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
12 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 13 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Withholding on nonresident aliens.  If you are a U.S. 
citizen or resident alien and you pay alimony to a nonresi-
dent alien spouse, you may have to withhold income tax at 
a rate of 30% on each payment. However, many tax trea-
ties provide for an exemption from withholding for alimony 
payments. For more information, see Pub. 515.
Alimony Payment Rules for 
Instruments Executed Prior to 2019
If you entered into a divorce or separation agreement on 
or before December 31, 2018, and the agreement has not 
been changed after December 31, 2018, to expressly pro-
vide that alimony received is not included in your former 
spouse’s income, the following rules apply.
Payments not alimony.  Not all payments under a di-
vorce or separation instrument are alimony. Alimony 
doesn’t include:
• Child support,
• Noncash property settlements,
• Payments that are your spouse’s part of community in-
come, as explained later under Community Property,
• Payments to keep up the payer’s property, or
• Use of the payer’s property.
Example. Under your written separation agreement, 
your spouse lives rent -free in a home you own and you 
must pay the mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, re-
pairs, and utilities for the home. Because you own the 
home and the debts are yours, your payments for the 
mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs aren’t 
alimony. Neither is the value of your spouse’s use of the 
home.
If utility payments otherwise qualify as alimony, you may 
be able to deduct these payments as alimony. Y our 
spouse must report them as income. If you itemize deduc-
tions, you can deduct the real estate taxes and, if the 
home is a qualified home, you can also include the inter-
est on the mortgage in figuring your deductible interest. 
However, if your spouse owned the home, see Example 2 
under Payments to a third party , later. If you owned the 
home jointly with your spouse, see T able 4, later. For more 
information, see Pub. 936.
Child support.  T o determine whether a payment is 
child support, see the discussion under Certain Rules for 
Instruments Executed After 1984 But Before 2019 , later. If 
your divorce or separation agreement was executed be-
fore 1985, see the 2004 revision of Pub. 504, available at 
IRS.gov/FormsPubs.
Underpayment. If both alimony and child support pay-
ments are called for by your divorce or separation instru-
ment, and you pay less than the total required, the pay-
ments apply first to child support and then to alimony.
Example. Y our divorce decree calls for you to pay your 
former spouse $200 a month ($2,400 ($200 x 12) a year) 
as child support and $150 a month ($1,800 ($150 x 12) a 
year) as alimony. If you pay the full amount of $4,200 
($2,400 + $1,800) during the year, you can deduct $1,800 
as alimony and your former spouse must report $1,800 as 
alimony received for a divorce decree executed prior to 
2019. If you pay only $3,600 during the year, $2,400 is 
child support. Y ou can deduct only $1,200 ($3,600 – 
$2,400) as alimony and your former spouse must report 
$1,200 as alimony received instead of $1,800. This is be-
cause the payments apply first to child support and then to 
alimony.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments, checks, or 
money orders to a third party on behalf of your spouse un-
der the terms of your divorce or separation instrument can 
be alimony, if they otherwise qualify. These include pay-
ments for your spouse’s medical expenses, housing costs 
(rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition, etc. The payments are 
treated as received by your spouse and then paid to the 
third party.
Example 1.  Under your 2018 divorce decree, you 
must pay your former spouse’s medical and dental expen-
ses. If the payments otherwise qualify, you can deduct 
them as alimony on your return. Y our former spouse must 
report them as alimony received and can include them in 
figuring deductible medical expenses.
Example 2.  Under your 2018 separation agreement, 
you must pay the real estate taxes and mortgage pay-
ments on a home owned by your spouse. If they otherwise 
qualify, you can deduct the payments as alimony on your 
return, and your spouse must report them as alimony re-
ceived. Y our spouse may be able to deduct the real estate 
taxes and home mortgage interest, subject to the limita-
tions on those deductions. See the Instructions for Sched-
ule A (Form 1040). However, if you owned the home, see 
the example under Payments not alimony , earlier. If you 
owned the home jointly with your spouse, see T able 4.
Life insurance premiums.  Alimony includes premiums 
you must pay under your divorce or separation instrument 
for insurance on your life to the extent your spouse owns 
the policy.
Payments for jointly owned home.  If your divorce or 
separation instrument states that you must pay expenses 
for a home owned by you and your spouse or former 
spouse, some of your payments may be alimony. See T a-
ble 4.
However, if your spouse owned the home, see Exam-
ple 2 under Payments to a third party, earlier. If you owned 
the home, see the example under Payments not alimony, 
earlier.
Certain Rules for Instruments 
Executed After 1984 But Before 2019
The following rules for alimony apply to payments under 
divorce or separation instruments executed after 1984 but 
before 2019.
Publication 504 (2025) 13

Page 14 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alimony Requirements
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument is alimony if the spouses don’t file a joint 
return with each other and all of the following requirements 
are met.
• The payment is in cash.
• The instrument doesn’t designate the payment as not 
alimony.
• The spouses aren’t members of the same household 
at the time the payments are made. This requirement 
applies only if the spouses are legally separated under 
a decree of divorce or separate maintenance.
• There is no liability to make any payment (in cash or 
property) after the death of the recipient spouse.
• The payment isn’t treated as child support.
Each of these requirements is discussed next.
Cash payment requirement.  Only cash payments, in-
cluding checks and money orders, qualify as alimony. The 
following don’t qualify as alimony.
• T ransfers of services or property (including a debt in-
strument of a third party or an annuity contract).
• Execution of a debt instrument by the payer.
• The use of the payer’s property.
Payments to a third party.  Cash payments to a third 
party under the terms of your divorce or separation instru-
ment can qualify as cash payments to your spouse. See 
Payments to a third party  under Alimony Payment Rules 
for Instruments Executed Prior to 2019, earlier.
Also, cash payments made to a third party at the written 
request of your spouse may qualify as alimony if all the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
• The payments are in lieu of payments of alimony di-
rectly to your spouse.
• The written request states that both spouses intend 
the payments to be treated as alimony.
• Y ou receive the written request from your spouse be-
fore you file your return for the year you made the pay-
ments.
Payments designated as not alimony.  Y ou and your 
spouse can designate that otherwise qualifying payments 
aren’t alimony. Y ou do this by including a provision in your 
divorce or separation instrument that states the payments 
aren’t deductible as alimony by you and are excludable 
from your spouse’s income. For this purpose, any instru-
ment (written statement) signed by both of you that makes 
this designation and that refers to a previous written sepa-
ration agreement is treated as a written separation agree-
ment (and therefore a divorce or separation instrument). If 
you’re subject to temporary support orders, the designa-
tion must be made in the original or a later temporary sup-
port order.
Y our spouse can exclude the payments from income 
only if they attach a copy of the instrument designating 
them as not alimony to their return. The copy must be at-
tached each year the designation applies.
Spouses can’t be members of the same household. 
Payments to your spouse while you’re members of the 
same household aren’t alimony if you’re legally separated 
under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance. A 
home you formerly shared is considered one household, 
even if you physically separate yourselves in the home.
Expenses for a Jointly Owned Home
Use the table below to find how much of your payment is alimony and how much you can claim as an itemized deduction.
IF you must pay 
all of the... AND your home is...
THEN you can deduct and 
your spouse (or former 
spouse) must include as 
alimony...
AND you can claim as an 
itemized deduction...
mortgage 
payments 
(principal and 
interest)
jointly owned half of the total payments half of the interest as interest 
expense (if the home is a qualified 
home).1
real estate taxes held as tenants in 
common
half of the total payments half of the real estate taxes.2
held as tenants by 
the entirety or in joint 
tenancy
none of the payments all of the real estate taxes.
1 Y our spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the interest if the home is a qualified home.
2 Y our spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other half of the real estate taxes.
T able 4.
14 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 15 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y ou aren’t treated as members of the same household 
if one of you is preparing to leave the household and does 
leave no later than 1 month after the date of the payment.
Exception. If you aren’t legally separated under a de-
cree of divorce or separate maintenance, a payment un-
der a written separation agreement, support decree, or 
other court order may qualify as alimony even if you’re 
members of the same household when the payment is 
made.
Liability for payments after death of recipient 
spouse. If any part of payments you make must continue 
to be made for any period after your spouse’s death, that 
part of your payments isn’t alimony whether made before 
or after the death. If all of the payments would continue, 
then none of the payments made before or after the death 
are alimony.
The divorce or separation instrument doesn’t have to 
expressly state that the payments cease upon the death of 
your spouse if, for example, the liability for continued pay-
ments would end under state law.
Example. Y ou must pay your former spouse $10,000 
in cash each year for 10 years. Y our divorce decree states 
that the payments will end upon your former spouse’s 
death. Y ou must also pay your former spouse or your for-
mer spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year for 10 
years. The death of your spouse wouldn’t end these pay-
ments under state law.
The $10,000 annual payments may qualify as alimony. 
The $20,000 annual payments that don’t end upon your 
former spouse’s death aren’t alimony.
Substitute payments.  If you must make any pay-
ments in cash or property after your spouse’s death as a 
substitute for continuing otherwise qualifying payments 
before the death, the otherwise qualifying payments aren’t 
alimony. T o the extent that your payments begin, acceler-
ate, or increase because of the death of your spouse, oth-
erwise qualifying payments you made may be treated as 
payments that weren’t alimony. Whether or not such pay-
ments will be treated as not alimony depends on all the 
facts and circumstances.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 6 years or upon your former spouse’s 
death, if earlier.
Y our former spouse has custody of your minor children. 
The decree provides that if any child is still a minor at your 
spouse’s death, you must pay $10,000 annually to a trust 
until the youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 
trust income and corpus (principal) are to be used for your 
children’s benefit.
These facts indicate that the payments to be made after 
your former spouse’s death are a substitute for $10,000 of 
the $30,000 annual payments. Of each of the $30,000 an-
nual payments, $10,000 isn’t alimony.
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you must pay 
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will 
stop at the end of 15 years or upon your former spouse’s 
death, if earlier. The decree provides that if your former 
spouse dies before the end of the 15 -year period, you 
must pay the estate the difference between $450,000 
($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up to that time. 
For example, if your spouse dies at the end of the 10th 
year, you must pay the estate $150,000 ($450,000 − 
$300,000).
These facts indicate that the lump -sum payment to be 
made after your former spouse’s death is a substitute for 
the full amount of the $30,000 annual payments. None of 
the annual payments are alimony. The result would be the 
same if the payment required at death were to be discoun-
ted by an appropriate interest factor to account for the pre-
payment.
Child support. A payment that is specifically designated 
as child support or treated as specifically designated as 
child support under your divorce or separation instrument 
isn’t alimony. The amount of child support may vary over 
time. Child support payments aren’t deductible by the 
payer and aren’t taxable to the payee.
Specifically designated as child support.  A pay-
ment will be treated as specifically designated as child 
support to the extent that the payment is reduced either:
• On the happening of a contingency relating to your 
child, or
• At a time that can be clearly associated with the con-
tingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically designated as 
child support even if other separate payments are specifi-
cally designated as child support.
Contingency relating to your child.  A contingency 
relates to your child if it depends on any event relating to 
that child. It doesn’t matter whether the event is certain or 
likely to occur. Events relating to your child include the 
child’s:
• Becoming employed,
• Dying,
• Leaving the household,
• Leaving school,
• Marrying, or
• Reaching a specified age or income level.
Clearly associated with a contingency.  Payments 
that would otherwise qualify as alimony are presumed to 
be reduced at a time clearly associated with the happen-
ing of a contingency relating to your child only in the fol-
lowing situations.
1. The payments are to be reduced not more than 6 
months before or after the date the child will reach 18, 
21, or local age of majority.
2. The payments are to be reduced on two or more oc-
casions that occur not more than 1 year before or after 
a different one of your children reaches a certain age 
from 18 to 24. This certain age must be the same for 
each child, but need not be a whole number of years.
Publication 504 (2025) 15

Page 16 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
In all other situations, reductions in payments aren’t trea-
ted as clearly associated with the happening of a contin-
gency relating to your child.
Either you or the IRS can overcome the presumption in 
the two situations above. This is done by showing that the 
time at which the payments are to be reduced was deter-
mined independently of any contingencies relating to your 
children. For example, if you can show that the period of 
alimony payments is customary in the local jurisdiction, 
such as a period equal to one -half of the duration of the 
marriage, you can overcome the presumption and may be 
able to treat the amount as alimony.
Recapture of Alimony
If your alimony payments decrease or end during the first 
3 calendar years, you may be subject to the recapture 
rule. If you’re subject to this rule, you have to include in in-
come (in the third year) part of the alimony payments you 
previously deducted. Y our spouse can deduct (in the third 
year) part of the alimony payments they previously inclu-
ded in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calendar year you 
make a payment qualifying as alimony under a decree of 
divorce or separate maintenance or a written separation 
agreement. Don’t include any time in which payments 
were being made under temporary support orders. The 
second and third years are the next 2 calendar years, 
whether or not payments are made during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or end of alimony pay-
ments that can require a recapture include:
• A change in your divorce or separation instrument,
• A failure to make timely payments,
• A reduction in your ability to provide support, or
• A reduction in your spouse’s support needs.
When to apply the recapture rule.  Y ou are subject to 
the recapture rule in the third year if the alimony you pay in 
the third year decreases by more than $15,000 from the 
second year or the alimony you pay in the second and 
third years decreases significantly from the alimony you 
pay in the first year.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, don’t include 
the following amounts.
• Payments made under a temporary support order.
• Payments required over a period of at least 3 calendar 
years that vary because they are a fixed part of your 
income from a business or property, or from compen-
sation for employment or self-employment.
• Payments that decrease because of the death of ei-
ther spouse or the remarriage of the spouse receiving 
the payments before the end of the third year.
How to figure and report the recapture.  Both you and 
your spouse can use Worksheet 1 to figure recaptured ali-
mony.
Including the recapture in income.  If you must in-
clude a recapture amount in income, show it on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 2a (“Alimony received”). Cross out “re-
ceived” and enter “recapture.” On the dotted line next to 
the amount, enter your spouse’s last name and SSN or 
ITIN.
Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct a recap-
ture amount, show it on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 19a 
(“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and enter “recapture.” In 
the space provided, enter your spouse’s SSN or ITIN.
Example. Y ou pay your former spouse $50,000 ali-
mony the first year, $39,000 the second year, and $28,000 
the third year. In the third year, you report $1,500 as in-
come on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a, and your for-
mer spouse reports $1,500 as a deduction on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 19a.
Instruments Executed Before 1985
Information on pre -1985 instruments was included in this 
publication through 2004. If you need the 2004 revision, 
please visit IRS.gov/FormsPubs.
Certain Rules for Instruments 
Executed or Modified After 2018
Amounts paid as alimony or separate maintenance pay-
ments under a divorce or separation instrument executed 
after 2018 won’t be deductible by the payer. Such 
amounts also won’t be includible in the income of the re-
cipient. The same is true of alimony paid under a divorce 
or separation instrument executed before 2019 and modi-
fied after 2018, if the modification expressly states that the 
alimony isn’t deductible to the payer or includible in the in-
come of the recipient. The examples below illustrate the 
tax treatment of alimony payments under the post -2018 
alimony rules. In each of the examples, assume the pay-
ments qualify as alimony under the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986.
Example 1. On December 2, 2016, a court executed a 
divorce decree providing for monthly alimony payments 
beginning January 1, 2017, for a period of 10 years. On 
May 16, 2025, the court modified the divorce decree to in-
crease the amount of monthly alimony payments. The first 
increased alimony payment was due on June 1, 2025. The 
modification didn’t expressly provide that the post -2018 
alimony rules apply to alimony payments made after the 
date of the modification. Therefore, all alimony payments 
made in 2025 are includible in the recipient’s income and 
deductible from the payer’s income.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in  Example 1 
above except the modification expressly provided that the 
post-2018 alimony rules apply. The alimony payments 
made in January 2025 through May 2025 are includible in 
the recipient’s income and deductible from the payer’s in-
come. The alimony payments made in June 2025 through 
December 2025 are neither includible in the recipient’s in-
come nor deductible from the payer’s income.
16 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 17 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. On December 2, 2016, a couple executed 
a written separation agreement providing for monthly ali-
mony payments on the first day of each month, beginning 
January 1, 2017, for a period of 10 years. The written sep-
aration agreement set forth that it expires upon the execu-
tion of a divorce decree dissolving the couple’s marriage. 
On May 27, 2025, a court executed the divorce decree 
awarding alimony under the same terms as described in 
the couple’s separation agreement. The alimony pay-
ments made in January 2025 through May 2025 under the 
written separation agreement are includible in the recipi-
ent’s income and deductible from the payer’s income. The 
court executed the divorce decree after December 31, 
2018; therefore, alimony payments made in June 2025 
through December 2025 under the divorce decree are nei-
ther includible in the recipient’s income nor deductible 
from the payer’s income.
Example 4. On October 1, 2018, a couple executed a 
written separation agreement subject to the laws of State 
X. The written separation agreement requires a $1,000 
monthly alimony payment on the last business day of a 
month for a period of 10 years. Under the laws of State X, 
at the time of divorce, a written separation agreement may 
survive as an independent contract. In the process of ob-
taining their divorce, the couple decided their separation 
agreement will remain an independent contract and won’t 
be incorporated or merged into their divorce decree. The 
court, after acknowledging the separation agreement as 
fair and equitable, executed a divorce decree on April 1, 
2025, dissolving the couple’s marriage. The divorce de-
cree did not mention alimony. All alimony payments made 
in 2025 are includible in the recipient’s income and deduc-
tible from the payer’s income because the alimony pay-
ments were made under the written separation agreement 
that was executed on or before December 31, 2018.
Qualified Domestic
Relations Order
A qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) is a judg-
ment, decree, or court order (including an approved prop-
erty settlement agreement) issued under a State’s or T ri-
be’s domestic relations law that:
• Recognizes the right of the spouse, former spouse, 
child, or other dependent of the participant to receive 
benefits from a qualified retirement plan (such as most 
pension and profit-sharing plans) or a tax-sheltered 
annuity;
• Relates to payment of child support, alimony, or mari-
tal property rights to a spouse, former spouse, child, 
or other dependent of the participant; and
• Specifies certain information, including the amount or 
part of the participant’s benefits to be paid to the par-
ticipant’s spouse, former spouse, child, or other de-
pendent.
Worksheet 1. Recapture of Alimony Keep for Y our Records
Note: Don’t enter less than -0- on any line.
1. Alimony paid in 2nd year ............................................ 1.  
2. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 2.  
3. Floor ........................................... 3. $15,000
4. Add lines 2 and 3 ................................................... 4.  
5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... 5.  
6. Alimony paid in 1st year ............................................. 6.  
7. Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year
(line 1 minus line 5) ............................... 7.  
8. Alimony paid in 3rd year ........................... 8.  
9. Add lines 7 and 8 ................................. 9.  
10. Divide line 9 by 2.0 ................................ 10.  
11. Floor ........................................... 11. $15,000
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ................................................. 12.  
13. Subtract line 12 from line 6 ............................................................. 13.  
14. Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13 ................................................. *14.  
. 
* If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 2a. 
 If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 19a.
Publication 504 (2025) 17

Page 18 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Benefits paid to a child or other dependent.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant’s child or other 
dependent are treated as paid to the participant. For infor-
mation about the tax treatment of benefits from retirement 
plans, see Pub. 575.
Benefits paid to a spouse or former spouse.  Benefits 
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant’s spouse or for-
mer spouse must generally be included in the spouse’s or 
former spouse’s income. If the participant contributed to 
the retirement plan, a prorated share of the participant’s 
cost (investment in the contract) is used to figure the taxa-
ble amount.
The spouse or former spouse can use the special rules 
for lump-sum distributions if the benefits would have been 
treated as a lump -sum distribution had the participant re-
ceived them. For this purpose, consider only the balance 
to the spouse’s or former spouse’s credit in determining 
whether the distribution is a total distribution. See 
Lump-Sum Distributions in Pub. 575 for information about 
the special rules.
Rollovers. If you receive an eligible rollover distribu-
tion under a QDRO as the plan participant’s spouse or for-
mer spouse, you may be able to roll it over tax free into an 
individual retirement arrangement (IRA) or another quali-
fied retirement plan.
For more information on the tax treatment of eligible 
rollover distributions, see Pub. 575.
Individual Retirement
Arrangements
The following discussions explain some of the effects of 
divorce or separation on IRAs.
Spousal IRA. If you get a final decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance by the end of your tax year, you can’t 
deduct contributions you make to your former spouse’s 
traditional IRA. T raditional IRAs are IRAs other than Roth 
or SIMPLE IRAs.
IRA transferred as a result of divorce.  The transfer of 
all or part of your interest in an IRA to your spouse or for-
mer spouse, under a decree of divorce or separate main-
tenance or a written instrument incident to the decree, 
isn’t considered a taxable transfer. Starting from the date 
of the transfer, the IRA interest transferred is treated as 
your spouse’s or former spouse’s IRA.
IRA contribution and deduction limits.  For the contri-
bution and deduction limits for IRAs, compensation in-
cludes any taxable alimony you receive under a decree or 
separate maintenance but only with respect to divorce or 
separation instruments executed on or before December 
31, 2018, that have not been modified to exclude such 
amounts.
For more information about IRAs, including Roth IRAs, 
see Pub. 590-A and Pub. 590-B.
Property Settlements
Generally, there is no recognized gain or loss on the trans-
fer of property between spouses, or between former spou-
ses, if the transfer is because of a divorce. Y ou may, how-
ever, have to report the transaction on a gift tax return. 
See Gift T ax on Property Settlements , later. If you sell 
property that you own jointly to split the proceeds as part 
of your property settlement, see Sale of Jointly Owned 
Property, later.
Transfer Between Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of 
property from you to (or in trust for the benefit of):
• Y our spouse, or
• Y our former spouse, but only if the transfer is incident 
to your divorce.
This rule applies even if the transfer was in exchange for 
cash, the release of marital rights, the assumption of liabil-
ities, or other consideration.
Exceptions to nonrecognition rule.  This rule doesn’t 
apply in the following situations.
• Y our spouse or former spouse is a nonresident alien.
• Certain transfers in trust, discussed later.
• Certain stock redemptions under a divorce or separa-
tion instrument or a valid written agreement that are 
taxable under applicable tax law, as discussed in Reg-
ulations section 1.1041-2.
Property subject to nonrecognition rule.  The term 
“property” includes all property whether real or personal, 
tangible or intangible, or separate or community. It in-
cludes property acquired after the end of your marriage 
and transferred to your former spouse. It doesn’t include 
services.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you transfer your in-
terest in an HSA to your spouse or former spouse under a 
divorce or separation instrument, it isn’t considered a tax-
able transfer. After the transfer, the interest is treated as 
your spouse’s HSA.
Archer medical savings account (MSA). If you transfer 
your interest in an Archer MSA to your spouse or former 
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument, it isn’t 
considered a taxable transfer. After the transfer, the inter-
est is treated as your spouse’s Archer MSA.
Individual retirement arrangement (IRA).  The treat-
ment of the transfer of an interest in an IRA as a result of 
divorce is similar to that just described for the transfer of 
an interest in an HSA and an Archer MSA. See IRA trans-
ferred as a result of divorce , earlier, under Individual Re-
tirement Arrangements.
18 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 19 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incident to divorce.  A property transfer is incident to 
your divorce if the transfer:
• Occurs within 1 year after the date your marriage 
ends, or
• Is related to the end of your marriage.
A divorce, for this purpose, includes the end of your mar-
riage by annulment or due to violations of state laws.
Related to end of marriage. A property transfer is re-
lated to the end of your marriage if both of the following 
conditions apply.
• The transfer is made under your original or modified 
divorce or separation instrument.
• The transfer occurs within 6 years after the date your 
marriage ends.
Unless these conditions are met, the transfer is pre-
sumed not to be related to the end of your marriage. How-
ever, this presumption won’t apply if you can show that the 
transfer was made to carry out the division of property 
owned by you and your spouse at the time your marriage 
ended. For example, the presumption won’t apply if you 
can show that the transfer was made more than 6 years 
after the end of your marriage because of business or le-
gal factors that prevented earlier transfer of the property 
and the transfer was made promptly after those factors 
were taken care of.
Transfers to third parties.  If you transfer property to a 
third party on behalf of your spouse (or former spouse, if 
incident to your divorce), the transfer is treated as two 
transfers.
• A transfer of the property from you to your spouse or 
former spouse.
• An immediate transfer of the property from your 
spouse or former spouse to the third party.
Y ou don’t recognize gain or loss on the first transfer. In-
stead, your spouse or former spouse may have to recog-
nize gain or loss on the second transfer.
For this treatment to apply, the transfer from you to the 
third party must be one of the following.
• Required by your divorce or separation instrument.
• Requested in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse.
• Consented to in writing by your spouse or former 
spouse. The consent must state that both you and 
your spouse or former spouse intend the transfer to be 
treated as a transfer from you to your spouse or former 
spouse subject to the rules of Internal Revenue Code 
section 1041. Y ou must receive the consent before fil-
ing your tax return for the year you transfer the prop-
erty.
This treatment doesn’t apply to transfers to which 
Regulations section 1. 1041-2 (certain stock re-
demptions) applies.
Transfers in trust. If you make a transfer of property in 
trust for the benefit of your spouse (or former spouse, if in-
CAUTION
!
cident to your divorce), you generally don’t recognize any 
gain or loss.
However, you must recognize gain or loss if, incident to 
your divorce, you transfer an installment obligation in trust 
for the benefit of your former spouse. For information on 
the disposition of an installment obligation, see Pub. 537.
Y ou must also recognize as gain on the transfer of prop-
erty in trust the amount by which the liabilities assumed by 
the trust, plus the liabilities to which the property is sub-
ject, exceed the total of your adjusted basis in the transfer-
red property.
Example. Y ou own property with a fair market value of 
$12,000 and an adjusted basis of $1,000. Y ou transfer the 
property in trust for the benefit of your spouse. The trust 
didn’t assume any liabilities. The property is subject to a 
$5,000 liability. Y our recognized gain is $4,000 ($5,000 − 
$1,000).
Reporting income from property. Y ou should report in-
come from property transferred to your spouse or former 
spouse as shown in T able 5, later.
For information on the treatment of interest on transfer-
red U.S. savings bonds, see chapter 1 of Pub. 550.
When you transfer property to your spouse (or for-
mer spouse, if incident to your divorce), you must 
give your spouse sufficient records to determine 
the adjusted basis and holding period of the property on 
the date of the transfer. If you transfer investment credit 
property with recapture potential, you must also provide 
sufficient records to determine the amount and period of 
the recapture.
Tax treatment of property received.  Property you re-
ceive from your spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is 
incident to your divorce) is treated as acquired by gift for 
income tax purposes. Its value isn’t taxable to you.
Basis of property received.  Y our basis in property re-
ceived from your spouse (or former spouse, if incident to 
your divorce) is the same as your spouse’s adjusted basis. 
This applies for determining either gain or loss when you 
later dispose of the property. It applies whether the prop-
erty’s adjusted basis is less than, equal to, or greater than 
either its value at the time of the transfer or any considera-
tion you paid. It also applies even if the property’s liabilities 
are more than its adjusted basis.
This rule generally applies to all property received after 
July 18, 1984, under a divorce or separation instrument in 
effect after that date. It also applies to all other property re-
ceived after 1983 for which you and your spouse (or for-
mer spouse) made a “section 1041 election”  to apply this 
rule. For information about how to make that election, see 
T emporary Regulations section 1.1041-1T(g).
Example. Y ou and your former spouse owned your 
home jointly. Y ou transferred your interest in the home to 
your former spouse when you divorced last year. Y our for-
mer spouse’s basis in the interest they received from you 
is your adjusted basis in the home. Y our former spouse’s 
total basis in the home is the joint adjusted basis.
RECORDS
Publication 504 (2025) 19

Page 20 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Property received before July 19, 1984.  Y our basis 
in property received in settlement of marital support rights 
before July 19, 1984, or under an instrument in effect be-
fore that date (other than property for which you and your 
spouse (or former spouse) made a “section 1041 elec-
tion”) is its fair market value when you received it.
Example. Y ou and your former spouse owned your 
home jointly before your divorce in 1983. That year, you 
received your former spouse’s interest in the home in set-
tlement of your marital support rights. Y our basis in the in-
terest you received from your former spouse is the part of 
the home’s fair market value proportionate to that interest. 
Y our total basis in the home is that part of the fair market 
value plus your adjusted basis in your own interest.
Property transferred in trust.  If the transferor recog-
nizes gain on property transferred in trust, as described 
earlier under T ransfers in trust, the trust’s basis in the 
property is increased by the recognized gain.
Example. Y our spouse transfers property in trust, rec-
ognizing a $4,000 gain. Y our spouse’s adjusted basis in 
the property was $1,000. The trust’s basis in the property 
is $5,000 ($1,000 + $4,000).
Gift Tax on Property Settlements
Generally, a transfer to a spouse who is a citizen of the 
United States isn’t subject to federal gift tax, because 
there is an unlimited deduction for transfers to a U.S. citi-
zen spouse. However, a transfer to a former spouse isn’t 
generally eligible for a marital deduction, and may be sub-
ject to federal gift tax unless the transfer qualifies for one 
or more of the exceptions explained in this discussion. If 
your transfer of property doesn’t qualify for an exception, 
or qualifies only in part, you must report it on a gift tax re-
turn. See Gift T ax Return, later.
For more information about the federal gift tax, see Es-
tate and Gift T axes in Pub. 559 and Form 709 and its in-
structions.
Exceptions
Y our transfer of property to your spouse or former spouse 
isn’t subject to gift tax if it meets any of the following ex-
ceptions.
• It is made in settlement of marital support rights.
• It qualifies for the marital deduction.
Property Transferred Pursuant to Divorce
The tax treatment of items of property transferred from you to your spouse or former spouse pursuant to your divorce is 
shown below.
IF you transfer... THEN you...
AND your spouse or 
former spouse...
FOR more information, 
see...
income-producing 
property (such as an 
interest in a business, 
rental property, stocks, 
or bonds)
include on your tax return 
any profit or loss, rental 
income or loss, dividends, 
or interest generated or 
derived from the property 
during the year until the 
property is transferred 
reports any income or 
loss generated or 
derived after the 
property is transferred. 
Pub. 550, Investment 
Income and Expenses. 
(See Ownership 
transferred under U.S. 
Savings Bonds in 
chapter 1.)
interest in a passive 
activity with unused 
passive activity losses
can’t deduct your 
accumulated unused 
passive activity losses 
allocable to the interest
increases the adjusted 
basis of the transferred 
interest by the amount of 
the unused losses. 
Pub. 925, Passive Activity 
and At-Risk Rules.
investment credit 
property with recapture 
potential
don’t have to recapture 
any part of the credit
may have to recapture 
part of the credit if they 
dispose of the property 
or change its use before 
the end of the recapture 
period. 
Form 4255, Certain Credit 
Recapture, Excessive 
Payments, and Penalties.
interests in nonstatutory 
stock options and 
nonqualified deferred 
compensation
don’t include any amount 
in gross income upon the 
transfer
includes an amount in 
gross income when they 
exercise the stock 
options or when the 
deferred compensation 
is paid or made available 
to them. 
T able 5.
20 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 21 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• It is made under a divorce decree.
• It is made under a written agreement, and you’re di-
vorced within a specified period.
• It qualifies for the annual exclusion.
• It qualifies for the unlimited exclusion for direct pay-
ments of tuition or medical care.
Settlement of marital support rights.  A transfer in set-
tlement of marital support rights isn’t subject to gift tax to 
the extent the value of the property transferred isn’t more 
than the value of those rights. This exception doesn’t ap-
ply to a transfer in settlement of dower, curtesy, or other 
marital property rights.
Marital deduction. A transfer of property to your spouse 
before receiving a final decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance isn’t subject to gift tax. However, this excep-
tion doesn’t apply to:
• T ransfers of certain terminable interests (for example, 
certain interests in trust), or
• T ransfers to your spouse if your spouse isn’t a U.S. 
citizen.
Transfer under divorce decree.  A transfer of property 
under the decree of a divorce court having the power to 
prescribe a property settlement isn’t subject to gift tax. 
This exception also applies to a property settlement 
agreed on before the divorce if it was made part of or ap-
proved by the decree.
Transfer under written agreement.  A transfer of prop-
erty under a written agreement in settlement of marital 
rights or to provide a reasonable child support allowance 
isn’t subject to gift tax if you’re divorced within the 3 -year 
period beginning 1 year before and ending 2 years after 
the date of the agreement. This exception applies whether 
or not the agreement is part of or approved by the divorce 
decree.
Annual exclusion. The first $19,000 of gifts of present 
interests to each person during 2025 isn’t subject to gift 
tax. This includes transfers to a former spouse or transfers 
to a current spouse that don’t qualify for the marital deduc-
tion. The annual exclusion is $190,000 for transfers to a 
spouse who isn’t a U.S. citizen provided the gift would oth-
erwise qualify for the gift tax marital deduction if the donee 
were a U.S. citizen.
Present interest. A gift is considered a present inter-
est if the donee has unrestricted rights to the immediate 
use, possession, and enjoyment of the property or income 
from the property.
Direct payments of tuition or medical care.  Direct 
payments of tuition to an educational organization or to 
any person or organization that provides medical care (in-
cluding direct payments to a health insurer) aren’t subject 
to federal gift tax. Therefore, such payments made for the 
benefit of a spouse or former spouse won’t be subject to 
federal gift tax.
Gift Tax Return
Report a transfer of property subject to gift tax on Form 
709. Generally, Form 709 is due April 15 following the year 
of the transfer.
Transfer under written agreement.  If a property trans-
fer would be subject to gift tax except that it is made under 
a written agreement, and you don’t receive a final decree 
of divorce by the due date for filing the gift tax return, you 
must report the transfer on Form 709 and attach a copy of 
your written agreement. The transfer will be treated as not 
subject to the gift tax until the final decree of divorce is 
granted, but no longer than 2 years after the effective date 
of the written agreement.
Within 60 days after you receive a final decree of di-
vorce, send a certified copy of the decree to the IRS office 
where you filed Form 709.
Sale of Jointly Owned Property
If you sell property that you and your spouse own jointly, 
you must report your share of the recognized gain or loss 
on your income tax return for the year of the sale. Y our 
share of the gain or loss is determined by your state law 
governing ownership of property. For information on re-
porting gain or loss, see Pub. 544.
Sale of home.  If you sold your main home, you may be 
able to exclude up to $250,000 (up to $500,000 if you and 
your spouse file a joint return) of gain on the sale. For 
more information, including special rules that apply to sep-
arated and divorced individuals selling a main home, see 
Pub. 523.
Costs of Getting a Divorce
Y ou can’t deduct legal fees and court costs for getting a di-
vorce. In addition, you can’t deduct legal fees paid for tax 
advice in connection with a divorce and legal fees to get 
alimony or fees you pay to appraisers, actuaries, and ac-
countants for services in determining your correct tax or in 
helping to get alimony.
Other nondeductible expenses.  Y ou can’t deduct the 
costs of personal advice, counseling, or legal action in a 
divorce. These costs aren’t deductible, even if they are 
paid, in part, to arrive at a financial settlement or to protect 
income-producing property.
Y ou also can’t deduct legal fees you pay for a property 
settlement. However, you can add it to the basis of the 
property you receive. For example, you can add the cost 
of preparing and filing a deed to put title to your house in 
your name alone to the basis of the house.
Finally, you can’t deduct fees you pay for your spouse 
or former spouse, unless your payments qualify as ali-
mony. (See Payments to a third party  under Alimony, ear-
lier.) If you have no legal responsibility arising from the di-
vorce settlement or decree to pay your spouse’s legal 
Publication 504 (2025) 21

Page 22 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fees, your payments are gifts and may be subject to the 
gift tax.
Tax Withholding
and Estimated Tax
When you become divorced or separated, you will usually 
have to file a new Form W -4 with your employer to claim 
your proper withholding. If you receive alimony, you may 
have to make estimated tax payments.
If you don’t pay enough tax either through with-
holding or by making estimated tax payments, you 
will have an underpayment of estimated tax and 
you may have to pay a penalty. If you don’t pay enough tax 
by the due date of each payment, you may have to pay a 
penalty even if you’re due a refund when you file your tax 
return.
For more information, see Pub. 505.
Joint estimated tax payments.  If you and your spouse 
made joint estimated tax payments for 2025 but file sepa-
rate returns, either of you can claim all of your payments, 
or you can divide them in any way on which you both 
agree. If you can’t agree, the estimated tax you can claim 
equals the total estimated tax paid times the tax shown on 
your separate return for 2025, divided by the total of the 
tax shown on your 2025 return and your spouse’s 2025 re-
turn. Y ou may want to attach an explanation of how you 
and your spouse divided the payments. Be sure to show 
both SSNs in the space provided on the separate returns.
If you got divorced in 2025 and you made joint estima-
ted tax payments with your former spouse, enter your for-
mer spouse's SSN in the space provided on line 26. If you 
were divorced and remarried in 2025, enter your present 
spouse's SSN in the space provided on the front of Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
Community Property
If you’re married and your domicile (permanent legal 
home) is in a community property state, special rules de-
termine your income. Some of these rules are explained in 
the following discussions. For more information, see Pub. 
555.
Community property states.  Community property 
states include:
• Arizona,
• California,
• Idaho,
• Louisiana,
• Nevada,
• New Mexico,
• T exas,
CAUTION
!
• Washington, and
• Wisconsin.
Community Income
If your domicile is in a community property state during 
any part of your tax year, you may have community in-
come. Y our state law determines whether your income is 
separate or community income. If you and your spouse file 
separate returns, you must report half of any income de-
scribed by state law as community income and all of your 
separate income, and your spouse must report the other 
half of any community income plus all of their separate in-
come. Each of you can claim credit for half the income tax 
withheld from community income.
Community Property Laws Disregarded
The following discussions are situations where special 
rules apply to community property.
Certain community income not treated as community 
income by one spouse.  Community property laws may 
not apply to an item of community income that you re-
ceived but didn’t treat as community income. Y ou will be 
responsible for reporting all of it if:
• Y ou treat the item as if only you’re entitled to the in-
come, and
• Y ou don’t notify your spouse of the nature and amount 
of the income by the due date for filing the return (in-
cluding extensions).
Relief from liability for tax attributable to an item of 
community income.  Y ou aren’t responsible for the tax 
on an item of community income if all five of the following 
conditions exist.
1. Y ou didn’t file a joint return for the tax year.
2. Y ou didn’t include an item of community income in 
gross income on your separate return.
3. The item of community income you didn’t include is 
one of the following.
a. Wages, salaries, and other compensation your 
spouse (or former spouse) received for services 
they performed as an employee.
b. Income your spouse (or former spouse) derived 
from a trade or business they operated as a sole 
proprietor.
c. Y our spouse’s (or former spouse’s) distributive 
share of partnership income.
d. Income from your spouse’s (or former spouse’s) 
separate property (other than income described in 
(a), (b), or (c)). Use the appropriate community 
property law to determine what is separate prop-
erty.
e. Any other income that belongs to your spouse (or 
former spouse) under community property law.
22 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 23 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Y ou establish that you didn’t know of, and had no rea-
son to know of, that community income.
5. Under all facts and circumstances, it wouldn’t be fair 
to include the item of community income in your gross 
income.
Equitable relief from liability for tax attributable to an 
item of community income.  T o be considered for equi-
table relief from liability for tax attributable to an item of 
community income, you must meet all of the following con-
ditions.
1. Y ou timely filed your claim for relief.
2. Y ou and your spouse (or former spouse) didn’t trans-
fer assets to one another as a part of a fraudulent 
scheme. A fraudulent scheme includes a scheme to 
defraud the IRS or another third party, such as a cred-
itor, former spouse, or business partner.
3. Y our spouse (or former spouse) didn’t transfer prop-
erty to you for the main purpose of avoiding tax or the 
payment of tax.
4. Y ou didn’t knowingly participate in the filing of a frau-
dulent joint return.
5. The income tax liability from which you seek relief is 
attributable (either in full or in part) to an item of your 
spouse (or former spouse) or an unpaid tax resulting 
from your spouse’s (or former spouse’s) income. If the 
liability is partially attributable to you, then relief can 
only be considered for the part of the liability attributa-
ble to your spouse (or former spouse). The IRS will 
consider granting relief regardless of whether the un-
derstated tax, deficiency, or unpaid tax is attributable 
(in full or in part) to you if any of the following excep-
tions apply.
a. The item is attributable or partially attributable to 
you solely due to the operation of community 
property law. If you meet this exception, that item 
will be considered attributable to your spouse (or 
former spouse) for purposes of equitable relief.
b. If the item is titled in your name, the item is pre-
sumed to be attributable to you. However, you can 
rebut this presumption based on the facts and cir-
cumstances.
c. Y ou didn’t know, and had no reason to know, that 
funds intended for the payment of tax were misap-
propriated by your spouse (or former spouse) for 
their benefit. If you meet this exception, the IRS 
will consider granting equitable relief although the 
unpaid tax may be attributable in part or in full to 
your item, and only to the extent the funds inten-
ded for payment were taken by your spouse (or 
former spouse).
d. Y ou establish that you were the victim of spousal 
abuse or domestic violence before the return was 
filed, and that, as a result of the prior abuse, you 
didn’t challenge the treatment of any items on the 
return for fear of your spouse’s (or former spou-
se’s) retaliation. If you meet this exception, relief 
will be considered even though the understated 
tax or unpaid tax may be attributable in part or in 
full to your item.
e. The item giving rise to the understated tax or defi-
ciency is attributable to you, but you establish that 
your spouse’s (or former spouse’s) fraud is the 
reason for the erroneous item.
Requesting relief. For information on how and when 
to request relief from liabilities arising from community 
property laws, see Community Property Laws in Pub. 971.
Spousal agreements. In some states, spouses may en-
ter into an agreement that affects the status of property or 
income as community or separate property. Check your 
state law to determine how it affects you.
Spouses living apart all year.  If you’re married at any 
time during the calendar year, special rules apply for re-
porting certain community income. Y ou must meet all of 
the following conditions for these special rules to apply.
1. Y ou and your spouse lived apart all year.
2. Y ou and your spouse didn’t file a joint return for a tax 
year beginning or ending in the calendar year.
3. Y ou and/or your spouse had earned income for the 
calendar year that is community income.
4. Y ou and your spouse haven’t transferred, directly or 
indirectly, any of the earned income in (3) between 
yourselves before the end of the year. Don’t take into 
account transfers satisfying child support obligations 
or transfers of very small amounts or value.
If all these conditions exist, you and your spouse must 
report your community income as explained in the follow-
ing discussions. See also Certain community income not 
treated as community income by one spouse, earlier.
Earned income. T reat earned income that isn’t trade 
or business or partnership income as the income of the 
spouse who performed the services to earn the income. 
Earned income is wages, salaries, professional fees, and 
other pay for personal services.
Earned income doesn’t include amounts paid by a cor-
poration that are a distribution of earnings and profits 
rather than a reasonable allowance for personal services 
rendered.
Trade or business income. T reat income and related 
deductions from a trade or business that isn’t a partner-
ship as those of the spouse carrying on the trade or busi-
ness.
Partnership income or loss.  T reat income or loss 
from a trade or business carried on by a partnership as the 
income or loss of the spouse who is the partner.
Separate property income.  T reat income from the 
separate property of one spouse as the income of that 
spouse.
Social security benefits.  T reat social security and 
equivalent railroad retirement benefits as the income of 
the spouse who receives the benefits.
Publication 504 (2025) 23

Page 24 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other income.  T reat all other community income, 
such as dividends, interest, rents, royalties, or gains, as 
provided under your state’s community property law.
Example. George and Sharon were married through-
out the year but didn’t live together at any time during the 
year. Both domiciles were in a community property state. 
They didn’t file a joint return or transfer any of their earned 
income between themselves. During the year, their in-
comes were as follows:
George Sharon 
Wages ...................... $20,000 $22,000 
Consulting business ...........   5,000 
Partnership ..................  10,000 
Dividends from separate 
property .....................   1,000   2,000 
Interest from community 
property .....................     500     500 
Totals $26,500 $34,500 
Under the community property law of their state, all the 
income is considered community income. (Some states 
treat income from separate property as separate in-
come—check your state law.) Sharon didn’t take part in 
George’s consulting business.
Ordinarily, on their separate returns they would each re-
port $30,500, half the total community income of $61,000 
($26,500 + $34,500). But because they meet the four con-
ditions listed earlier under Spouses living apart all year , 
they must disregard community property law in reporting 
all their income (except the interest income) from com-
munity property. They each report on their returns only 
their own earnings and other income, and their share of 
the interest income from community property. George re-
ports $26,500 and Sharon reports $34,500.
Other separated spouses.  If you and your spouse are 
separated but don’t meet the four conditions discussed 
earlier under Spouses living apart all year , you must treat 
your income according to the laws of your state. In some 
states, income earned after separation but before a de-
cree of divorce continues to be community income. In 
other states, it is separate income.
Ending the Marital Community
When the marital community ends as a result of divorce or 
separation, the community assets (money and property) 
are divided between the spouses. Each spouse is taxed 
on half the community income for the part of the year be-
fore the community ends. However, see Spouses living 
apart all year , earlier. Income received after the commun-
ity ended is separate income, taxable only to the spouse 
to whom it belongs.
An absolute decree of divorce or annulment ends the 
marital community in all community property states. A de-
cree of annulment, even though it holds that no valid mar-
riage ever existed, usually doesn’t nullify community 
property rights arising during the “marriage.” However, you 
should check your state law for exceptions.
A decree of legal separation or of separate mainte-
nance may or may not end the marital community. The 
court issuing the decree may terminate the marital com-
munity and divide the property between the spouses.
A separation agreement may divide the community 
property between you and your spouse. It may provide 
that this property, along with future earnings and property 
acquired, will be separate property. This agreement may 
end the community.
In some states, the marital community ends when the 
spouses permanently separate, even if there is no formal 
agreement. Check your state law.
Alimony (Community Income)
Payments that may otherwise qualify as alimony aren’t de-
ductible by the payer if they are the recipient spouse’s part 
of community income. They are deductible by the payer as 
alimony and taxable to the recipient spouse only to the ex-
tent they are more than that spouse’s part of community 
income.
Example. Y ou live in a community property state. 
Y ou’re separated but the special rules explained earlier 
under Spouses living apart all year  don’t apply. Under a 
written agreement, you pay your spouse $12,000 of your 
$20,000 total yearly community income. Y our spouse re-
ceives no other community income. Under your state law, 
earnings of a spouse living separately and apart from the 
other spouse continue as community property.
On your separate returns, each of you must report 
$10,000 of the total community income. In addition, your 
spouse must report $2,000 as alimony received. Y ou can 
deduct $2,000 as alimony paid.
Amounts paid as alimony or separate mainte-
nance payments under a divorce or separation in-
strument executed after 2018 won’t be deductible 
by the payer. Such amounts also won’t be includible in the 
income of the recipient. The same is true of alimony paid 
under a divorce or separation instrument executed before 
2019 and modified after 2018 if the modification expressly 
states that the alimony isn’t deductible to the payer or in-
cludible in the income of the recipient.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need help prepar-
ing your tax return; or want to download free publications, 
forms, or instructions, go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Tax reform.  T ax reform legislation impacting federal 
taxes, credits, and deductions was enacted in P .L. 119-21, 
commonly known as the One Big Beautiful Bill Act, on July 
CAUTION
!
24 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 25 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4, 2025. Go to IRS.gov/OBBB for more information and 
updates on how this legislation affects your taxes.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After receiving all 
your wage and earnings statements (Forms W -2, W -2G, 
1099-R, 1099 -MISC, 1099 -NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 1099 -G); 
and interest, dividend, and retirement statements from 
banks and investment firms (Forms 1099), you have sev-
eral options to choose from to prepare and file your tax re-
turn. Y ou can prepare the tax return yourself, see if you 
qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Y our options for pre-
paring and filing your return online or in your local com-
munity, if you qualify, include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare and file your 
federal individual income tax return for free using soft-
ware or Free File Fillable Forms. However, state tax 
preparation may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for free online 
federal tax preparation, e-filing, and direct deposit or 
payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people with 
low-to-moderate incomes, persons with disabilities, 
and limited-English-speaking taxpayers who need 
help preparing their own tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information on free tax return prepa-
ration.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, particularly 
those who are 60 years of age and older. TCE volun-
teers specialize in answering questions about pen-
sions and retirement-related issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or download the free IRS2Go app 
for information on free tax return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed Forces and quali-
fied veterans may use MilT ax, a free tax service of-
fered by the Department of Defense through Military 
OneSource. For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, which can 
be completed online and then e -filed regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if you’re eligible for the 
earned income credit (EITC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) helps you 
get an employer identification number (EIN) at no 
cost.
• The T ax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to estimate the federal income 
tax you want your employer to withhold from your pay-
check. This is tax withholding. See how your withhold-
ing affects your refund, take-home pay, or tax due.
• The Sales T ax Deduction Calculator (IRS.gov/
SalesT ax) figures the amount you can claim if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax questions.  On 
IRS.gov, you can get up -to-date information on 
current events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you get an-
swers to some of the most common tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive T ax Assistant, a tool that 
will ask you questions and, based on your input, pro-
vide answers on a number of tax topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Y ou will find details on the most recent tax 
changes and interactive links to help you find answers 
to your questions.
• Y ou may also be able to access tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return?  There are 
various types of tax return preparers, including enrolled 
agents, certified public accountants (CPAs), accountants, 
and many others who don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone prepare your tax return, 
choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall substantive accu-
racy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax identification 
number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the return, 
you’re ultimately responsible for providing all the 
information required for the preparer to accurately 
prepare your return and for the accuracy of every item re-
ported on the return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns 
for others should have a thorough understanding of tax 
matters. For more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a T ax Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use Business Services On-
line. The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers on-
line service at SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, and secure 
W-2 filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement; and Form W -2c, Corrected Wage and T ax 
Statement.
Business tax account.  If you are a sole proprietor, a 
partnership, an S corporation, a C corporation, or a sin-
gle-member limited liability company (LLC), you can view 
your tax information on record with the IRS and do more 
with a business tax account. Go to IRS.gov/
BusinessAccount for more information.
CAUTION
!
Publication 504 (2025) 25

Page 26 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia to see the 
various social media tools the IRS uses to share the latest 
information on tax changes, scam alerts, initiatives, prod-
ucts, and services. At the IRS, privacy and security are our 
highest priority. We use these tools to share public infor-
mation with you. Don’t post your social security number 
(SSN) or other confidential information on social media 
sites. Always protect your identity when using any social 
networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube channels provide short, in-
formative videos on various tax -related topics in English, 
Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Online tax information in other languages.  Y ou can 
find information on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if English isn’t 
your native language.
Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Service. The IRS of-
fers the OPI Service to taxpayers needing language inter-
pretation. The OPI Service is available at T axpayer Assis-
tance Centers (TACs), most IRS offices, and every 
VITA/TCE tax return site. This service is available in Span-
ish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Korean, Vietnamese, Russian, 
and Haitian Creole.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpayers with 
disabilities. T axpayers who need information about ac-
cessibility services can call 833 -690-0598. The Accessi-
bility Helpline can answer questions related to current and 
future accessibility products and services available in al-
ternative media formats (for example, braille -ready, large 
print, audio, etc.). The Accessibility Helpline does not 
have access to your IRS account. For help with tax law, re-
funds, or account -related issues, go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp.
Alternative media preference.  Form 9000, Alternative 
Media Preference, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
receive certain types of written correspondence in the fol-
lowing formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille-Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/DisasterRelief to review the 
available disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to IRS.gov/
Forms to view, download, or print all the forms, instruc-
tions, and publications you may need. Or you can go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an order.
Mobile-friendly forms.  Y ou’ll need an IRS Online Ac-
count (OLA) to complete mobile-friendly forms that require 
signatures. Y ou’ll have the option to submit your form(s) 
online or download a copy for mailing. Y ou’ll need scans of 
your documents to support your submission. Go to 
IRS.gov/MobileFriendlyForms for more information.
Getting tax publications and instructions in eBook 
format. Download and view most tax publications and in-
structions (including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested using Apple’s iBooks for 
iPad. Our eBooks haven’t been tested on other dedicated 
eBook readers, and eBook functionality may not operate 
as intended.
Access your online account (individual taxpayers 
only). Go to IRS.gov/Account to securely access infor-
mation about your federal tax account.
• View the amount you owe and a breakdown by tax 
year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a new payment 
plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of payment history 
and any pending or scheduled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key data from your 
most recent tax return, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests from tax pro-
fessionals.
Get a transcript of your return. With an online account, 
you can access a variety of information to help you during 
the filing season. Y ou can get a transcript, review your 
most recently filed tax return, and get your adjusted gross 
income. Create or access your online account at IRS.gov/
Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax professional 
submit an authorization request to access your individual 
taxpayer IRS OLA. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest and easiest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to e-file and choose direct deposit, 
which securely and electronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. Direct deposit also 
avoids the possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their refunds. If 
you don’t have a bank account, go to IRS.gov/
DirectDeposit for more information on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an account online.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related identity 
theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft happens when someone 
steals your personal information to commit tax fraud. 
26 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 27 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Y our taxes can be affected if your SSN is used to file a 
fraudulent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with taxpayers by 
email, text messages (including shortened links), tele-
phone calls, or social media channels to request or 
verify personal or financial information. This includes 
requests for personal identification numbers (PINs), 
passwords, or similar information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Identity Theft 
Central webpage, for information on identity theft and 
data security protection for taxpayers, tax professio-
nals, and businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn what steps you should 
take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP PINs are 
six-digit numbers assigned to taxpayers to help pre-
vent the misuse of their SSNs on fraudulent federal in-
come tax returns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your mobile de-
vice to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue refunds before mid -February 
for returns that claimed the EITC or the additional 
child tax credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire 
refund, not just the portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS recommends paying 
electronically whenever possible. Options to pay electroni-
cally are included in the list below. Payments of U.S. tax 
must be remitted to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital assets 
are not accepted. Go to IRS.gov/Payments for information 
on how to make a payment using any of the following op-
tions.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay taxes from your bank account. It’s 
free and secure, and no sign-in is required. Y ou can 
change or cancel within 2 days of scheduled payment.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or Digital Wallet: Choose an 
approved payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a payment 
when filing your federal taxes using tax return prepara-
tion software or through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal T ax Payment System: This is the 
best option for businesses. Enrollment is required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment to the ad-
dress listed on the notice or instructions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay your taxes with cash at 
a participating retail store.
CAUTION
!
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be able to do same-day 
wire from your financial institution. Contact your finan-
cial institution for availability, cost, and time frames.
Note: The IRS uses the latest encryption technology to 
ensure that the electronic payments you make online, by 
phone, or from a mobile device using the IRS2Go app are 
safe and secure. Paying electronically is quick and easy.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/Payments for 
more information about your options.
• Apply for an online payment agreement (IRS.gov/
OPA) to meet your tax obligation in monthly install-
ments if you can’t pay your taxes in full today. Once 
you complete the online process, you will receive im-
mediate notification of whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier to see if 
you can settle your tax debt for less than the full 
amount you owe. For more information on the Offer in 
Compromise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/1040X for in-
formation and updates.
Checking the status of your amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of Form 1040 -X amen-
ded returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks from the date you filed 
your amended return for it to show up in our sys-
tem, and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter you’ve re-
ceived. Go to IRS.gov/Notices to find additional informa-
tion about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
IRS Document Upload Tool.  Y ou may be able to use 
the Document Upload T ool to respond digitally to eligible 
IRS notices and letters by securely uploading required 
documents online through IRS.gov. For more information, 
go to IRS.gov/DUT.
Schedule LEP . Y ou can use Schedule LEP (Form 1040), 
Request for Change in Language Preference, to state a 
preference to receive notices, letters, or other written com-
munications from the IRS in an alternative language. Y ou 
may not immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment to LEP 
taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline that began pro-
viding translations in 2023. Y ou will continue to receive 
communications, including notices and letters, in English 
until they are translated to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC.  Keep in mind, many ques-
tions can be answered on IRS.gov without visiting a TAC. 
Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask about 
most. If you still need help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. All TACs 
now provide service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need without long 
wait times. Before you visit, go to IRS.gov/TAC to find the 
CAUTION
!
Publication 504 (2025) 27

Page 28 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nearest TAC and to check hours, available services, and 
appointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, under the 
Stay Connected tab, choose the Contact Us option and 
click on “Local Offices.”
————————————————————————
Below is a message to you from the T axpayer Advocate 
Service, an independent organization established by Con-
gress.
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) 
Is Here To Help You
What Is the Taxpayer Advocate Service?
The T axpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent 
organization within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 
TAS helps taxpayers resolve problems with the IRS, 
makes administrative and legislative recommendations to 
prevent or correct the problems, and protects taxpayer 
rights. We work to ensure that every taxpayer is treated 
fairly and that you know and understand your rights under 
the T axpayer Bill of Rights. We are Y our Voice at the IRS.
How Can TAS Help Me?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you haven’t been 
able to resolve with the IRS on your own. Always try to re-
solve your problem with the IRS first, but if you can’t, then 
come to TAS. Our services are free.
• TAS helps all taxpayers (and their representatives), in-
cluding individuals, businesses, and exempt organiza-
tions. Y ou may be eligible for TAS help if your IRS 
problem is causing financial difficulty, if you’ve tried 
and been unable to resolve your issue with the IRS, or 
if you believe an IRS system, process, or procedure 
just isn’t working as it should.
• T o get help any time with general tax topics, visit 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov. The site can help 
you with common tax issues and situations, such as 
what to do if you make a mistake on your return or if 
you get a notice from the IRS.
• TAS works to resolve large-scale (systemic) problems 
that affect many taxpayers. Y ou can report systemic is-
sues at www.IRS.gov/SAMS. (Be sure not to include 
any personal identifiable information.)
How Do I Contact TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of Columbia, 
and Puerto Rico. T o find your local advocate’s number:
• Go to www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us,
• Check your local directory, or
• Call TAS toll free at 877-777-4778.
What Are My Rights as a Taxpayer?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights describes ten basic rights that 
all taxpayers have when dealing with the IRS. Go to 
www.T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/T axpayer-Rights for 
more information about the rights, what they mean to you, 
and how they apply to specific situations you may encoun-
ter with the IRS. TAS strives to protect taxpayer rights and 
ensure the IRS is administering the tax law in a fair and 
equitable way.
28 Publication 504 (2025)

Page 29 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
A
Absence, temporary 6
Address, change of 1
Aliens (See Nonresident aliens)
Alimony 12
Community income 24
Deductibility 12
Defined 12
Inclusion in income 12
Not treated as child support 10
Annual exclusion, gift tax 21
Annulment decrees:
Absolute decree 24
Amended return required 3
Considered unmarried 3
Archer MSA 18
Assistance (See T ax help)
B
Basis:
Property received in settlement 19
Benefits paid under QDROs 18
Birth of dependent 6
C
Change of address 1
Change of name 1
Child custody 8
Child support:
Alimony, difference from 13
Clearly associated with 
contingency 15
Contingency relating to child 15
Payment specifically designated 
as 15
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement 10
Children:
Birth of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 6
Claiming parent, when child is head 
of household 6
Custody of 8
Death of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 6
Photographs of missing children 1
Community income 22-24
Community property 22-24
(See also Community income)
Ending the marital community 24
Laws disregarded 22
States 22
Costs of getting divorce:
Nondeductible expenses 21
Nondeductible, generally 21
Other nondeductible expenses 21
Custody of child 8
D
Death of dependent 6
Death of recipient spouse. 14
Debts of spouse:
Refund applied to 3
Deductions:
Alimony paid 12
Alimony recapture 16
Limits on IRAs 18
Marital 21
Dependents:
Qualifying child 6
Qualifying child (T able 3)8
Qualifying relative 6
Qualifying relative (T able 3)8
Social security numbers 1
Divorce decrees:
Absolute decree 24
Amended 12
Defined for purposes of alimony 12
Invalid 12
Unmarried persons 2
Divorced parents 7
Child custody 8
Domestic relations orders 
(See Qualified domestic relations 
orders (QDROs))
Domicile 22
E
Earned income 23
Equitable relief (See Relief from joint 
liability)
Estimated tax 22
Joint payments 22
F
Filing status 2
Head of household 5
Form 1040:
Deducting alimony paid before 
2019 12
Reporting alimony received 12
Form 1040-X:
Annulment, decree of 3
Form 8332:
Release of claims to an exemption 
to noncustodial parent 9
Form 8379:
Injured spouse 3
Form 8857:
Innocent spouse relief 3
Form W-4:
Withholding 22
Form W-7:
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 1
Former spouse:
Defined for purposes of alimony 12
G
Gift tax 20, 21
H
Head of household 5
Health savings accounts (HSAs) 18
Home owned jointly:
Alimony payments for 13
Sale of 21
HSAs (Health savings accounts) 18
I
Identification number 1
Income 22
(See also Community income)
Alimony received 12
Individual retirement arrangements 
(IRAs) 18
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs):
Processing 1
Injured spouse 3
Innocent spouse relief 3
Insurance premiums 13
Invalid decree 12
IRAs (Individual retirement 
arrangements) 18
Itemized deductions on separate 
returns 4
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) 1
J
Joint liability:
Relief from 1, 3
Joint returns 3
Change from separate return 4
Change to separate return 4
Divorced taxpayers 3
Joint and individual liability 3
Relief from joint liability 3
Signing 3
Jointly owned home:
Alimony payments for 13
Sale of 21
K
Kidnapped child:
Head of household status and 6
L
Liability for taxes (See Relief from 
joint liability)
Publication 504 (2025) 29

Page 30 of 30  Fileid: … cation-504/2025/a/xml/cycle08/source 8:35 - 13-Nov-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Life insurance premiums as 
alimony 13
M
Marital community, ending 24
Marital status 2
Married persons 3
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 18
Missing children, photographs of 1
Mortgage payments as alimony 13
MSAs (Medical savings 
accounts) 18
N
Name, change of 1
Nondeductible expenses 21
Nonresident aliens:
Joint returns 3
Withholding 13
P
Parent:
Head of household, claim for 6
Parents, divorced or separated 7
Property settlements 18-21
Publications 2
(See also T ax help)
Q
Qualified domestic relations orders 
(QDROs) 17, 18
Qualifying child, tests for claiming 
(Table 3) 8
Qualifying person, head of 
household 6
T able 27
Qualifying relative, tests for 
claiming (Table 3) 8
R
Recapture of alimony 16
Refunds:
Spouse debts, applied to 3
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent 9
Relief from joint liability 1, 3
Relief from separate return liability:
Community income 22
Reporting requirements:
Alimony received 12
Returns:
Amended return required 2
Joint (See Joint returns)
Separate (See Separate returns)
Revocation of release of claim to 
an exemption 10
Rollovers 18
S
Sales of jointly owned property 21
Section 1041 election 19
Separate maintenance decrees 2, 
12, 24
Separate returns 4
Change to or from joint return 4
Community or separate income 4
Itemized deductions 4
Relief from liability 22
Separate liability 4
T ax consequences4
Separated parents 7
Separation agreements 24
Defined for purposes of alimony 12
Separation of liability (See Relief 
from joint liability)
Settlement of property 
(See Property settlements)
Social security benefits 23
Social security numbers (SSNs):
Alimony recipient’s number 
required 12
Dependents 1
Spousal IRA 18
Spouse:
Defined for purposes of alimony 12
Refund applied to debts 3
Statute of limitations:
Amended return 2
Injured spouse allocation 4
T
Tables and figures:
Expenses for a jointly owned home 
(T able 4)14
Itemized deductions on separate 
returns (T able 1)5
Property transferred pursuant to 
divorce (T able 5)20
Qualifying person for head of 
household (T able 2)7
Rules for claiming dependents 
(T able 3)8
Tax help 24
Tax withholding (See Withholding)
Taxpayer identification numbers:
Processing 1
Renewal 1
Third parties:
Alimony payments to 13, 14
Property settlements, transfers 
to 19
Tiebreaker rules 10
U
Underpayment of alimony 13
Unmarried persons 2
W
Withholding:
Change of 22
Nonresident aliens 13
Worksheets:
Recapture of alimony (Worksheet 
1) 17
30 Publication 504 (2025)