Contents
What's New .................. 1
Reminders ................... 1
Introduction .................. 2
Who Must File ................. 3
Who Should File ............... 4
Filing Status .................. 5
Exemptions .................. 9
Exemptions for Dependents ....... 11
Social Security Numbers for 
Dependents .............. 22
Standard Deduction ............ 22
2012 Standard Deduction 
Tables ................ 24
How To Get Tax Help ........... 25
Index ..................... 28
What's New
Who must file.  In some cases, the amount of 
income you can receive before you must file a 
tax return has increased. Table 1 shows the fil­
ing requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de­
duct for each exemption has increased. It was 
$3,700 for 2011. It is $3,800 for 2012.
Standard deduction increased.  The stand­
ard deduction for some taxpayers who do not 
itemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form 
1040 is higher for 2012 than it was for 2011. 
The amount depends on your filing status. You 
can use the 2012 Standard Deduction Tables 
near the end of this publication to figure your 
standard deduction.
Reminders
Future developments.  Information about any 
future developments affecting Publication 501 
(such as legislation enacted after we release it) 
will be posted at www.irs.gov/pub501.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens.
If you are a nonresident or resident alien and 
you do not have and are not eligible to get a so­
cial security number (SSN), you must apply for 
an individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN). Your spouse also may need an ITIN if he 
or she does not have and is not eligible to get 
an SSN. See Form W­7, Application for IRS In­
dividual Taxpayer Identification Number. Also, 
see Social Security Numbers for Dependents , 
later.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter­
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil­
dren. Photographs of missing children selected 
by the Center may appear in this publication on 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U
Exemptions,
Standard
Deduction,
and Filing 
Information
For use in preparing
2012 Returns
Get forms and other Information
faster and easier by:
Internet IRS.gov
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 99% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 29  15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 10, 2013

pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1­800­THE­LOST 
(1­800­843­5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication discusses some tax rules that 
affect every person who may have to file a fed­
eral income tax return. It answers some basic 
questions: who must file; who should file; what 
filing status to use; how many exemptions to 
claim; and the amount of the standard deduc­
tion.
Who Must File  explains who must file an in­
come tax return. If you have little or no gross in­
come, reading this section will help you decide 
if you have to file a return.
Who Should File  helps you decide if you 
should file a return, even if you are not required 
to do so.
Filing Status helps you determine which fil­
ing status to use. Filing status is important in 
determining whether you must file a return and 
whether you may claim certain deductions and 
credits. It also helps determine your standard 
deduction and tax rate.
Exemptions, which reduce your taxable in­
come, are discussed in Exemptions.
Exemptions for Dependents  explains the 
difference between a qualifying child and a 
qualifying relative. Other topics include the so­
cial security number requirement for depend­
ents, the rules for multiple support agreements, 
and the rules for divorced or separated parents.
Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol­
lar amounts for the standard deduction — a 
benefit for taxpayers who do not itemize their 
deductions. This section also discusses the 
standard deduction for taxpayers who are blind 
or age 65 or older, as well as special rules that 
limit the standard deduction available to de­
pendents. In addition, this section helps you de­
cide whether you would be better off taking the 
standard deduction or itemizing your deduc­
tions.
How To Get Tax Help  explains how to get 
tax help from the IRS.
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi­
dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must follow the same tax 
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules to de­
termine if you are a resident or nonresident 
alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresident 
alien at any time during the year, the rules and 
tax forms that apply to you may be different 
from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Pub­
lication 519.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Individual and Specialty Forms and 
Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR­6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. 
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in­
clude your daytime phone number, including 
the area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at taxforms@irs.gov. 
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub­
ject line. You can also send us comments from 
www.irs.gov/formspubs. Select “Comment on 
Tax Forms and Publications” under “More Infor­
mation.”
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and 
publications, call 1­800­TAX­FORM 
(1­800­829­3676), or write to the address below 
and receive a response within 10 days after 
your request is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705­6613
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, 
check the information available on IRS.gov or 
call 1­800­829­1040. We cannot answer tax 
questions sent to either of the above ad­
dresses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
Tax Rules for Children and 
Dependents
Form (and Instructions)
Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
Power of Attorney and Declaration 
of Representative
Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
   559
   929
  1040X
   2848
   8332
   8814
Table 1. 2012 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2012 you 
were...*
THEN file a return 
if your gross 
income was at 
least...**
single under 65  $9,750
65 or older $11,200
head of household under 65 $12,500
65 or older $13,950
married, filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $19,500
65 or older (one spouse) $20,650
65 or older (both spouses) $21,800
married, filing separately any age  $3,800
qualifying widow(er) with 
dependent child
under 65 $15,700
65 or older $16,850
* If you were born before January 2, 1948, you are considered to be 65 or older at the 
end of 2012.
**Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, 
property, and services that is not exempt from tax, including any income from 
sources outside the United States or from the sale of your main home (even if you 
can exclude part or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits unless (a) 
you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time 
during 2012 or (b) one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross 
income and any tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing 
jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the Form 1040 instructions to figure the taxable part 
of social security benefits you must include in gross income. Gross income includes 
gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a 
business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F, 
line 9. But in figuring gross income, do not reduce your income by any losses, 
including any loss on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F, line 9.
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2012 (or on the date your spouse 
died) and your gross income was at least $3,800, you must file a return regardless of 
your age.
Page 2 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 501 (2012)

Who Must File
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, 
whether you must file a federal income tax re­
turn depends on your gross income, your filing 
status, your age, and whether you are a de­
pendent. For details, see Table 1 and Table 2. 
You also must file if one of the situations descri­
bed in Table 3 applies. The filing requirements 
apply even if you owe no tax.
You may have to pay a penalty if you are re­
quired to file a return but fail to do so. If you will­
fully fail to file a return, you may be subject to 
criminal prosecution.
For information on what form to use — Form 
1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the 
instructions for your tax return.
Gross income.  Gross income is all income 
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop­
erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If 
you are married and live with your spouse in a 
community property state, half of any income 
defined by state law as community income may 
be considered yours. For a list of community 
property states, see Community property states 
under Married Filing Separately, later.
Self-employed persons.  If you are 
self­employed in a business that provides serv­
ices (where products are not a factor), your 
gross income from that business is the gross re­
ceipts. If you are self­employed in a business 
involving manufacturing, merchandising, or 
mining, your gross income from that business is 
the total sales minus the cost of goods sold. In 
either case, you must add any income from in­
vestments and from incidental or outside opera­
tions or sources.
You must file Form 1040 if you owe 
any self-employment tax.
Filing status.  Your filing status generally de­
pends on whether you are single or married. 
Whether you are single or married is deter­
mined as of the last day of your tax year, which 
is December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing sta­
tus is discussed in detail later in this publication.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must 
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end 
of your tax year. For 2012, you are 65 or older if 
you were born before January 2, 1948.
Filing Requirements
for Most Taxpayers
You must file a return if your gross income for 
the year was at least the amount shown on the 
appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should 
see Table 2 instead.
Deceased Persons
You must file an income tax return for a dece­
dent (a person who died) if both of the following 
are true.
1. You are the surviving spouse, executor, 
administrator, or legal representative.
TIP
2. The decedent met the filing requirements 
described in this publication at the time of 
his or her death.
For more information, see Final Income Tax 
Return for Decedent — Form 1040  in Publica­
tion 559.
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
To determine whether you must file a return, in­
clude in your gross income any income you 
earned or received abroad, including any in­
come you can exclude under the foreign earned 
income exclusion. For more information on spe­
cial tax rules that may apply to you, see Publi­
cation 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi­
dent Aliens Abroad.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you generally must file 
a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the whole year, your U.S. gross income 
does not include income from sources within 
Puerto Rico. It does, however, include any in­
come you received for your services as an em­
ployee of the United States or any U.S. agency. 
If you receive income from Puerto Rican sour­
ces that is not subject to U.S. tax, you must re­
duce your standard deduction, which reduces 
the amount of income you can have before you 
must file a U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Publication 570, 
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income From 
U.S. Possessions.
Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Possessions
If you had income from Guam, the Common­
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri­
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad­
dition, you may have to file a return with the in­
dividual possession government. See Publica­
tion 570 for more information.
Dependents
A person who is a dependent may still have to 
file a return. It depends on his or her earned in­
come, unearned income, and gross income. 
For details, see Table 2. A dependent must also 
file if one of the situations described in Table 3 
applies.
Responsibility of parent. If a dependent child 
must file an income tax return but cannot file 
due to age or any other reason, a parent, guard­
ian, or other legally responsible person must file 
it for the child. If the child cannot sign the return, 
the parent or guardian must sign the child's 
name followed by the words “By (your signa­
ture), parent for minor child.”
Earned income.  Earned income includes sal­
aries, wages, professional fees, and other 
amounts received as pay for work you actually 
perform. Earned income (only for purposes of 
filing requirements and the standard deduction) 
also includes any part of a scholarship that you 
must include in your gross income. See chap­
ter 1 of Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Educa­
tion, for more information on taxable and non­
taxable scholarships.
Child's earnings.  Amounts a child earns 
by performing services are included in his or her 
gross income and not the gross income of the 
parent. This is true even if under local law the 
child's parent has the right to the earnings and 
may actually have received them. But if the 
child does not pay the tax due on this income, 
the parent is liable for the tax.
Unearned income.  Unearned income in­
cludes income such as interest, dividends, and 
capital gains. Trust distributions of interest, divi­
dends, capital gains, and survivor annuities are 
also considered unearned income.
Election to report child's unearned income 
on parent's return.  You may be able to in­
clude your child's interest and dividend income 
on your tax return. If you do this, your child will 
not have to file a return. To make this election, 
all of the following conditions must be met.
Your child was under age 19 (or under age 
24 if a student) at the end of 2012. (A child 
born on January 1, 1994, is considered to 
be age 19 at the end of 2012; you cannot 
make the election for this child unless the 
child was a student. Similarly, a child born 
on January 1, 1989, is considered to be 
age 24 at the end of 2012; you cannot 
make the election for this child.)
Your child had gross income only from in­
terest and dividends (including capital gain 
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends).
The interest and dividend income was less 
than $9,500.
Your child is required to file a return for 
2012 unless you make this election.
Your child does not file a joint return for 
2012.
No estimated tax payment was made for 
2012 and no 2011 overpayment was ap­
plied to 2012 under your child's name and 
social security number.
No federal income tax was withheld from 
your child's income under the backup with­
holding rules.
You are the parent whose return must be 
used when making the election to report 
your child's unearned income.
For more information, see Form 8814 and 
Parent's Election To Report Child's Interest and 
Dividends in Publication 929.
Other Situations
You may have to file a tax return even if your 
gross income is less than the amount shown in 
Page 3 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 3

Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See Ta­
ble 3 for those other situations when you must 
file.
Who Should File
Even if you do not have to file, you should file a 
tax return if you can get money back. For exam­
ple, you should file if one of the following ap­
plies.
1. You had income tax withheld from your 
pay.
2. You made estimated tax payments for the 
year or had any of your overpayment for 
last year applied to this year's estimated 
tax.
3. You qualify for the earned income credit. 
See Publication 596, Earned Income 
Credit (EIC), for more information.
4. You qualify for the additional child tax 
credit. See the instructions for the tax form 
you file (Form 1040 or 1040A) for more in­
formation.
5. You qualify for the refundable American 
opportunity education credit. See Form 
8863, Education Credits.
6. You qualify for the health coverage tax 
credit. For information about this credit, 
see Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax 
Credit.
7. You qualify for the refundable credit for 
prior year minimum tax. See Form 8801, 
2012 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you must file a return. 
 In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes 
unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a 
trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income 
is the total of your unearned and earned income.
 Caution. If your gross income was $3,800 or more, you usually cannot be claimed as a dependent unless you are a qualifying 
child. For details, see Exemptions for Dependents.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $950.
2. Your earned income was more than $5,950.
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of— 
a. $950, or
b. Your earned income (up to $5,650) plus $300.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $2,400 ($3,850 if 65 or older and blind).
2. Your earned income was more than $7,400 ($8,850 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,400 ($3,850 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $5,650) plus $1,750 ($3,200 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $950.
3. Your earned income was more than $5,950.
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $950, or
b.  Your earned income (up to $5,650) plus $300. 
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $2,100 ($3,250 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your earned income was more than $7,100 ($8,250 if 65 or older and blind).
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,100 ($3,250 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $5,650) plus $1,450 ($2,600 if 65 or older and blind).
Table 2. 
Page 4 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4 Publication 501 (2012)

Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax — Indi­
viduals, Estates, and Trusts.
8. You qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See Form 4136, Credit for Federal 
Tax Paid on Fuels.
Form 1099-B received. Even if you are not re­
quired to file a return, you should consider filing 
if all of the following apply.
You received a Form 1099­B, Proceeds 
From Broker and Barter Exchange Trans­
actions (or substitute statement).
The amount in box 2a of Form 1099­B (or 
substitute statement), when added to your 
other gross income, means you have to file 
a tax return because of the filing require­
ment in Table 1 or Table 2 that applies to 
you.
Box 3 of Form 1099­B (or substitute state­
ment) is blank.
In this case, filing a return may keep you from 
getting a notice from the IRS.
Filing Status
You must determine your filing status before 
you can determine your filing requirements, 
standard deduction (discussed later), and tax. 
You figure your tax by using the section of the 
Tax Computation Worksheet or the column in 
the Tax Table that applies to your filing status.
You also use your filing status to determine 
whether you are eligible to claim certain other 
deductions and credits.
There are five filing statuses:
Single,
Married Filing Jointly,
Married Filing Separately,
Head of Household, and
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent 
Child.
If more than one filing status applies to you, 
choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar­
ried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage 
means only a legal union between a man and a 
woman as husband and wife. The word 
“spouse” means a person of the opposite sex 
who is a husband or a wife.
Unmarried persons.  You are considered un­
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sep­
arated from your spouse under a divorce or 
separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or separate 
maintenance decree.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced un­
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage.  If you obtain a 
divorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns 
as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di­
vorce you intend to and do, in fact, remarry 
each other in the next tax year, you and your 
spouse must file as married individuals in both 
years.
Annulled marriages.  If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un­
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. You must file amended returns (Form 
1040X) claiming single or head of household 
status for all tax years that are affected by the 
annulment and not closed by the statute of limi­
tations for filing a tax return. Generally, for a 
credit or refund, you must file Form 1040X 
within 3 years (including extensions) after the 
date you filed your original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later. If you filed your original tax return early 
(for example, March 1), your return is consid­
ered filed on the due date (generally April 15). 
However, if you had an extension to file (for ex­
ample, until October 15) but you filed earlier 
and we received it July 1, your return is consid­
ered filed on July 1.
Head of household or qualifying 
widow(er) with dependent child.  If you are 
considered unmarried, you may be able to file 
as a head of household or as a qualifying 
widow(er) with a dependent child. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De-
pendent Child to see if you qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar­
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2012 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2012, you must file a return.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
a. Alternative minimum tax. (See Form 6251.)
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax­favored account. 
(See Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and 
Other Tax­Favored Health Plans.) But if you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 
by itself.
c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer (see Publication 531, Reporting Tip 
Income) or on wages you received from an employer who did not withhold these taxes (see Form 8919).
d. Write­in taxes, including uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your 
employer or on group­term life insurance and additional tax on health savings accounts. (See Publication 531, 
Publication 969, and the Form 1040 instructions for line 60.)
e. Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you owe these taxes, you can file 
Schedule H (Form 1040) by itself.
f. Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 44, 59b, and 60.)
2. You (or your spouse if filing jointly) received Archer MSA, Medicare Advantage MSA, or health savings account 
distributions.
3. You had net earnings from self­employment of at least $400. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church­controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.)
Page 5 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 5

Considered married.  You are considered 
married for the whole year if on the last day of 
your tax year you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. You are married and living together as 
husband and wife.
2. You are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com­
mon law marriage began.
3. You are married and living apart but not le­
gally separated under a decree of divorce 
or separate maintenance.
4. You are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid­
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you did not remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene­
fits described later under Qualifying Widow(er) 
With Dependent Child.
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you are not divorced or legally separa­
ted. If you qualify to file as head of household 
instead of as married filing separately, your 
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax 
may be lower, and you may be able to claim the 
earned income credit. See Head of Household , 
later.
Single
Your filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you do not qualify for another fil­
ing status. To determine your marital status, 
see Marital Status, earlier.
Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if 
you were widowed before January 1, 2012, and 
did not remarry before the end of 2012. You 
may, however, be able to use another filing sta­
tus that will give you a lower tax. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De-
pendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.
How to file.  You can file Form 1040 or Form 
1040A. If you have no dependents, are under 
65 and not blind, and meet other requirements, 
you can file Form 1040EZ. If you file Form 
1040A or Form 1040, show your filing status as 
single by checking the box on line 1. Use the 
Single column of the Tax Table, or Section A of 
the Tax Computation Worksheet, to figure your 
tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as your fil­
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint 
return. On a joint return, you and your spouse 
report your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. You can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com­
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you do not itemize de­
ductions) may be higher, and you may qualify 
for tax benefits that do not apply to other filing 
statuses.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). You can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax.
How to file.  If you file as married filing jointly, 
you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you 
and your spouse have no dependents, are both 
under 65 and not blind, and meet other require­
ments, you can file Form 1040EZ. If you file 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A, show this filing sta­
tus by checking the box on line 2. Use the Mar-
ried filing jointly column of the Tax Table, or 
Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet, 
to figure your tax.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year, under Married persons, earlier.
If your spouse died in 2013 before filing a 
2012 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2012 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you cannot choose married filing jointly as your 
filing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income, exemptions, and deductions on 
your joint return.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ­
ent accounting methods.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re­
turn. This means that if one spouse does not 
pay the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if 
one spouse does not report the correct tax, 
both spouses may be responsible for any addi­
tional taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse 
may be held responsible for all the tax due even 
if all the income was earned by the other 
spouse.
You may want to file separately if:
You believe your spouse is not reporting all 
of his or her income, or
You do not want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse does not have 
enough tax withheld or does not pay 
enough estimated tax.
TIP
Divorced taxpayer.  You may be held 
jointly and individually responsible for any tax, 
interest, and penalties due on a joint return filed 
before your divorce. This responsibility may ap­
ply even if your divorce decree states that your 
former spouse will be responsible for any 
amounts due on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re­
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. 
You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers who are divorced, widowed, le­
gally separated, or who have not lived to­
gether for the 12 months ending on the 
date the election for this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno­
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Publication 971, Innocent 
Spouse Relief, explains the kinds of relief and 
who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con­
sidered a joint return, both husband and wife 
generally must sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec­
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
been appointed as executor or administrator, 
you can sign the return for your spouse and en­
ter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home.  If your spouse 
is away from home, you should prepare the re­
turn, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign 
so it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.  If 
your spouse cannot sign because of injury or 
disease and tells you to sign, you can sign your 
spouse's name in the proper space on the re­
turn followed by the words “By (your name), 
Husband (or Wife).” Be sure to also sign in the 
space provided for your signature. Attach a 
dated statement, signed by you, to the return. 
The statement should include the form number 
of the return you are filing, the tax year, and the 
reason your spouse cannot sign, and should 
state that your spouse has agreed to your sign­
ing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in­
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  You can sign a 
joint return for your spouse If your spouse can­
not sign because he or she is serving in a com­
bat zone (such as the Persian Gulf area, Serbia, 
Montenegro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if 
you do not have a power of attorney or other 
statement. Attach a signed statement to your 
return explaining that your spouse is serving in 
a combat zone. For more information on special 
Page 6 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6 Publication 501 (2012)

tax rules for persons who are serving in a com­
bat zone, or who are in missing status as a re­
sult of serving in a combat zone, see Publica­
tion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide.
Other reasons spouse cannot sign.  If 
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for any 
other reason, you can sign for your spouse only 
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a le­
gal document giving you permission to act for 
your spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a 
copy of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 
2848.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen­
erally, a husband and wife cannot file a joint re­
turn if either one is a nonresident alien at any 
time during the tax year. However, if one 
spouse was a nonresident alien or dual­status 
alien who was married to a U.S. citizen or resi­
dent alien at the end of the year, the spouses 
can choose to file a joint return. If you do file a 
joint return, you and your spouse are both trea­
ted as U.S. residents for the entire tax year. See 
chapter 1 of Publication 519. 
Married Filing Separately
You can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon­
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse do not agree to file a 
joint return, you have to use this filing status un­
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
You may be able to choose head of house­
hold filing status if you are considered unmar­
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained later, under 
Head of Household ). This can apply to you 
even if you are not divorced or legally separa­
ted. If you qualify to file as head of household, 
instead of as married filing separately, your tax 
may be lower, you may be able to claim the 
earned income credit and certain other credits, 
and your standard deduction will be higher. The 
head of household filing status allows you to 
choose the standard deduction even if your 
spouse chooses to itemize deductions. See 
Head of Household, later, for more information.
You will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you 
would on a joint return for the reasons 
listed under Special Rules, later. However, un-
less you are required to file separately, you 
should figure your tax both ways (on a joint re-
turn and on separate returns). This way you can 
make sure you are using the filing status that re-
sults in the lowest combined tax. When figuring 
the combined tax of husband and wife, you may 
want to consider state taxes as well as federal 
taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, exemp­
tions, credits, and deductions. You can claim an 
exemption for your spouse only if your spouse 
had no gross income, is not filing a return, and 
was not the dependent of another person.
If you file as married filing separately, you 
can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select this 
TIP
filing status by checking the box on line 3 of ei­
ther form. You also must enter your spouse's 
full name in the space provided and must enter 
your spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provi­
ded unless your spouse does not have and is 
not required to have an SSN or ITIN. If your 
spouse does not have and is not required to 
have an SSN or ITIN, enter “NRA” in the space 
for your spouse's SSN. Use the Married filing 
separately column of the Tax Table or Section 
C of the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure 
your tax.
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Your tax rate generally is higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al­
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. You cannot take the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in­
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$2,500 (instead of $5,000 on a joint re­
turn). If you are legally separated or living 
apart from your spouse, you may be able 
to file a separate return and still take the 
credit. See Joint Return Test in Publication 
503, Child and Dependent Care Expen­
ses, for more information.
4. You cannot take the earned income credit.
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. You cannot take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit), the deduction for student 
loan interest, or the tuition and fees de­
duction.
7. You cannot exclude any interest income 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you 
used for higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. You cannot claim the credit for the 
elderly or the disabled, and
b. You must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire­
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits are reduced at in­
come levels half those for a joint return:
a. The child tax credit, and
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit.
10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return).
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
cannot claim the standard deduction. If 
you can claim the standard deduction, 
your basic standard deduction is half the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen­
ses.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). 
You may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse were covered by an employee retire­
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc­
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is 
more than a certain amount. This amount is 
much lower for married individuals who file sep­
arately and lived together at any time during the 
year. For more information, see How Much Can 
You Deduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici­
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you generally can deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re­
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar­
ried persons filing separate returns who lived 
apart at all times during the year are each al­
lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance 
for losses from passive real estate activities. 
See Rental Activities in Publication 925, Pas­
sive Activity and At­Risk Rules.
Community property states. If you live in Ari­
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, 
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin 
and file separately, your income may be consid­
ered separate income or community income for 
income tax purposes. See Publication 555, 
Community Property.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status from a sepa­
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040X.
You generally can change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This does not in­
clude any extensions. A separate return in­
cludes a return filed by you or your spouse 
claiming married filing separately, single, or 
head of household filing status.
Separate Returns
After Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you cannot choose 
to file separate returns for that year after the 
due date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a de­
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date (including extensions) 
Page 7 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 7

of the return to make the change. See Publica­
tion 559 for more information on filing income 
tax returns for a decedent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all the following requirements.
1. You are unmarried or considered unmar­
ried on the last day of the year. See Mari-
tal Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep­
ing up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, he or she does not 
have to live with you. See Special rule for 
parent, later, under Qualifying Person.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate usually will be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. You will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  If you file as head of household, 
you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. 
Indicate your choice of this filing status by 
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use 
the Head of a household  column of the Tax Ta­
ble or Section D of the Tax Computation Work­
sheet to figure your tax.
Considered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar­
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid­
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. You file a separate return (defined earlier 
under Joint Return After Separate Re-
turns).
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep­
ing up your home for the tax year.
3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur­
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your 
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if he or she is temporarily absent due 
to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences, later.
4. Your home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person, later, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during 
the year.)
5. You must be able to claim an exemption 
for the child. However, you meet this test if 
you cannot claim the exemption only be­
cause the noncustodial parent can claim 
the child using the rules described later in 
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart) under Qualify-
ing Child or in Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents 
TIP
Who Live Apart) under Qualifying Relative. 
The general rules for claiming an exemp­
tion for a dependent are explained later 
under Exemptions for Dependents.
If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state  (listed earlier under 
Married Filing Separately ), special rules may 
apply in determining your income and expen-
ses. See Publication 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  You are consid­
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you do not choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. You 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as a head of 
household.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  You 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 
of Publication 519.
Keeping Up a Home
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. You can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
If you used payments you received under 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
(TANF) or other public assistance programs to 
pay part of the cost of keeping up your home, 
you cannot count them as money you paid. 
However, you must include them in the total 
cost of keeping up your home to figure if you 
CAUTION
!
paid over half the cost.
Costs you do not include.  Do not include the 
cost of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
vacations, life insurance, or transportation. 
Also, do not include the rental value of a home 
you own or the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.
Any person not described in Table 4 is not a 
qualifying person.
Example 1—child.  Your unmarried son 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. He did not provide more 
than half of his own support and does not meet 
the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else. 
As a result, he is your qualifying child (see 
Qualifying Child , later) and, because he is sin­
gle, your qualifying person for head of house­
hold purposes.
Example 2—child who is not qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1 except your son was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and his gross income was 
$5,000. Because he does not meet the age test 
(explained later under Qualifying Child ), your 
son is not your qualifying child. Because he 
does not meet the gross income test (explained 
later under Qualifying Relative ), he is not your 
qualifying relative. As a result, he is not your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo­
ses.
Example 3—girlfriend.  Your girlfriend 
lived with you all year. Even though she may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income and 
support tests (explained later) are met, she is 
not your qualifying person for head of house­
hold purposes because she is not related to you 
in one of the ways listed under Relatives who 
do not have to live with you. See Table 4.
Cost of Keeping Up a HomeWorksheet 1. Keep for Your Records
Amount
You
Paid
Total
Cost
Property taxes $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense   
Rent   
Utility charges   
Repairs/maintenance   
Property insurance   
Food consumed
 on the premises   
Other household expenses   
Totals $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ( )
Amount others paid $ 
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more than half the cost of 
keeping up the home.
Page 8 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8 Publication 501 (2012)

Example 4—girlfriend's child.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 3 except your girl­
friend's 10­year­old son also lived with you all 
year. He is not your qualifying child and, be­
cause he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he 
is not your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualify-
ing Child Test , later). As a result, he is not your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo­
ses.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your father or mother, you may be eli­
gible to file as head of household even if your 
father or mother does not live with you. How­
ever, you must be able to claim an exemption 
for your father or mother. Also, you must pay 
more than half the cost of keeping up a home 
that was the main home for the entire year for 
your father or mother. You are keeping up a 
main home for your father or mother if you pay 
more than half the cost of keeping your parent 
in a rest home or home for the elderly.
Death or birth.  You may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the individual who 
qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies 
during the year. You must have provided more 
than half the cost of keeping up a home that 
was the individual's main home for more than 
half the part of the year he or she was alive.
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, 
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in 
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem­
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment 
for the year until her death was $6,000. You 
paid $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your 
brother made no other payments towards your 
mother's support. Your mother had no income. 
Because you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu­
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an ex­
emption for her, you can file as a head of 
household.
Temporary absences. You and your quali­
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily ab­
sent from your home due to special circumstan­
ces such as illness, education, business, vaca­
tion, or military service. It must be reasonable to 
assume the absent person will return to the 
home after the temporary absence. You must 
continue to keep up the home during the ab­
sence.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to 
file as head of household even if the child who 
is your qualifying person has been kidnapped. 
You can claim head of household filing status if 
all the following statements are true.
1. The child must be presumed by law en­
forcement authorities to have been kid­
napped by someone who is not a member 
of your family or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. You would have qualified for head of 
household filing status if the child had not 
been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
child is returned. However, the last year this 
treatment can apply is the earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Qualifying Widow(er)
With Dependent Child
If your spouse died in 2012, you can use mar­
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2012 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying 
widow(er) with dependent child as your filing 
status for 2 years following the year your 
spouse died. For example, if your spouse died 
in 2011 and you have not remarried, you may 
be able to use this filing status for 2012 and 
2013. The rules for using this filing status are 
explained in detail here.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re­
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc­
tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions). It 
does not entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file. If you file as a qualifying widow(er) 
with dependent child, you can use either Form 
1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status 
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. 
Use the Married filing jointly column of the Tax 
Table or Section B of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.  You are eligible to file your 
2012 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de­
pendent child if you meet all the following tests.
You were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It does not matter whether you actually 
filed a joint return.
Your spouse died in 2010 or 2011 and you 
did not remarry before the end of 2012.
You have a child or stepchild for whom you 
can claim an exemption. This does not in­
clude a foster child.
This child lived in your home all year, ex­
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de­
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
You paid more than half the cost of keep­
ing up a home for the year. See Keeping 
Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-
hold.
Example. John Reed's wife died in 2010. 
John has not remarried. He has continued dur­
ing 2011 and 2012 to keep up a home for him­
self and his child, who lives with him and for 
whom he can claim an exemption. For 2010 he 
was entitled to file a joint return for himself and 
his deceased wife. For 2011 and 2012, he can 
file as a qualifying widower with a dependent 
child. After 2012, he can file as head of house­
hold if he qualifies.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the 
child who qualifies you for this filing status is 
born or dies during the year. You must have 
provided more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home that was the child's main home dur­
ing the entire part of the year he or she was 
alive.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to file 
as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child 
even if the child who qualifies you for this filing 
status has been kidnapped. You can claim 
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child filing 
status if all the following statements are true.
1. The child must be presumed by law en­
forcement authorities to have been kid­
napped by someone who is not a member 
of your family or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. You would have qualified for qualifying 
widow(er) with dependent child filing sta­
tus if the child had not been kidnapped.
As mentioned earlier, this filing status 
is available for only 2 years following 
the year your spouse died.
Exemptions
Exemptions reduce your taxable income. You 
can deduct $3,800 for each exemption you 
claim in 2012. If you are entitled to two exemp­
tions for 2012, you can deduct $7,600 ($3,800 
× 2).
Types of exemptions.  There are two types of 
exemptions you may be able to take:
Personal exemptions for yourself and your 
spouse, and
Exemptions for dependents (dependency 
exemptions).
While each is worth the same amount ($3,800 
for 2012), different rules, discussed later, apply 
to each type.
Dependent cannot claim a personal exemp-
tion. If you are entitled to claim an exemption 
for a dependent (such as your child), that de­
pendent cannot claim a personal exemption on 
his or her own tax return.
How to claim exemptions.  How you claim an 
exemption on your tax return depends on which 
form you file.
Form 1040EZ filers.  If you file Form 
1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined 
with the standard deduction and entered on 
line 5.
Form 1040A filers. If you file Form 1040A, 
complete lines 6a through 6d. The total number 
of exemptions you can claim is the total in the 
box on line 6d. Also complete line 26.
CAUTION
!
Page 9 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 9

Form 1040 filers.  If you file Form 1040, 
complete lines 6a through 6d.The total number 
of exemptions you can claim is the total in the 
box on line 6d. Also complete line 42.
U.S. citizen or resident alien.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national 
(defined later) or a resident of Canada or Mex­
ico, you may qualify for any of the exemptions 
discussed here.
Nonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are a 
nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can­
ada or Mexico, or certain residents of India or 
Korea), you can qualify for only one personal 
exemption for yourself. You cannot claim ex­
emptions for a spouse or dependents.
These restrictions do not apply if you are a 
nonresident alien married to a U. S. citizen or 
resident alien and have chosen to be treated as 
a resident of the United States.
More information.  For more information 
on exemptions if you are a nonresident alien, 
see chapter 5 in Publication 519.
Dual-status taxpayers. If you have been both 
a nonresident alien and a resident alien in the 
same tax year, you should see Publication 519 
for information on determining your exemptions.
Personal Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption for 
yourself. If you are married, you may be allowed 
one exemption for your spouse. These are 
called personal exemptions.
Your Own Exemption
You can take one exemption for yourself unless 
you can be claimed as a dependent by another 
taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim 
you as a dependent, you cannot take an ex­
emption for yourself even if the other taxpayer 
does not actually claim you as a dependent.
Your Spouse's Exemption
Your spouse is never considered your depend­
ent.
Joint return.  On a joint return, you can claim 
one exemption for yourself and one for your 
spouse.
Separate return.  If you file a separate return, 
you can claim an exemption for your spouse 
only if your spouse had no gross income, is not 
filing a return, and was not the dependent of an­
other taxpayer. This is true even if the other tax­
payer does not actually claim your spouse as a 
dependent. You can claim an exemption for 
your spouse even if he or she is a nonresident 
alien; in that case, your spouse must have no 
gross income for U.S. tax purposes and satisfy 
the other conditions listed above.
Head of household. If you qualify for head 
of household filing status because you are con­
sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemption 
for your spouse if the conditions described in 
the preceding paragraph are satisfied.
To claim the exemption for your spouse, 
check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or Form 
1040A and enter the name of your spouse in 
the space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN 
or ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at 
the top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died during 
the year and you file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse, you generally can 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household 
filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who lived 
with you more than half the year 
and meets certain other tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not you 
can claim an exemption for the person.
he or she is married and you can claim an 
exemption for him or her
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you cannot claim an 
exemption for him or her
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your 
father or mother
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your 
father or mother (such as a 
grandparent, brother, or sister who 
meets certain tests). 
he or she lived with you more than half the year, 
and he or she is related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who do not have to 
live with you, later, and you can claim an 
exemption for him or her5
a qualifying person.
he or she did not live with you more than half the 
year
not a qualifying person.
he or she is not related to you in one of the ways 
listed under Relatives who do not have to live 
with you, later, and is your qualifying relative 
only because he or she lived with you all year as 
a member of your household 
not a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term “qualifying child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of household filing status does 
not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) 
under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is 
not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone else's return.
4The term “qualifying relative” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple Support Agreement.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Table 4.
Page 10 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10 Publication 501 (2012)

just explained in Joint return. If you file a sepa­
rate return for the year, you may be able to 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
just described in Separate return.
If you remarried during the year, you cannot 
take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross 
income and you remarry in the year your 
spouse died, you can be claimed as an exemp­
tion on both the final separate return of your de­
ceased spouse and the separate return of your 
new spouse for that year. If you file a joint return 
with your new spouse, you can be claimed as 
an exemption only on that return.
Divorced or separated spouse.  If you ob­
tained a final decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance during the year, you cannot take 
your former spouse's exemption. This rule ap­
plies even if you provided all of your former 
spouse's support.
Exemptions for 
Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each person 
you can claim as a dependent. You can claim 
an exemption for a dependent even if your de­
pendent files a return.
The term “dependent” means:
A qualifying child, or
A qualifying relative.
The terms “ qualifying child ” and “ qualifying rel-
ative ” are defined later.
You can claim an exemption for a qualifying 
child or qualifying relative only if these three 
tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail later.
All the requirements for claiming an exemp­
tion for a dependent are summarized in Table 5.
Dependent not allowed a personal 
exemption. If you can claim an ex-
emption for your dependent, the de-
pendent cannot claim his or her own personal 
exemption on his or her own tax return. This is 
true even if you do not claim the dependent's 
exemption on your return.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp­
tions for them.
Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a child 
tax credit for each qualifying child who was un­
der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed 
an exemption for that child. For more informa­
tion, see the instructions for the tax form you file 
(Form 1040 or 1040A).
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an­
other person, you cannot claim anyone else as 
CAUTION
!
a dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
or qualifying relative, you cannot claim that per­
son as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by 
someone else, you and your spouse cannot 
claim any dependents on your joint return.
Joint Return Test
You generally cannot claim a married person as 
a dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Exception. You can claim an exemption for a 
person who files a joint return if that person and 
his or her spouse file the joint return only to 
claim a refund of income tax withheld or estima­
ted tax paid.
Example 1—child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18­year­old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. The couple files a joint re­
turn. You cannot take an exemption for your 
daughter.
Example 2—child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18­year­old son and his 17­year­old wife had 
$800 of wages from part­time jobs and no other 
income. Neither is required to file a tax return. 
They do not have a child. Taxes were taken out 
of their pay so they file a joint return only to get 
a refund of the withheld taxes. The exception to 
the joint return test applies, so you are not dis­
qualified from claiming an exemption for each of 
them just because they file a joint return. You 
can claim exemptions for each of them if all the 
other tests to do so are met.
Example 3—child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay. He and 
his wife are not required to file a tax return. 
However, they file a joint return to claim an 
American opportunity credit of $124 and get a 
refund of that amount. Because claiming the 
American opportunity credit is their reason for 
filing the return, they are not filing it only to get a 
refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax 
paid. The exception to the joint return test does 
not apply, so you cannot claim an exemption for 
either of them.
Citizen or Resident Test
You generally cannot claim a person as a de­
pendent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, 
U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico. However, there is an ex­
ception for certain adopted children, as ex­
plained next.
Exception for adopted child.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally 
adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if 
the child lived with you as a member of your 
household all year. This exception also applies 
if the child was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption.
Child's place of residence.  Children usually 
are citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For­
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro­
gram and placed in American homes for a tem­
porary period generally are not U.S. residents 
and do not meet this test. You cannot claim an 
exemption for them. However, if you provided a 
home for a foreign student, you may be able to 
take a charitable contribution deduction. See 
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You in 
Publication 526, Charitable Contributions.
U.S. national.  A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or 
her allegiance to the United States. U.S. nation­
als include American Samoans and Northern 
Mariana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, a special rule applies to deter-
mine which person can actually treat the child 
as a qualifying child. See Special Rule for Qual­
ifying Child of More Than One Person, later.
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
or a descendant (for example, your grand­
child) of any of them, or
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis­
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descend­
ant (for example, your niece or nephew) of 
any of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
CAUTION
!
Page 11 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 11

Age Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly),
A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your spouse 
if filing jointly), or
Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Your son turned 19 on Decem­
ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totally 
disabled or a student, he does not meet the age 
test because, at the end of the year, he was not 
under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or your 
spouse. To be your qualifying child, a child 
who is not permanently and totally disabled 
must be younger than you. However, if you are 
married filing jointly, the child must be younger 
than you or your spouse but does not have to 
be younger than both of you.
Example 1—child not younger than you 
or your spouse.  Your 23­year­old brother, 
who is a student and unmarried, lives with you 
and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both you 
and your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a 
joint return. Your brother is not your qualifying 
child because he is not younger than you or 
your spouse.
Example 2—child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in  Example 1  except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is 
younger than your spouse and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your brother is 
your qualifying child, even though he is not 
younger than you.
Student defined. To qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
 
You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund 
of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
 
You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico.1
 
You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
 
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
 
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year 
and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), (b) 
under age 24 at the end of the year, a student, and younger 
than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), or (c) any age if 
permanently and totally disabled. 
 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 
year.2
 
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or 
her own support for the year.
 
5. The child is not filing a joint return for the year (unless that 
joint return is filed only to claim a refund of withheld income 
tax or estimated tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than 
one person, only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See the Special Rule for Qualifying Child of 
More Than One Person described later to find out which person 
is the person entitled to claim the child as a qualifying child. 
1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of any other taxpayer.
 
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with 
you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your 
household2 (and your relationship must not violate local law).
 
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$3,800.3
 
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total 
support for the year.4
 
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or
 parents who live apart), and kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped
 children.
Table 5.
Page 12 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12 Publication 501 (2012)

1. A full­time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff, course of study, and 
a regularly enrolled student body at the 
school, or
2. A student taking a full­time, on­farm train­
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern­
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months do not have to be con­
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full­time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full­time 
attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele­
mentary school, junior or senior high school, 
college, university, or technical, trade, or me­
chanical school. However, an on­the­job train­
ing course, correspondence school, or school 
offering courses only through the Internet does 
not count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu­
dents who work on “co­op” jobs in private indus­
try as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full­time students.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
He or she cannot engage in any substan­
tial gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
A doctor determines the condition has las­
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
To meet this test, your child must have lived 
with you for more than half the year. There are 
exceptions for temporary absences, children 
who were born or died during the year, kidnap­
ped children, and children of divorced or sepa­
rated parents.
Temporary absences.  Your child is consid­
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation, or
Military service.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half the time he 
or she was alive during the year. The same is 
true if the child lived with you more than half the 
year except for any required hospital stay fol­
lowing birth.
Child born alive. You may be able to claim 
an exemption for a child born alive during the 
year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify­
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim an exemption for a dependent 
must be met.
Stillborn child.  You cannot claim an ex­
emption for a stillborn child.
Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as 
meeting the residency test even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but both of the following state­
ments must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who is not a member of your 
family or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child lived with you for more than half of 
the part of the year before the date of the 
kidnapping.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
child is returned. However, the last year this 
treatment can apply is the earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di­
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non­
custodial parent if all four of the following state­
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un­
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa­
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she will not claim the child as a de­
pendent for the year, and the noncus­
todial parent attaches this written dec­
laration to his or her return. (If the 
decree or agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, see 
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce de-
cree or separation agreement, later. If 
the decree or agreement went into ef­
fect after 2008, see Post-2008 divorce 
decree or separation agreement, 
later.)
b. A pre­1985 decree of divorce or sepa­
rate maintenance or written separa­
tion agreement that applies to 2012 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement was not 
changed after 1984 to say the non­
custodial parent cannot claim the 
child as a dependent, and the non­
custodial parent provides at least 
$600 for the child's support during the 
year.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present, or
In the company of the parent, when the 
child does not sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca­
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa­
rent with the higher adjusted gross income 
(AGI).
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, December 31, 2012, is treated as part 
of 2012.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa­
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child was not with either pa­
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can­
not be determined with which parent the child 
normally would have lived or if the child would 
not have lived with either parent that night, the 
child is treated as not living with either parent 
that night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi­
dence registered with the school.
Example 1—child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. You and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2012, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. You are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2—child is away at camp.  In 
2012, your daughter lives with each parent for 
alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During the time she is 
at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with her other parent, your 
Page 13 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 13

ex­spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long she would have lived with each parent if 
she had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Your son lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
same number of nights with his other parent, 
your ex­spouse. Your AGI is $40,000. Your 
ex­spouse's AGI is $25,000. You are treated as 
your son's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4—child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent. Your son normally lives 
with you during the week and with his other pa­
rent, your ex­spouse, every other weekend. 
You become ill and are hospitalized. The other 
parent lives in your home with your son for 10 
consecutive days while you are in the hospital. 
Your son is treated as living with you during this 
10­day period because he was living in your 
home.
Example 5—child emancipated in May. 
When your son turned age 18 in May 2012, he 
became emancipated under the law of the state 
where he lives. As a result, he is not considered 
in the custody of his parents for more than half 
of the year. The special rule for children of di­
vorced or separated parents does not apply.
Example 6—child emancipated in Au-
gust. Your daughter lives with you from Janu­
ary 1, 2012, until May 31, 2012, and lives with 
her other parent, your ex­spouse, from June 1, 
2012, through the end of the year. She turns 18 
and is emancipated under state law on August 
1, 2012. Because she is treated as not living 
with either parent beginning on August 1, she is 
treated as living with you the greater number of 
nights in 2012. You are the custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
may use either Form 8332 or a similar state­
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release the exemption to the noncustodial pa­
rent. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, 
for a number of specified years (for example, al­
ternate years), or for all future years, as speci­
fied in the declaration.
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de­
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent will not claim the 
child as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa­
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
The pages that include all of the informa­
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent cannot 
attach pages from the decree or agreement in­
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state­
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus­
todial parent's claim to an exemption for a child, 
and the noncustodial parent must attach a copy 
to his or her return. The form or statement must 
release the custodial parent's claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the re­
lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa­
rent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption. For the revo­
cation to be effective for 2012, the custodial pa­
rent must have given (or made reasonable ef­
forts to give) written notice of the revocation to 
the noncustodial parent in 2011 or earlier. The 
custodial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 
for this purpose and must attach a copy of the 
revocation to his or her return for each tax year 
he or she claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup­
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This rule for 
divorced or separated parents also applies to 
parents who never married and lived apart at all 
times during the last 6 months of the year.
Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child cannot have provi­
ded more than half of his or her own support for 
the year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or is not support, see 
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , 
later. If you are not sure whether a child provi­
ded more than half of his or her own support, 
you may find Worksheet 2 helpful.
Example. You provided $4,000 toward 
your 16­year­old son's support for the year. He 
has a part­time job and provided $6,000 to his 
own support. He provided more than half of his 
own support for the year. He is not your qualify­
ing child.
CAUTION
!
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay­
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a child placement agency are consid­
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup­
port provided by the state or county.
If you are not in the trade or business of pro­
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out­of­pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri­
butions, the expenses are deductible as chari­
table contributions but are not considered sup­
port you provided. For more information about 
the deduction for charitable contributions, see 
Publication 526. If your unreimbursed expenses 
are not deductible as charitable contributions, 
they may qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid­
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
are not considered support provided by you.
Example 1.  Lauren, a foster child, lived 
with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because 
they wanted to adopt her (although she had not 
been placed with them for adoption). They did 
not care for her as a trade or business or to 
benefit the agency that placed her in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are 
not deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for Lau­
ren.
Example 2.  You provided $3,000 toward 
your 10­year­old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food benefits, housing, etc.) , 
later. Your foster child did not provide more 
than half of her own support for the year.
Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student is not taken into account 
in determining whether the child provided more 
than half of his or her own support.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child cannot file a joint re­
turn for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and his or her spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18­year­old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. The couple files a joint re­
turn. Because your daughter and her husband 
file a joint return, she is not your qualifying child.
Page 14 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14 Publication 501 (2012)

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 2. Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Do not include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead .......................................................... 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support .......................... 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................... 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ........ 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ................................. 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)  
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ........................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 .................................................. 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ........................................................ 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ........... 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ............................. 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance ...................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses .......................... 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ................................. 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported    
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............... 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses .............................................. 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ............................................ 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ........................................................................ 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................... 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ........................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ............. 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ......................................................... 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ................. 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a 
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here. 
Did You Provide More Than Half? 
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on 
line 1 ............................................................................ 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ................................................................ 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ......... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?  
 
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.  
 
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for 
this person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated 
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced 
or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 15 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 15

Example 2—child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18­year­old son and his 17­year­old wife had 
$800 of wages from part­time jobs and no other 
income. Neither is required to file a tax return. 
They do not have a child. Taxes were taken out 
of their pay so they file a joint return only to get 
a refund of the withheld taxes. The exception to 
the joint return test applies, so your son may be 
your qualifying child if all the other tests are 
met.
Example 3—child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in  Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay. He and 
his wife were not required to file a tax return. 
However, they file a joint return to claim an 
American opportunity credit of $124 and get a 
refund of that amount. Because claiming the 
American opportunity credit is their reason for 
filing the return, they are not filing it only to get a 
refund of income tax withheld or estimated tax 
paid. The exception to the joint return test does 
not apply, so your son is not your qualifying 
child.
Special Rule for Qualifying Child of 
More Than One Person
If your qualifying child is not a qualify-
ing child of anyone else, this special 
rule does not apply to you and you do 
not need to read about it. This is also true if your 
qualifying child is not a qualifying child of any-
one else except your spouse with whom you file 
a joint return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), 
described earlier, see Applying this special rule 
to divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests to be a 
qualifying child of more than one person. Al­
though the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, only one person can actually 
treat the child as a qualifying child to take all of 
the following tax benefits (provided the person 
is eligible for each benefit).
1. The exemption for the child.
2. The child tax credit.
3. Head of household filing status.
4. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
5. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
6. The earned income credit.
The other person cannot take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person cannot agree 
to divide these tax benefits between you. The 
other person cannot take any of these benefits 
for a child unless he or she has a different quali­
fying child.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these six tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply.
If only one of the persons is the child's pa­
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
If the parents do not file a joint return to­
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual­
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher adjusted gross income (AGI) for the 
year.
If no parent can claim the child as a quali­
fying child, the child is treated as the quali­
fying child of the person who had the high­
est AGI for the year.
If a parent can claim the child as a qualify­
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child. 
If the child's parents file a joint return with 
each other, this rule can be applied by di­
viding the parents' combined AGI equally 
between the parents. See Example 6.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
Example 1—child lived with parent and 
grandparent. You and your 3­year­old daugh­
ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are 
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is 
$9,000. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's 
father did not live with you or your daughter. 
You have not signed Form 8832 (or a similar 
statement) to release the child's exemption to 
the noncustodial parent.
Jane is a qualifying child of both you and 
your mother because she meets the relation­
ship, age, residency, support, and joint return 
tests for both you and your mother. However, 
only one of you can claim her. Jane is not a 
qualifying child of anyone else, including her fa­
ther. You agree to let your mother claim Jane. 
This means your mother can claim Jane as a 
qualifying child for all of the six tax benefits lis­
ted earlier, if she qualifies (and if you do not 
claim Jane as a qualifying child for any of those 
tax benefits).
Example 2—parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1  except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she 
cannot claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane.
Example 3—two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except you and your mother both claim Jane as 
a qualifying child. In this case, you, as the 
child's parent, will be the only one allowed to 
claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will 
disallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene­
fits listed earlier unless she has another qualify­
ing child.
Example 4—qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1 except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your mother. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI 
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam­
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can 
claim the other two.
Example 5—taxpayer who is a qualifying 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except you are only 18 years old and did not 
provide more than half of your own support for 
the year. This means you are your mother's 
qualifying child. If she can claim you as a de­
pendent, then you cannot claim your daughter 
as a dependent because of the Dependent Tax-
payer Test explained earlier.
Example 6—child lived with both pa-
rents and grandparent.  The facts are the 
same as in Example 1  except you are married 
to your daughter's father. The two of you live 
with your daughter and your mother and have 
AGI of $20,000 on a joint return. If you and your 
husband do not claim your daughter as a quali­
fying child, your mother can claim her instead. 
Even though the AGI on your joint return, 
$20,000, is more than your mother's AGI of 
$15,000, for this purpose each parent's AGI can 
be treated as $10,000, so your mother's 
$15,000 AGI is treated as higher than the AGI of 
any of the child's parents who can claim the 
child.
Example 7—separated parents.  You, 
your husband, and your 10­year­old son lived 
together until August 1, 2012, when your hus­
band moved out of the household. In August 
and September, your son lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your son lived with your hus­
band, the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying 
child of both you and your husband because 
your son lived with each of you for more than 
half the year and because he met the relation­
ship, age, support, and joint return tests for both 
of you. At the end of the year, you and your hus­
band still were not divorced, legally separated, 
or separated under a written separation agree­
ment, so the rule for children of divorced or sep­
arated parents (or parents who live apart) does 
not apply.
You and your husband will file separate re­
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
husband does not claim your son as a qualify­
ing child, you can claim your son as a qualifying 
child for the dependency exemption, child tax 
credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene­
fits (assuming you otherwise qualify for each of 
those tax benefits). However, you cannot claim 
head of household filing status because you 
and your husband did not live apart for the last 
6 months of the year. As a result, your filing sta­
tus is married filing separately, so you cannot 
claim the earned income credit or the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses.
Example 8—separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 7  except you and your husband both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your husband will be allowed to treat your 
Page 16 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16 Publication 501 (2012)

son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur­
ing 2012, the boy lived with him longer than with 
you. If you claimed an exemption or the child 
tax credit for your son, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to both these tax benefits. If you do not 
have another qualifying child, the IRS will also 
disallow your claim to the exclusion for depend­
ent care benefits. In addition, because you and 
your husband did not live apart for the last 6 
months of the year, your husband cannot claim 
head of household filing status. As a result, his 
filing status is married filing separately, so he 
cannot claim the earned income credit or the 
credit for child and dependent care expenses.
Example 9—unmarried parents.  You, 
your 5­year­old son, and your son's father lived 
together all year. You and your son's father are 
not married. Your son is a qualifying child of 
both you and his father because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and his father. Your 
AGI is $12,000 and your son's father's AGI is 
$14,000. Your son's father agrees to let you 
claim the child as a qualifying child. This means 
you can claim him as a qualifying child for the 
dependency exemption, child tax credit, head 
of household filing status, credit for child and 
dependent care expenses, exclusion for de­
pendent care benefits, and the earned income 
credit, if you qualify for each of those tax bene­
fits (and if your son's father does not, in fact, 
claim your son as a qualifying child for any of 
those tax benefits).
Example 10—unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 9 except you and your son's father both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your son's father will be allowed to treat 
your son as a qualifying child. This is because 
his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the child 
tax credit, or the earned income credit for your 
son, the IRS will disallow your claim to all these 
tax benefits. If you do not have another qualify­
ing child, the IRS will also disallow your claim to 
head of household filing status, the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses, and the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits.
Example 11—child did not live with a pa-
rent. You and your 7­year­old niece, your si­
ster's child, lived with your mother all year. You 
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your 
mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parents 
file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and 
do not live with you or their child. Your niece is a 
qualifying child of both you and your mother be­
cause she meets the relationship, age, resi­
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and your mother. However, only your 
mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This 
is because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more 
than your AGI, $9,300.
Applying this special rule to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep­
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim an exemption 
and the child tax credit for the child. However, 
the custodial parent, if eligible, or other eligible 
person can claim the child as a qualifying child 
for head of household filing status, the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses, the exclu­
sion for dependent care benefits, and the 
earned income credit. If the child is the qualify­
ing child of more than one person for these ben­
efits, then the tiebreaker rules determine which 
person can treat the child as a qualifying child.
Example 1.  You and your 5­year­old son 
lived all year with your mother, who paid the en­
tire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is 
$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your 
son's father did not live with you or your son.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), your son is treated as the quali­
fying child of his father, who can claim an ex­
emption and the child tax credit for him. Be­
cause of this, you cannot claim an exemption or 
the child tax credit for your son. However, your 
son's father cannot claim your son as a qualify­
ing child for head of household filing status, the 
credit for child and dependent care expenses, 
the exclusion for dependent care benefits, or 
the earned income credit.
You and your mother did not have any child 
care expenses or dependent care benefits, but 
the boy is a qualifying child of both you and your 
mother for head of household filing status and 
the earned income credit because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. 
(Note: The support test does not apply for the 
earned income credit.) However, you agree to 
let your mother claim your son. This means she 
can claim him for head of household filing sta­
tus and the earned income credit if she qualifies 
for each and if you do not claim him as a quali­
fying child for the earned income credit. (You 
cannot claim head of household filing status be­
cause your mother paid the entire cost of keep­
ing up the home.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except your AGI is $25,000 and your 
mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother cannot 
claim your son as a qualifying child for any pur­
pose because her AGI is not higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except you and your mother both 
claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. Your mother also claims 
him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You, as the child's parent, will be 
the only one allowed to claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. 
The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to the 
earned income credit and head of household fil­
ing status unless she has another qualifying 
child.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela­
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child.  You can treat a child as 
your qualifying relative even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but both of the following state­
ments must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who is not a member of your 
family or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child met the tests to be your qualifying 
relative for the part of the year before the 
date of the kidnapping.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
child is returned. However, the last year this 
treatment can apply is the earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child is not your qualifying relative if the child 
is your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1.  Your 22­year­old daughter, 
who is a student, lives with you and meets all 
the tests to be your qualifying child. She is not 
your qualifying relative.
Example 2.  Your 2­year­old son lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela­
tive.
Example 3.  Your son lives with you but is 
not your qualifying child because he is 30 years 
old and does not meet the age test. He may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income test 
and the support test are met.
Example 4.  Your 13­year­old grandson 
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his un­
cle for 4 months, and with you for 5 months dur­
ing the year. He is not your qualifying child be­
cause he does not meet the residency test. He 
may be your qualifying relative if the gross in­
come test and the support test are met.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child is not the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifying 
relative if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
is not required to file an income tax return and 
either:
Does not file an income tax return, or
Files a return only to get a refund of in­
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—return not required.  You 
support an unrelated friend and her 3­year­old 
child, who lived with you all year in your home. 
Your friend has no gross income, is not required 
to file a 2012 tax return, and does not file a 
2012 tax return. Both your friend and her child 
are your qualifying relatives if the member of 
Page 17 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 17

household or relationship test, gross income 
test, and support test are met.
Example 2—return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from her wages. 
She files a return only to get a refund of the in­
come tax withheld and does not claim the 
earned income credit or any other tax credits or 
deductions. Both your friend and her child are 
your qualifying relatives if the member of house­
hold or relationship test, gross income test, and 
support test are met.
Example 3—earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2  except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit on her return. Your friend's child is the 
qualifying child of another taxpayer (your 
friend), so you cannot claim your friend's child 
as your qualifying relative.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  A child who lives 
in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying rel­
ative, and you may be able to claim the child as 
a dependent. If the child does not live with you, 
the child does not meet the residency test to be 
your qualifying child. If the persons the child 
does live with are not U.S. citizens and have no 
U.S. gross income, those persons are not “tax­
payers,” so the child is not the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer. If the child is not your quali­
fying child or the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative if 
the gross income test and the support test are 
met.
You cannot claim as a dependent a child 
who lives in a foreign country other than Can­
ada or Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, 
U.S. resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an 
exception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test , 
earlier.
Example. You provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your mother and have no income. 
You are single and live in the United States. 
Your mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no 
U.S. income, so she is not a “taxpayer.” Your 
children are not your qualifying children be­
cause they do not meet the residency test. 
Also, they are not the qualifying children of any 
other taxpayer, so they are your qualifying rela­
tives and you can claim them as dependents if 
all the tests are met. You may also be able to 
claim your mother as a dependent if all the tests 
are met, including the gross income test and the 
support test.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who do not have to live 
with you.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person cannot be your 
qualifying relative. However, see Personal Ex-
emptions, earlier.
Relatives who do not have to live with you. 
A person related to you in any of the following 
ways does not have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de­
scendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis­
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
Your father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
Your stepfather or stepmother.
A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
A brother or sister of your father or mother.
Your son­in­law, daughter­in­law, fa­
ther­in­law, mother­in­law, brother­in­law, 
or sister­in­law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce.
Example. You and your wife began sup­
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2006. 
Your wife died in 2011. Despite your wife's 
death, your father­in­law continues to meet this 
test, even if he does not live with you. You can 
claim him as a dependent if all other tests are 
met, including the gross income test and sup­
port test.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place­
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per­
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person does not need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
For example, your spouse's uncle who re­
ceives more than half of his support from you 
may be your qualifying relative, even though he 
does not live with you. However, if you and your 
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un­
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives 
with you all year as a member of your house­
hold.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
are temporarily absent due to special circum­
stances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation, or
Military service.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim an exemption for 
the dependent, you can still claim the exemp­
tion.
Example. Your dependent mother died on 
January 15. She met the tests to be your quali­
fying relative. The other tests to claim an ex­
emption for a dependent were also met. You 
can claim an exemption for her on your return.
Local law violated.  A person does not meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela­
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a 
member of your household all year. However, 
your relationship with her violated the laws of 
the state where you live, because she was mar­
ried to someone else. Therefore, she does not 
meet this test and you cannot claim her as a de­
pendent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he 
or she lives with you all year as a member of 
your household. A cousin is a descendant of a 
brother or sister of your father or mother.
Gross Income Test
To meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $3,800.
Gross income defined.  Gross income is all 
income in the form of money, property, and 
services that is not exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min­
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella­
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, 
etc., to determine the gross income from rental 
property.
Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not net) partnership income.
Gross income also includes all taxable un­
employment compensation and certain scholar­
ship and fellowship grants. Scholarships re­
ceived by degree candidates and used for 
tuition, fees, supplies, books, and equipment 
required for particular courses generally are not 
included in gross income. For more information 
about scholarships, see chapter 1 of Publica­
tion 970.
Tax­exempt income, such as certain social 
security benefits, is not included in gross in­
come.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of this test (the gross 
income test), the gross income of an individual 
Page 18 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18 Publication 501 (2012)

who is permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year does not include income 
for services the individual performs at a shel­
tered workshop. The availability of medical care 
at the workshop must be the main reason for 
the individual's presence there. Also, the in­
come must come solely from activities at the 
workshop that are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
Provides special instruction or training de­
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi­
vidual, and
Is operated by certain tax­exempt organi­
zations or by a state, a U.S. possession, a 
political subdivision of a state or posses­
sion, the United States, or the District of 
Columbia.
“Permanently and totally disabled”  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Relative)
To meet this test, you generally must provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
You figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar­
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from his or her 
own funds.
You may find Worksheet 2 helpful in figuring 
whether you provided more than half of a per­
son's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. 
A person's own funds are not support unless 
they are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest. 
She paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recre­
ation. She put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your mother received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you 
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no 
other support was received, you have provided 
more than half of her support.
Child's wages used for own support.  You 
cannot include in your contribution to your 
child's support any support paid for by the child 
with the child's own wages, even if you paid the 
wages.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro­
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even 
if you do so with borrowed money that you re­
pay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your in­
come, you must provide more than half of the 
dependent's support for the calendar year in 
which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern­
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup­
port. If your allotment is used to support per­
sons other than those you name, you can take 
the exemptions for them if they otherwise qual­
ify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces. 
You authorize an allotment for your widowed 
mother that she uses to support herself and her 
sister. If the allotment provides more than half of 
each person's support, you can take an exemp­
tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, 
even though you authorize the allotment only 
for your mother.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowan-
ces. These allowances are treated the same 
way as dependency allotments in figuring sup­
port. The allotment of pay and the tax­exempt 
basic allowance for quarters are both consid­
ered as provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to­
tal support, include tax­exempt income, sav­
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. Tax­exempt income includes cer­
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax­exempt interest.
Example 1.  You provide $4,000 toward 
your mother's support during the year. She has 
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se­
curity benefits of $4,800, and tax­exempt inter­
est of $200. She uses all these for her support. 
You cannot claim an exemption for your mother 
because the $4,000 you provide is not more 
than half of her total support of $9,600 ($4,000 
+ $600 + $4,800 + $200).
Example 2. Your niece takes out a student 
loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her college tui­
tion. She is personally responsible for the loan. 
You provide $2,000 toward her total support. 
You cannot claim an exemption for her because 
you provide less than half of her support.
Social security benefits. If a husband and 
wife each receive benefits that are paid by one 
check made out to both of them, half of the total 
paid is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward his or her own support, 
the benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food benefits, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi­
ded by the state to a needy person generally 
are considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient will not be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments were not used for that purpose.
Foster care.  Payments you receive for the 
support of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump­sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay­
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump­sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro­
vide also includes any other amounts you provi­
ded during the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of a 
person's support, you must first determine the 
total support provided for that person. Total 
support includes amounts spent to provide 
food, lodging, clothing, education, medical and 
dental care, recreation, transportation, and sim­
ilar necessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid­
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  Grace Brown, mother of Mary 
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their 
two children. Grace gets social security benefits 
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans­
portation, and recreation. Grace has no other 
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense 
for the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's 
medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair 
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is 
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support 
as follows:
Fair rental value of lodging ........... $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ....................... 2,400 
Medical expenses ................. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .......... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support Frank and Mary provide 
($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + 
$1,040 food = $4,040) is more than half of 
Grace's $6,440 total support.
Example 2. Your parents live with you, your 
spouse, and your two children in a house you 
own. The fair rental value of your parents' share 
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), 
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa­
ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, 
which he spends equally between your mother 
and himself for items of support such as cloth­
ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total 
food expense for the household is $6,000. Your 
heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your 
mother has hospital and medical expenses of 
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure 
your parents' total support as follows:
Page 19 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 19

Support provided Father Mother 
Fair rental value of lodging .... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support .................  2,100  2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) .................  1,000  1,000 
Medical expenses for 
mother .................   600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
You must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of your father's total sup­
port of $4,100 — less than half. You provide 
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 
food + $600 medical) — more than half of her 
total support of $4,700. You meet the support 
test for your mother, but not your father. Heat 
and utility costs are included in the fair rental 
value of the lodging, so these are not consid­
ered separately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al­
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined. Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in­
surance, utilities, cost of furniture and applian­
ces, etc. In some cases, fair rental value may 
be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you do not pro­
vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value 
must be divided depending on how much of the 
total lodging you provide. If you provide only a 
part and the person supplies the rest, the fair 
rental value must be divided between both of 
you according to the amount each provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This does not include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. You pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in his or her own home. 
The total fair rental value of a person's home 
that he or she owns is considered support con­
tributed by that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in his or her home, you 
must reduce the amount you provide for sup­
port of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging he or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will­
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele­
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a 
person during the year can be included in total 
support under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capi­
tal item is or is not support.
Example 1.  You buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13­year­old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be­
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, do not include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  You buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12­year­old child. 
The television set is placed in your child's bed­
room. You can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  You pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. You and your 
17­year­old daughter use the car equally. Be­
cause you own the car and do not give it to your 
daughter but merely let her use it, do not in­
clude the cost of the car in your daughter's total 
support. However, you can include in your 
daughter's support your out­of­pocket expen­
ses of operating the car for her benefit.
Example 4.  Your 17­year­old son, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro­
vide the rest of your son's support — $4,000. 
Because the car is bought and owned by your 
son, the car's fair market value ($4,500) must 
be included in his support. Your son has provi­
ded more than half of his own total support of 
$8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your 
qualifying child. You did not provide more than 
half of his total support, so he is not your quali­
fying relative. You cannot claim an exemption 
for your son.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur­
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu­
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits.  Medical in­
surance benefits, including basic and supple­
mentary Medicare benefits, are not part of sup­
port.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your son re­
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. He uses this amount for his education. 
You provide the rest of his support — $2,000. 
Because GI benefits are included in total sup­
port, your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 
+ $2,000). You have not provided more than 
half of his support.
Child care expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in­
clude these payments in the amount you provi­
ded for the support of your child or disabled de­
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
Publication 503.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Do Not Include in Total Support
The following items are not included in total 
support.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student. 
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to take 
the exemption but for the support test, together 
provide more than half of the person's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim an exemption for that person as a qualify­
ing relative. Each of the others must sign a 
statement agreeing not to claim the exemption 
for that year. The person who claims the ex­
emption must keep these signed statements for 
his or her records. A multiple support declara­
tion identifying each of the others who agreed 
not to claim the exemption must be attached to 
the return of the person claiming the exemption. 
Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can 
be used for this purpose.
You can claim an exemption under a multi­
ple support agreement for someone related to 
you or for someone who lived with you all year 
as a member of your household.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your two 
brothers provide the entire support of your 
mother for the year. You provide 45%, your sis­
ter 35%, and your two brothers each provide 
10%. Either you or your sister can claim an ex­
emption for your mother. The other must sign a 
statement agreeing not to take an exemption for 
your mother. The one who claims the 
Page 20 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20 Publication 501 (2012)

exemption must attach Form 2120, or a similar 
declaration, to his or her return and must keep 
the statement signed by the other for his or her 
records. Because neither brother provides more 
than 10% of the support, neither can take the 
exemption and neither has to sign a statement.
Example 2. You and your brother each pro­
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of her support is provided 
equally by two persons who are not related to 
her. She does not live with them. Because more 
than half of her support is provided by persons 
who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one 
can take the exemption.
Example 3.  Your father lives with you and 
receives 25% of his support from social secur­
ity, 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your 
uncle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or 
your uncle can take the exemption for your fa­
ther if the other signs a statement agreeing not 
to. The one who takes the exemption must at­
tach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to his 
return and must keep for his records the signed 
statement from the one agreeing not to take the 
exemption.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child, 
earlier. However, if the child does not meet the 
requirements to be a qualifying child of either 
parent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. In that case, the following 
rules must be used in applying the support test.
A child will be treated as being the qualifying 
relative of his or her noncustodial parent if all 
four of the following statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un­
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa­
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents (and 
the rules on multiple support agreements, 
explained earlier, do not apply).
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she will not claim the child as a de­
pendent for the year, and the noncus­
todial parent attaches this written dec­
laration to his or her return. (If the 
decree or agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, see 
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce de-
cree or separation agreement, later. If 
the decree or agreement went into ef­
fect after 2008, see Post-2008 divorce 
decree or separation agreement, 
later.)
b. A pre­1985 decree of divorce or sepa­
rate maintenance or written separa­
tion agreement that applies to 2012 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement was not 
changed after 1984 to say the non­
custodial parent cannot claim the 
child as a dependent, and the non­
custodial parent provides at least 
$600 for the child's support during the 
year.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. 
The custodial parent is the parent with whom 
the child lived for the greater number of nights 
during the year. The other parent is the noncus­
todial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present, or
In the company of the parent, when the 
child does not sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca­
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa­
rent with the higher adjusted gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, December 31, 2012, is treated as part 
of 2012.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa­
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent.
Absences. If a child was not with either pa­
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night. But if it cannot be determined with 
which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child would not have lived with ei­
ther parent that night, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent that night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi­
dence registered with the school.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
may use either Form 8332 or a similar state­
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release the exemption to the noncustodial pa­
rent. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, 
for a number of specified years (for example, al­
ternate years), or for all future years, as speci­
fied in the declaration.
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de­
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent will not claim the 
child as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa­
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
The pages that include all of the informa­
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent cannot 
attach pages from the decree or agreement to 
the tax return instead of Form 8332 if the de­
cree or agreement went into effect after 2008. 
The custodial parent must sign either Form 
8332 or a similar statement whose only purpose 
is to release the custodial parent's claim to an 
exemption for a child, and the noncustodial pa­
rent must attach a copy to his or her return. The 
form or statement must release the custodial 
parent's claim to the child without any condi­
tions. For example, the release must not de­
pend on the noncustodial parent paying sup­
port.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption that he or she 
previously released to the noncustodial parent. 
For the revocation to be effective for 2012, the 
custodial parent must have given (or made rea­
sonable efforts to give) written notice of the rev­
ocation to the noncustodial parent in 2011 or 
earlier. The custodial parent can use Part III of 
Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a 
copy of the revocation to his or her return for 
each tax year he or she claims the child as a 
dependent as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the support 
provided by your new spouse is treated as pro­
vided by you.
CAUTION
!
Page 21 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 21

Child support under pre-1985 agreement.
All child support payments actually received 
from the noncustodial parent under a pre­1985 
agreement are considered used for the support 
of the child.
Example. Under a pre­1985 agreement, 
the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the 
child's support. This amount is considered sup­
port provided by the noncustodial parent even if 
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other 
than support.
Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are in­
cludible in the spouse's gross income as either 
alimony, separate maintenance payments, or 
similar payments from an estate or trust, are not 
treated as a payment for the support of a de­
pendent.
Parents who never married. This special rule 
for divorced or separated parents also applies 
to parents who never married and lived apart at 
all times during the last 6 months of the year.
Multiple support agreement. If the support of 
the child is determined under a multiple support 
agreement, this special support test for di­
vorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) does not apply.
Social Security
Numbers for 
Dependents
You must show the social security number 
(SSN) of any dependent for whom you claim an 
exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A.
If you do not show the dependent's 
SSN when required or if you show an 
incorrect SSN, the exemption may be 
disallowed.
No SSN.  If a person for whom you expect to 
claim an exemption on your return does not 
have an SSN, either you or that person should 
apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filing 
Form SS­5, Application for a Social Security 
Card, with the Social Security Administration 
(SSA). You can get Form SS­5 online at 
www.socialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA of­
fice.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you do not have a required SSN by the filing 
due date, you can file Form 4868, Application 
for Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. In­
dividual Income Tax Return, for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2012.  If your child was 
born and died in 2012, and you do not have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos­
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A.
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de­
pendent does not have and cannot get an SSN, 
CAUTION
!
you must list the individual taxpayer identifica­
tion number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifi­
cation number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi­
dent alien who does not have and is not eligible 
to get an SSN, your dependent must apply for 
an individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN). For details on how to apply, see Form 
W­7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer 
Identification Number.
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim an exemption for the 
child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an 
ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption tax­
payer identification number (ATIN) for the child 
from the IRS. See Form W­7A, Application for 
Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending 
U.S. Adoptions, for details.
Standard Deduction
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a 
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc­
tions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex­
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc­
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
Are 65 or older, or
Are blind.
You benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable item-
ized deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Your standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
1. Your filing status is married filing sepa­
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc­
tions on his or her return,
2. You are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period, or
3. You are a nonresident or dual­status alien 
during the year. You are considered a 
dual­status alien if you were both a non­
resident and resident alien during the 
year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is 
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien 
at the end of the year, you can choose to 
be treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publi­
cation 519.) If you make this choice, you 
can take the standard deduction.
If an exemption for you can be claimed 
on another person's return (such as 
your parents' return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc­
tion for Dependents, later.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Standard Deduction Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether an exemption can be 
claimed for you by another taxpayer. Generally, 
the standard deduction amounts are adjusted 
each year for inflation. The standard deduction 
amounts for most people are shown in Table 6.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc­
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
as it would have been had the decedent contin­
ued to live. However, if the decedent was not 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand­
ard deduction for age cannot be claimed.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Age (65 or Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and do not itemize deductions, you are en­
titled to a higher standard deduction. You are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th 
birthday. Therefore, you can take a higher 
standard deduction for 2012 if you were born 
before January 2, 1948.
Use Table 7 to figure the standard deduction 
amount.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you do not itemize deductions, you are entitled 
to a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind.  If you are not totally blind, 
you must get a certified statement from an eye 
doctor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) that:
1. You cannot see better than 20/200 in the 
better eye with glasses or contact lenses, 
or
2. Your field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition is not likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in­
clude this fact. You must keep the statement in 
your records.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1. You file a joint return, or
2. You file a separate return and can claim 
an exemption for your spouse because 
your spouse had no gross income and 
cannot be claimed as a dependent by an­
other taxpayer.
You cannot claim the higher standard 
deduction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
CAUTION
!
Page 22 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22 Publication 501 (2012)

Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter­
mine your standard deduction using Tables 6 
and 7.
Example 1.  Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2012. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
Table 6. Their standard deduction is $11,900.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end 
of 2012. Larry and Donna use Table 7 . Their 
standard deduction is $13,050.
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint re­
turn for 2012. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend­
ent. If they do not itemize deductions, they use 
Table 7. Their standard deduction is $14,200.
Standard Deduction for 
Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per­
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
1. $950, or
2. The individual's earned income for the 
year plus $300 (but not more than the reg­
ular standard deduction amount, generally 
$5,950).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, 
the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re­
turn, use Table 8  to determine your standard 
deduction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income 
is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac­
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a 
scholarship or fellowship grant that you must in­
clude in your gross income. See chapter 1 of 
Publication 970 for more information on what 
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Michael is single. His parents 
can claim an exemption for him on their 2012 
tax return. He has interest income of $780 and 
wages of $150. He has no itemized deductions. 
Michael uses Table 8  to find his standard de­
duction. He enters $150 (his earned income) on 
line 1, $450 ($150 + $300) on line 3, $950 (the 
larger of $450 and $950) on line 5, and $5,950 
on line 6. His standard deduction, on line 7a, is 
$950 (the smaller of $950 and $5,950).
Example 2. Joe, a 22­year­old college stu­
dent, can be claimed as a dependent on his pa­
rents' 2012 tax return. Joe is married and files a 
separate return. His wife does not itemize de­
ductions on her separate return. Joe has 
$1,500 in interest income and wages of $3,800. 
He has no itemized deductions. Joe finds his 
standard deduction by using Table 8. He enters 
his earned income, $3,800, on line 1. He adds 
lines 1 and 2 and enters $4,100 on line 3. On 
line 5, he enters $4,100, the larger of lines 3 
and 4. Because Joe is married filing a separate 
return, he enters $5,950 on line 6. On line 7a he 
enters $4,100 as his standard deduction be­
cause it is smaller than $5,950, the amount on 
line 6.
Example 3.  Amy, who is single, can be 
claimed as a dependent on her parents' 2012 
tax return. She is 18 years old and blind. She 
has interest income of $1,300 and wages of 
$2,900. She has no itemized deductions. Amy 
uses Table 8  to find her standard deduction. 
She enters her wages of $2,900 on line 1. She 
adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,200 on line 3. 
On line 5, she enters $3,200, the larger of lines 
3 and 4. Because she is single, Amy enters 
$5,950 on line 6. She enters $3,200 on line 7a. 
This is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 
and 6. Because she checked one box in the top 
part of the worksheet, she enters $1,450 on 
line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines 7a 
and 7b and enters her standard deduction of 
$4,650 on line 7c.
Example 4.  Ed is single. His parents can 
claim an exemption for him on their 2012 tax re­
turn. He has wages of $7,000, interest income 
of $500, and a business loss of $3,000. He has 
no itemized deductions. Ed uses Table 8 to fig­
ure his standard deduction. He enters $4,000 
($7,000 ­ $3,000) on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 
2 and enters $4,300 on line 3. On line 5, he en­
ters $4,300, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because 
he is single, Ed enters $5,950 on line 6. On 
line 7a he enters $4,300 as his standard deduc­
tion because it is smaller than $5,950, the 
amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total de­
ductions are more than the standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not 
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed 
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stand-
ard deduction.
You should first figure your itemized deduc­
tions and compare that amount to your stand­
ard deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
When to itemize.  You may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
1. Do not qualify for the standard deduction, 
or the amount you can claim is limited,
2. Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year,
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,
4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi­
ness expenses or other miscellaneous de­
ductions,
5. Had large uninsured casualty or theft los­
ses,
6. Made large contributions to qualified chari­
ties, or
7. Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to 
which you otherwise are entitled.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, 
line 29, on Form 1040, line 40.
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re­
turn rather than take the standard deduction. 
You may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. To make this election, you 
must check the box on line 30 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind.  If you do not itemize 
your deductions and later find that you should 
have itemized — or if you itemize your deduc­
tions and later find you should not have — you 
can change your return by filing Form 1040X.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. You can change methods of taking de­
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con­
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
You and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. You both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc­
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because he or she will not qual­
ify for the standard deduction. See Persons not 
eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.
Page 23 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 23

2012 Standard Deduction Tables
CAUTION
!
If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you 
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1948, or are blind.
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*Table 6.
If your filing status is... Your standard deduction is:
Single or Married filing separately $ 5,950
Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child  11,900
Head of household   8,700
*Do not use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1948, or are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a 
dependent. Use Table 7 or 8 instead.
Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1948, or Who are Blind*Table 7.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You:  Born before January 2, 1948  
   Blind  
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption:  Born before January 2, 1948  
   Blind  
Total number of boxes you checked 
IF
your filing status is...
AND
the number in the box above is...
THEN
your standard deduction is...
Single
 1 $ 7,400
2   8,850
Married filing jointly or 
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child
 1 $13,050
2  14,200
3  15,350
4  16,500
Married filing separately
 1 $ 7,100
2   8,250
3   9,400
4  10,550
Head of household
 1 $ 10,150
2   11,600
*If someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent, use Table 8 instead. 
Page 24 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24 Publication 501 (2012)

Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent.
Table 8.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You:  Born before January 2, 1948 
 Blind 
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption: Born before January 2, 1948 
  Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter ­0­. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $300
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $950
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
Single or Married filing separately—$5,950
Married filing jointly—$11,900
Head of household—$8,700
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1948, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1948, or blind, multiply $1,450 ($1,150 if married) by the number in the box 
above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2012. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also 
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, or­
der free publications and forms, ask tax ques­
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev­
eral ways. By selecting the method that is best 
for you, you will have quick and easy access to 
tax help.
Free help with your tax return.  Free help in 
preparing your return is available nationwide 
from IRS­certified volunteers. The Volunteer In­
come Tax Assistance (VITA) program is de­
signed to help low­moderate income, elderly, 
disabled, and limited English proficient taxpay­
ers. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) 
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 
and older with their tax returns. Most VITA and 
TCE sites offer free electronic filing and all vol­
unteers will let you know about credits and de­
ductions you may be entitled to claim. Some 
VITA and TCE sites provide taxpayers the op­
portunity to prepare their return with the assis­
tance of an IRS­certified volunteer. To find the 
nearest VITA or TCE site, visit IRS.gov or call 
1­800­906­9887 or 1­800­829­1040.
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers 
the Tax­Aide counseling program. To find the 
nearest AARP Tax­Aide site, visit AARP's web­
site at www.aarp.org/money/taxaide or call 
1­888­227­7669.
For more information on these programs, go 
to IRS.gov and enter “VITA” in the search box.
Internet. You can access the IRS 
website at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week to:
E-file your return. Find out about commer­
cial tax preparation and e-file services 
available free to eligible taxpayers.
Check the status of your 2012 refund. Go 
to IRS.gov and click on Where’s My Re-
fund. Information about your return will 
generally be available within 24 hours after 
the IRS receives your e­filed return, or 4 
weeks after you mail your paper return. If 
you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait 
14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electroni­
cally). Have your 2012 tax return handy so 
you can provide your social security num­
ber, your filing status, and the exact whole 
dollar amount of your refund.
Where’s My Refund? has a new look this 
year! The tool will include a tracker that 
displays progress through three stages: (1) 
return received, (2) refund approved, and 
(3) refund sent. Where’s My Refund? will 
provide an actual personalized refund date 
as soon as the IRS processes your tax re­
turn and approves your refund. So in a 
change from previous filing seasons, you 
won't get an estimated refund date right 
away. Where’s My Refund? includes infor­
mation for the most recent return filed in 
the current year and does not include infor­
mation about amended returns.
You can obtain a free transcript online at 
IRS.gov by clicking on Order a Return or 
Account Transcript under “Tools.” For a 
transcript by phone, call 1­800­908­9946 
and follow the prompts in the recorded 
message. You will be prompted to provide 
your SSN or Individual Taxpayer Identifica­
tion Number (ITIN), date of birth, street ad­
dress and ZIP code.
Download forms, including talking tax 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Order IRS products.
Research your tax questions.
Search publications by topic or keyword.
Use the Internal Revenue Code, regula­
tions, or other official guidance.
View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) 
published in the last few years.
Figure your withholding allowances using 
the IRS Withholding Calculator at 
www.irs.gov/individuals.
Determine if Form 6251 (Alternative Mini­
mum Tax— Individuals) must be filed by 
using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) 
Assistant available at IRS.gov by typing Al-
ternative Minimum Tax Assistant in the 
search box.
Sign up to receive local and national tax 
news by email.
Page 25 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 25

Get information on starting and operating a 
small business.
Phone. Many services are available 
by phone.
Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
tions. Call 1­800­TAX­FORM 
(1­800­829­3676) to order current­year 
forms, instructions, and publications, and 
prior­year forms and instructions (limited to 
5 years). You should receive your order 
within 10 days.
Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with 
your tax questions at 1­800­829­1040.
Solving problems. You can get 
face­to­face help solving tax problems 
most business days in IRS Taxpayer As­
sistance Centers (TAC). An employee can 
explain IRS letters, request adjustments to 
your account, or help you set up a payment 
plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assistance 
Center for an appointment. To find the 
number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts 
or look in the phone book under United 
States Government, Internal Revenue 
Service.
TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to 
TTY/TDD equipment, call 1­800­829­4059 
to ask tax questions or to order forms and 
publications. The TTY/TDD telephone 
number is for individuals who are deaf, 
hard of hearing, or have a speech disabil­
ity. These individuals can also access the 
IRS through relay services such as the 
Federal Relay Service at www.gsa.gov/
fedrelay.
TeleTax topics. Call 1­800­829­4477 to lis­
ten to pre­recorded messages covering 
various tax topics.
Checking the status of your 2012 refund. 
To check the status of your 2012 refund, 
call 1­800­829­1954 or 1­800­829­4477 
(automated Where’s My Refund? informa­
tion 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Infor­
mation about your return will generally be 
available within 24 hours after the IRS re­
ceives your e­filed return, or 4 weeks after 
you mail your paper return. If you filed 
Form 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks 
(11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have 
your 2012 tax return handy so you can pro­
vide your social security number, your filing 
status, and the exact whole dollar amount 
of your refund. Where’s My Refund? will 
provide an actual personalized refund date 
as soon as the IRS processes your tax re­
turn and approves your refund. Where’s 
My Refund? includes information for the 
most recent return filed in the current year 
and does not include information about 
amended returns.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone 
services. To ensure IRS representatives give 
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, 
we use several methods to evaluate the quality 
of our telephone services. One method is for a 
second IRS representative to listen in on or re­
cord random telephone calls. Another is to ask 
some callers to complete a short survey at the 
end of the call.
Walk-in. Some products and services 
are available on a walk­in basis.
Products. You can walk in to some post of­
fices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up 
certain forms, instructions, and publica­
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, and city 
and county government offices have a col­
lection of products available to photocopy 
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS 
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev­
enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue 
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins availa­
ble for research purposes.
Services. You can walk in to your local 
TAC most business days for personal, 
face­to­face tax help. An employee can ex­
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to 
your tax account, or help you set up a pay­
ment plan. If you need to resolve a tax 
problem, have questions about how the tax 
law applies to your individual tax return, or 
you are more comfortable talking with 
someone in person, visit your local TAC 
where you can talk with an IRS representa­
tive face­to­face. No appointment is neces­
sary—just walk in. Before visiting, check 
www.irs.gov/localcontacts for hours of op­
eration and services provided. If you have 
an ongoing, complex tax account problem 
or a special need, such as a disability, an 
appointment can be requested by calling 
your local TAC. You can leave a message 
and a representative will call you back 
within 2 business days. All other issues will 
be handled without an appointment. To call 
your local TAC, go to
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the 
phone book under United States Govern-
ment, Internal Revenue Service.
Mail. You can send your order for 
forms, instructions, and publications to 
the address below. You should re­
ceive a response within 10 days after your re­
quest is received.
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705­6613
Taxpayer Advocate Service.  The Taxpayer 
Advocate Service (TAS) is your voice at the 
IRS. Its job is to ensure that every taxpayer is 
treated fairly, and that you know and under­
stand your rights. TAS offers free help to guide 
you through the often­confusing process of re­
solving tax problems that you haven’t been able 
to solve on your own. Remember, the worst 
thing you can do is nothing at all.
TAS can help if you can’t resolve your prob­
lem with the IRS and:
Your problem is causing financial difficul­
ties for you, your family, or your business.
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action.
You have tried repeatedly to contact the 
IRS but no one has responded, or the IRS 
has not responded to you by the date 
promised.
If you qualify for help, they will do everything 
they can to get your problem resolved. You will 
be assigned to one advocate who will be with 
you at every turn. TAS has offices in every 
state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. 
Although TAS is independent within the IRS, 
their advocates know how to work with the IRS 
to get your problems resolved. And its services 
are always free.
As a taxpayer, you have rights that the IRS 
must abide by in its dealings with you. The TAS 
tax toolkit at www.TaxpayerAdvocate.irs.gov 
can help you understand these rights.
If you think TAS might be able to help you, 
call your local advocate, whose number is in 
your phone book and on our website at 
www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also call the 
toll­free number at 1­877­777­4778. Deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals who have access to 
TTY/TDD equipment can call 1­800­829­4059. 
These individuals can also access the IRS 
through relay services such as the Federal Re­
lay Service at www.gsa.gov/fedrelay.
TAS also handles large­scale or systemic 
problems that affect many taxpayers. If you 
know of one of these broad issues, please re­
port it through the Systemic Advocacy Manage­
ment System at www.irs.gov/advocate.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). 
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde­
pendent from the IRS. Some clinics serve indi­
viduals whose income is below a certain level 
and who need to resolve a tax problem. These 
clinics provide professional representation be­
fore the IRS or in court on audits, appeals, tax 
collection disputes, and other issues for free or 
for a small fee. Some clinics can provide infor­
mation about taxpayer rights and responsibili­
ties in many different languages for individuals 
who speak English as a second language. For 
more information and to find a clinic near you, 
see the LITC page on www.irs.gov/advocate or 
IRS Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinic List. This publication is also available by 
calling 1­800­TAX­FORM (1­800­829­3676) or 
at your local IRS office.
Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS Guide 
to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS serv­
ices and resources. Learn about free tax infor­
mation from the IRS, including publications, 
services, and education and assistance pro­
grams. The publication also has an index of 
over 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax informa­
tion) you can listen to on the telephone. The 
majority of the information and services listed in 
this publication are available to you free of 
charge. If there is a fee associated with a re­
source or service, it is listed in the publication.
Accessible versions of IRS published prod­
ucts are available on request in a variety of al­
ternative formats for people with disabilities.
DVD for tax products. You can order 
Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products 
DVD, and obtain:
Current­year forms, instructions, and publi­
cations.
Prior­year forms, instructions, and publica­
tions.
Tax Map: an electronic research tool and 
finding aid.
Tax law frequently asked questions.
Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re­
sponse system.
Internal Revenue Code—Title 26 of the 
U.S. Code.
Page 26 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Publication 501 (2012)

Links to other Internet­based tax research 
materials.
Fill­in, print, and save features for most tax 
forms.
Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Toll­free and email technical support.
Two releases during the year.
– The first release will ship the beginning of 
January 2013.
– The final release will ship the beginning 
of March 2013.
Purchase the DVD from National Technical In­
formation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/
cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or call 
1­877­233­6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30 
(plus a $6 handling fee).
Page 27 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2012)   Page 27

Page 28 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Abroad, citizens living, filing 
requirements ....... ....... 3
Absence, 
temporary ..... ...... 9, 13, 18
Accounting periods, joint 
returns ........... ........... 6
Adopted child ...... ...... 11, 18
Taxpayer identification 
number ......... ......... 22
Age:
Filing status 
determination ...... ...... 3
Gross income and filing 
requirements 
(Table 1) ......... ........ 2
Standard deduction for age 65 
or older ......... ......... 22
Test ............ ............ 12
Aliens:
Dual­status (See Dual­status 
taxpayers)
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Alimony ............ ........... 22
Alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
effect on filing requirements 
(Table 3) .......... .......... 5
Amended returns (See 
also Form 1040X) .... ... 7, 23
Change from itemized to 
standard deduction (or vice 
versa) ......... ......... 23
American citizens abroad .. .. 3
Annulled marriages, filing 
status ........... ........... 5
Armed forces:
Combat zone, signing return for 
spouse ......... ......... 6
Dependency allotments .. .. 19
GI Bill benefits ...... ....... 20
Military quarters 
allotments ....... ....... 19
Assistance (See Tax help)
ATINs (Adoption taxpayer 
identification 
numbers) ........ ......... 22
B
Birth of child ......... ......... 9
Blind persons, standard 
deduction ......... ......... 22
C
Canada, resident 
of ......... ......... 10, 11, 18
Capital expenses ...... ...... 20
Child, qualifying ....... ....... 11
Child born alive ....... ....... 13
Child care expenses .......... 20
Child custody ........ ........ 13
Children:
Adopted child (See Adoption)
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Birth of child ......... ........ 9
Claiming parent, when child is 
head of household .... ... 9
Custody of ........ ......... 13
Death of child ........ ........ 9
Dividends of ........ ........ 3
Filing requirements as 
dependents (Table 2) .. .. 4
Investment income of child 
under age 18 ..... ..... 3, 4
Kidnapped ....... ....... 13, 17
Social security number ... .. 22
Stillborn .......... .......... 13
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement ........ ........ 22
Child tax credit ........ ........ 11
Church employees, filing 
requirements (Table 3) .. .. 5
Citizen or resident test ... ... 11
Citizens outside U.S., filing 
requirements ....... ....... 3
Common law marriage ... .... 6
Community property 
states ........... ........... 7
Cousin ............ ............ 18
Custody of child ...... ....... 13
D
Death:
Of child .......... .......... 13
Of dependent ...... ..... 9, 18
Of spouse ........ ....... 6, 10
Decedents (See also Death of 
spouse) ......... ........ 6, 22
Filing requirements ..... ..... 3
Deductions:
Personal exemption .... .... 10
Standard deduction .... .... 22
Dependents:
Birth of ........... ........... 18
Born and died within 
year .......... .......... 22
Child's earnings ....... ...... 3
Death of .......... .......... 18
Earned income ....... ....... 3
Exemption for ....... ....... 11
Filing requirements .... .... 3, 4
Married, filing joint 
return ........ ....... 11, 14
Not allowed to claim 
dependents ....... ...... 11
Qualifying child ....... ...... 11
Qualifying relative ..... ..... 17
Social security number ... .. 22
Standard deduction for ... .. 23
Unearned income ...... ..... 3
Dependent taxpayer test .. .. 11
Disabled:
Child ............ ............ 13
Dependent ......... ......... 18
Divorced parents ....... ...... 13
Divorced taxpayers:
Child custody ....... ....... 13
Filing status ....... ........ 5, 6
Joint returns, responsibility 
for ............ ............ 6
Personal exemption .... .... 11
Domestic help, no exemption 
for ............ ............. 11
Dual-status taxpayers:
Exemptions ........ ........ 10
Joint returns not available .. . 7
E
Earned income:
Defined for purposes of 
standard deduction ...... 23
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) ......... ........ 4
Earned income credit:
Two persons with same 
qualifying child .... ..... 16
Elderly persons:
Home for the aged .... ..... 19
Standard deduction for age 65 
or older ......... ......... 22
Equitable relief, Innocent 
spouse ........... .......... 6
Exemptions ......... ........ 9, 22
Dependents ........ ........ 11
Personal (See Personal 
exemption)
F
Fair rental value ....... ....... 20
Figures (See Tables and figures)
Filing requirements .... ..... 3, 5
Filing status ........ ......... 5, 9
Annulled marriages .......... 5
Change to:
Joint return after separate 
returns ........ ....... 7
Separate returns after joint 
return ....... ....... 7, 9
Determination of ..... ..... 3, 5
Head of household .... .... 5, 8
Marital status, determination 
of ............ ............ 5
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing 
separately (See Married 
filing separately)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Food benefits ........ ........ 19
Foreign employment, filing 
requirements ....... ....... 3
Foreign students ....... ...... 11
Form 1040:
Personal exemption .... .... 10
Social security numbers .. .. 22
Use of ........... ........... 6, 7
Form 1040A:
Personal exemption ..... .... 9
Social security numbers .. .. 22
Use of ........... ........... 6, 7
Form 1040EZ:
Personal exemption ..... .... 9
Use of ............ ........... 6
Form 1040X:
Change of filing status ... ... 7
Itemized deductions, change to 
standard deduction ...... 23
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions .. .. 23
Form 1099-B .......... ......... 5
Form 8814, parents' election to 
report child's interest and 
dividends ......... ......... 3
Form 8857, innocent spouse 
relief ............ ............ 6
Form SS-5, social security 
number request ..... ..... 22
Form W-7, individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request .......... .......... 22
Form W-7A, adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request .......... .......... 22
Foster care payments and 
expenses ....... ....... 14, 19
Foster child .... ... 11, 14, 18, 19
Free tax services ....... ...... 25
Funeral expenses ...... ...... 20
G
GI Bill benefits ....... ........ 20
Gross income:
Defined:
Filing requirements 
(Table 1) ....... ...... 2
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) ......... ........ 4
Test ............ ............ 18
Group-term life insurance .. .. 5
H
Head of household ..... ..... 8, 9
Exemption for spouse ... ... 10
Filing requirements 
(Table 1) ......... ........ 2
Health insurance 
premiums ......... ......... 20
Help (See Tax help)
Home:
Aged, home for ...... ...... 19
Cost of keeping up ..... ..... 8
Household workers, no 
exemption for ....... ...... 11
I
Income:
Gross ........... ........... 18
Tax exempt ........ ........ 19
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Filing requirements 
(Table 3) ......... ........ 5
Married filing separately ... .. 7
Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers 
(ITINs) ......... ......... 1, 22
Page 28 Publication 501 (2012)

Page 29 of 29  Fileid: … tions/P501/2012/A/XML/Cycle08/source 15:09 ­ 10­Jan­2013
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Innocent spouse relief .... .... 6
Insurance premiums:
Life ............. ............ 20
Medical .......... .......... 20
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) ......... ......... 23
Choosing to itemize .... .... 23
Married filing separately .. .. 23
When to itemize ...... ...... 23
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification 
numbers) ........ ......... 22
J
Joint returns ........ ........ 6, 7
Dependents on ...... ...... 18
Personal exemption .... .... 10
Joint return test ..... ..... 11, 14
K
Kidnapped children:
Qualifying child ....... ...... 13
Qualifying relative ..... ..... 17
Widow(er) with dependent 
child ........... .......... 9
L
Life insurance premiums .. .. 20
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions ........ ........ 23
Local law violated ...... ...... 18
Lodging ............ ........... 20
Losses, rental real estate ... .. 7
M
Marital status, determination 
of .............. .............. 5
Married dependents, filing joint 
return ......... ......... 11, 14
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing separately ... ... 7
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions .. .. 23
Exemption for spouse ... ... 10
Itemized deductions .... .... 23
Married taxpayers (See 
also Joint returns) ...... ..... 6
Age 65 or older spouse, 
standard deduction ...... 22
Blind spouse, standard 
deduction ........ ....... 22
Dual­status alien spouse .. .. 7
Filing status ......... ........ 5
Medical insurance 
premiums ......... ......... 20
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs, effect on filing 
requirements (Table 3) .. .. 5
Medicare taxes, not 
support .......... .......... 20
Member of household or 
relationship test ..... ..... 18
Mexico, resident 
of ......... ......... 10, 11, 18
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs 
of in IRS publications ...... 1
More information (See Tax help)
Multiple support 
agreement ........ ........ 20
N
National of the United 
States .......... ........... 11
Nonresident aliens ...... ...... 2
Dependents ........ ........ 22
Exemptions ........ ........ 10
Joint return ......... ......... 7
Spouse ........... ........... 8
Taxpayer identification 
number ......... ......... 22
O
Overseas taxpayers ..... ..... 3
P
Parent, claiming head of 
household for ....... ....... 9
Parents, divorced or 
separated ......... ......... 13
Parents who never 
married .......... .......... 14
Penalty, failure to file ..... .... 3
Personal exemption .... ..... 10
Photographs of missing 
children in IRS 
publications ....... ........ 1
Publications (See Tax help)
Puerto Rico, residents of ... .. 3
Q
Qualifying: (See also Surviving 
spouse)
Child ............ ............ 11
Relative .......... .......... 17
Surviving spouse ...... ...... 9
Widow/widower ....... ...... 9
R
Recapture taxes ........ ....... 5
Relationship test ..... .... 11, 18
Relative, qualifying ..... ..... 17
Remarriage after divorce ... .. 5
Rental losses ......... ......... 7
Residency test ....... ........ 13
S
Scholarships ....................
............... 3, 14, 18, 20, 23
Self-employed persons:
Filing requirements 
(Table 3) ......... ........ 5
Gross income ........ ....... 3
Separated parents ...... ...... 13
Separated taxpayers:
Filing status ......... ........ 6
Living apart but not legally 
separated ........ ........ 6
Personal exemption .... .... 11
Separate returns (See Married 
filing separately)
Signatures, joint returns ... ... 6
Single taxpayers:
Filing status ....... ........ 5, 6
Gross income filing 
requirements 
(Table 1) ......... ........ 2
How to file and forms .... .... 6
Personal exemption .... .... 10
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Reporting of (Table 3) .... ... 5
Support, not included in .. .. 20
Social security benefits .. ... 19
Social security numbers (SSNs) 
for dependents ..... ...... 22
Spouse:
Deceased ........ ....... 6, 10
Dual­status alien spouse .. .. 7
Exemption for ....... ....... 10
Innocent spouse relief .... ... 6
Nonresident alien ...... ...... 8
Signing joint returns ..... .... 6
Surviving (See Surviving 
spouse)
SSNs (See Social security 
numbers (SSNs) for 
dependents)
Standard deduction .. .. 1, 22, 23
Married filing jointly .... ..... 6
State or local income 
taxes ........... ........... 23
Stillborn child ........ ........ 13
Students:
Defined .......... .......... 12
Foreign .......... .......... 11
Support test:
Qualifying child ....... ...... 14
Qualifying relative ..... ..... 19
Surviving spouse:
Death of spouse (See Death of 
spouse)
Gross income filing 
requirements 
(Table 1) ......... ........ 2
Single filing status ...... ..... 6
Widow(er) with dependent 
child ........... .......... 9
T
Tables and figures (See 
also Worksheets) ........ 8, 15
Filing requirements:
Dependents (Table 2) .... 4
Gross income levels 
(Table 1) ....... ...... 2
Other situations requiring 
filing (Table 3) .... .... 5
Standard deduction 
tables ........ ....... 24, 25
Taxes, not support ...... ..... 20
Tax-exempt income ..... ..... 19
Tax help ........... ........... 25
Taxpayer Advocate ..... ..... 26
Tax returns:
Amended (See Form 1040X)
Filing of (See Filing 
requirements)
Joint returns (See Joint returns)
Who must file ..... ..... 1, 3, 4
Temporary absences .. .. 13, 18
Tiebreaker rules ...... ....... 16
Tips, reporting of (Table 3) .. . 5
Total support ......... ........ 19
TTY/TDD information .... .... 26
Tuition, benefits under GI 
Bill ............. ............ 20
U
U.S. citizen or resident ... ... 11
U.S. citizens filing abroad, filing 
requirements:
Filing requirements ..... ..... 3
U.S. national ......... ......... 11
U.S. possessions, income 
from ............ ............ 3
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
W
Welfare benefits ....... ....... 19
What's New:
Exemption amount ..... ..... 1
Standard deduction ..... .... 1
Who must file ........ ........ 1
Widow/widower (See Surviving 
spouse)
Worksheets:
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up 
home .......... .......... 8
Support test ........ ........ 15
Publication 501 (2012) Page 29