Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: C:\Documents and Settings\mfycb\Desktop\07.P535.latest.sgm (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z Contents
Introduction ..................... 1Department
of the What’s New for 2007............... 2BusinessTreasury
What’s New for 2008............... 2
Internal
Reminders ...................... 2Revenue Expenses
Service 1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2
2. Employees’ Pay ............... 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................. 8
2007 Returns 4. Interest ..................... 10
5. Taxes ...................... 15
6. Insurance ................... 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize ................... 20
8. Amortization ................. 25
9. Depletion .................... 32
10. Business Bad Debts ............ 37
11. Other Expenses ............... 39
12. How To Get Tax Help ........... 45
Index .......................... 47
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR–6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.
Get forms and other information
Ordering forms and publications. Visitfaster and easier by: www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Internet • www.irs.gov address below and receive a response within 10
days after your request is received.

Page 2 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Use a personal computer. ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
National Distribution Center • Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance ❏ 936 Home Mortgage InterestP.O. Box 8903 (VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly DeductionBloomington, IL 61702-8903 (TCE) site. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
For details on these fast filing methods, see yourTax questions. If you have a tax question, income tax package. Form (and Instructions)visit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-4933. We
cannot answer tax questions sent to either of the Photographs of missing children. The Inter- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
addresses above. nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the ❏ 5213 Election To PostponeNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Determination as To Whether thedren. Photographs of missing children selected Presumption Applies That anby the Center may appear in this publication on Activity Is Engaged in for Profitpages that would otherwise be blank. You canWhat’s New for 2007
help bring these children home by looking at the See chapter 12 for information about gettingThe following items highlight some changes in photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST publications and forms.the tax law for 2007. More information on (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
changes in the tax law for 2007 can be found in
Publication 553, Highlights of 2007 Tax
Changes.
What Can I Deduct?
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
age rate for the cost of operating your car, van, To be deductible, a business expense must be
pickup, or panel truck in 2007 is 48.5 cents a 1. both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
mile for all business miles. pense is one that is common and accepted in
your industry. A necessary expense is one thatSelf-employed health insurance deduction. is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-Partners and more-than-2% shareholders in an Deducting ness. An expense does not have to be indispen-S corporation may be able to claim this deduc- sable to be considered necessary.tion when the policy is in the name of the partner
It is important to distinguish business ex-or shareholder. See chapter 6. Business
penses from:
Environmental cleanup costs. The election • The expenses used to figure cost of goodsExpensesto deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs sold,expired for costs paid or incurred after Decem-
ber 31, 2007. See chapter 7. • Capital expenses, and
Introduction • Personal expenses.
This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-
ing business expenses. Business expenses areWhat’s New for 2008 Cost of Goods Soldthe costs of carrying on a trade or business and
they are usually deductible if the business is If your business manufactures products orThe following items highlight some changes in
operated to make a profit. purchases them for resale, you generally mustthe tax law for 2008. More information on
changes in the tax law for 2008 can be found in value inventory at the beginning and end of each
TopicsPublication 553. tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.
This chapter discusses: Some of your business expenses may be in-Standard mileage rate. The standard mile- cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost ofage rate for the cost of operating your car, van, • What you can deduct goods sold is deducted from your gross receiptspickup, or panel truck in 2008 is 50.5 cents a to figure your gross profit for the year. If you• How much you can deductmile for all business miles. include an expense in the cost of goods sold,
• When you can deduct you cannot deduct it again as a business ex-Marginal production of oil and gas. For tax
pense.years beginning after December 31, 2007, the • Not-for-profit activities
The following are types of expenses that gotemporary suspension of the taxable income
into figuring cost of goods sold.limit on percentage depletion from the marginal Useful Itemsproduction of oil and natural gas is scheduled to • The cost of products or raw materials, in-You may want to see:expire. See chapter 9. cluding freight.
Publication • Storage.
❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business • Direct labor (including contributions to
Reminders pension or annuity plans) for workers who❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car produce the products.Expenses
• Factory overhead.IRS e-file (Electronic Filing) ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
must capitalize the direct costs and part of the❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for indirect costs for certain production or resaleIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest,
You can file your tax returns electronically using ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack-
an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-file aging, handling, and administrative costs.❏ 542 Corporationsinclude faster refunds, increased accuracy, and This rule does not apply to personal propertyacknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return. ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts you acquire for resale if your average annualYou can use one of the following IRS e-file gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homeoptions. the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10(Including Use by Daycare
million.• Use an authorized IRS e-file provider. Providers)
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information, see the following 2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-
sources. quire or begin a specific business. These crete one are capital expenses you may be able
costs are capital expenses and you can to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica- deduct them as a capital loss. road on your business property is a deductibletion 334. expense.If you are a corporation and your attempt to• Inventories—Publication 538. go into a new trade or business is not success- Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules• Uniform capitalization rules—Publication ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory apply, amounts spent for tools used in your538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev- costs as a loss. business are deductible expenses if the toolsenue Code and the related regulations. The costs of any assets acquired during your have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theirunsuccessful attempt to go into business are a cost is minor.part of your basis in the assets. You cannot take
Capital Expenses a deduction for these costs. You will recover the Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-costs of these assets when you dispose of them. zation rules apply, the cost of replacingYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodcosts. These costs are a part of your investment
working condition, but not add to its life, is ain your business and are called “capital ex- Business Assets deductible expense.penses.” Capital expenses are considered as-
sets in your business. There are, in general, There are many different kinds of business as- Heating equipment. The cost of changingthree types of costs you capitalize. sets; for example, land, buildings, machinery, from one heating system to another is a capitalfurniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.• Business start-up costs (See Tip below). expense.You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-
• Business assets. sets, including freight and installation charges.
Personal versus BusinessCertain property you produce for use in your• Improvements. trade or business must be capitalized under the Expenses
uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations
You can elect to deduct or amortize Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, orsection 1.263A-2 for information on these rules.
certain business start-up costs. See family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
chapters 7 and 8. pense for something that is used partly for busi-
TIP
Improvements ness and partly for personal purposes, divide
Cost recovery. Although you generally can- the total cost between the business and per-
The costs of making improvements to a busi-not take a current deduction for a capital ex- sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.ness asset are capital expenses if the improve-pense, you may be able to recover the amount For example, if you borrow money and usements add to the value of the asset, appreciablyyou spend through depreciation, amortization, 70% of it for business and the other 30% for alengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to aor depletion. These recovery methods allow you family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%different use. Improvements are generally majorto deduct part of your cost each year. In this of the interest as a business expense. The re-expenditures. Some examples are: new electricway, you are able to recover your capital ex- maining 30% is personal interest and generallywiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,pense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationbricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andtion (chapter 9) in this publication. You may also on deducting interest and the allocation rules.lighting improvements.be allowed a section 179 deduction. For infor-
However, you can currently deduct repairsmation on the section 179 deduction and depre- Business use of your home. If you use partthat keep your property in a normal efficientciation, see Publication 946. of your home for business, you may be able tooperating condition as a business expense. deduct expenses for the business use of yourTreat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts of home. These expenses may include mortgagea machine that only keep it in a normal operatingGoing Into Business interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-condition. ciation.The costs of getting started in business, before To qualify to claim expenses for the businessRestoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re-you actually begin business operations, are cap- use of your home, you must meet both of theconditioning, improving, or altering your prop-ital expenses. These costs may include ex- following tests.erty as part of a general restoration plan to makepenses for advertising, travel, or wages for it suitable for your business. This applies even iftraining employees. 1. The business part of your home must besome of the work would by itself be classified as used exclusively and regularly for yourrepairs.If you go into business. When you go into trade or business.business, treat all costs you had to get your
business started as capital expenses. 2. The business part of your home must be:Capital versus Deductible
Usually you recover costs for a particular Expenses a. Your principal place of business, orasset through depreciation. Generally, you can-
not recover other costs until you sell the busi- To help you distinguish between capital and b. A place where you meet or deal with
ness or otherwise go out of business. However, deductible expenses, different examples are patients, clients, or customers in the
you can choose to amortize certain costs for given below. normal course of your trade or busi-
setting up your business. See Going Into Busi- ness, orMotor vehicles. You usually capitalize theness in chapter 7 for more information on busi-
c. A separate structure (not attached tocost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.ness start-up costs.
your home) used in connection withYou can recover its cost through annual deduc-
If you do not go into business. If you are an your trade or business.tions for depreciation.
individual and your attempt to go into business is There are dollar limits on the depreciation
not successful, the expenses you had in trying to You generally do not have to meet the exclu-you can claim each year on passenger automo-
establish yourself in business fall into two cate- sive use test for the part of your home that youbiles used in your business. See Publication
gories. regularly use either for the storage of inventory463.
or product samples, or as a daycare facility.Generally, repairs you make to your busi-1. The costs you had before making a deci- ness vehicle are currently deductible. However, Your home office qualifies as your principalsion to acquire or begin a specific busi- amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul a place of business if you meet the following re-ness. These costs are personal and business vehicle are capital expenses and are quirements.nondeductible. They include any costs in- recovered through depreciation. • You use the office exclusively and regu-curred during a general search for, or pre-
larly for administrative or management ac-liminary investigation of, a business or Roads and driveways.  The cost of building a
tivities of your trade or business.investment possibility. private road on your business property and the
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You have no other fixed location where may be limits on how much of the loss you can a. All events have occurred that fix the fact
you conduct substantial administrative or of liability, anddeduct.
management activities of your trade or b. The liability can be determined with rea-Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on yourbusiness. sonable accuracy.business activity without the intention of making
a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetIf you have more than one business location, 2. Economic performance has occurred.other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.determine your principal place of business
based on the following factors. At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible loss Economic performance. You generallyfrom a trade or business or other in-• The relative importance of the activities cannot deduct or capitalize a business expensecome-producing activity is limited to the invest-performed at each location. until economic performance occurs. If your ex-ment you have “at risk” in the activity. You are at pense is for property or services provided to you,• If the relative importance factor does not risk in any activity for the following. or for your use of property, economic perform-determine your principal place of busi- ance occurs as the property or services areness, consider the time spent at each lo- 1. The money and adjusted basis of property provided, or the property is used. If your ex-cation. you contribute to the activity. pense is for property or services you provide to
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activity others, economic performance occurs as youFor more information, see Publication 587. if: provide the property or services.
Business use of your car. If you use your car a. You are personally liable for repayment, Example. Your tax year is the calendarexclusively in your business, you can deduct car or year. In December 2007, the Field Plumbingexpenses. If you use your car for both business
Company did some repair work at your place ofand personal purposes, you must divide your b. You pledge property (other than prop-
business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid itexpenses based on actual mileage. erty used in the activity) as security for
by check in January 2008. If you use the accrualYou can deduct actual car expenses, which the loan.
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas method of accounting, deduct the $600 on your
and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and tax return for 2007 because all events haveFor more information, see Publication 925.
registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this casePassive activities. Generally, you are in aness part of these actual expenses, you may be the work was completed), the liability can bepassive activity if you have a trade or businessable to use the standard mileage rate to figure determined, and economic performance oc-activity in which you do not materially partici-your deduction. For 2007, the standard mileage curred in that year.pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsrate is 48.5 cents a mile for all business miles. If you use the cash method of accounting,for losses from passive activities only offset in-If you are self-employed, you can also de- deduct the expense on your 2008 return.come from passive activities. You cannot useduct the business part of interest on your car
any excess deductions to offset other income. Inloan, state and local personal property tax on the Prepayment. You generally cannot deductaddition, passive activity credits can only offsetcar, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you expenses in advance, even if you pay them inthe tax on net passive income. Any excess lossclaim the standard mileage rate. advance. This rule applies to both the cash andor credits are carried over to later years. Sus-For more information on car expenses and accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,pended passive losses are fully deductible in thethe rules for using the standard mileage rate, prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-year you completely dispose of the activity. Forsee Publication 463. pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,more information, see Publication 925. create an asset with a useful life extending sub-
Net operating loss. If your deductions are stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.
more than your income for the year, you may
How Much Can I have a “net operating loss.” You can use a net Example. In 2007, you sign a 10-year lease
operating loss to lower your taxes in other years. and immediately pay your rent for the first 3Deduct? See Publication 536 for more information. years. Even though you paid the rent for 2007,
2008, and 2009, you can only deduct the rent forSee Publication 542 for information aboutYou can deduct the cost of a business expense 2007 on your 2007 tax return. You can deductnet operating losses of corporations.if it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary the rent for 2008 and 2009 on your tax returnsand it is not a capital expense. for those years.
Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit
rule). If you recover part of an expense in the Contested liability. Under the cash method,When Can I
same tax year in which you would have claimed you can deduct a contested liability only in the
a deduction, reduce your current year expense year you pay the liability. Under the accrualDeduct an Expense?
by the amount of the recovery. If you have a method, you can deduct contested liabilities
recovery in a later year, include the recovered such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-When you can deduct an expense depends on
amount in income in that year. However, if part sion income, war profits, and excess profitsyour accounting method. An accounting method
of the deduction for the expense did not reduce taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liabilityis a set of rules used to determine when and how
your tax, you do not have to include that part of (or transfer money or other property to satisfyincome and expenses are reported. The two
the recovered amount in income. the obligation) or in the tax year you settle thebasic methods are the cash method and the
For more information on recoveries and the contest. However, to take the deduction in theaccrual method. Whichever method you choose
tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. year of payment or transfer, you must meetmust clearly reflect income.
certain conditions. See Contested Liability inFor more information on accounting meth-Payments in kind. If you provide services to Publication 538 for more information.ods, see Publication 538.pay a business expense, the amount you can
deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. Related person. Under an accrual method ofCash method. Under the cash method of ac-You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor. accounting, you generally deduct expensescounting, you generally deduct business ex-Similarly, if you pay a business expense in when you incur them, even if you have not yetpenses in the tax year you pay them.goods or other property, you can deduct only paid them. However, if you and the person youwhat the property costs you. If these costs are
owe are related and that person uses the cashAccrual method. Under an accrual method ofincluded in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct
method of accounting, you must pay the ex-accounting, you generally deduct business ex-them as a business expense.
pense before you can deduct it. Your deductionpenses when both of the following apply.
is allowed when the amount is includible in in-Limits on losses. If your deductions for an
1. The all-events test has been met. The test come by the related cash method payee. Seeinvestment or business activity are more than
is met when:the income it brings in, you have a loss. There Related Persons in Publication 538.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(or 7) years have passed since you started the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-
activity. cation 529 for information on this limit.Not-for-Profit Activities The benefit gained by making this election is
that the IRS will not immediately question Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitIf you do not carry on your business or invest- whether your activity is engaged in for profit. activity. The income and expenses of the activityment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. are as follows.loss from the activity to offset other income. Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in theActivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) Gross income ................. $3,200or recreation, are often not entered into for profit. years of profit at the end of this period, your Subtract:The limit on not-for-profit losses applies to deductions are not limited under these rules. If Real estate taxes ........ $700individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit Home mortgage interest .... 9 0 0corporations. It does not apply to corporations can be applied retroactively to any year with a Insurance ............. 4 0 0other than S corporations. loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. Utilities ............... 7 0 0In determining whether you are carrying on Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the Maintenance ........... 2 0 0an activity for profit, several factors are taken period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (or Depreciation on an automobile 600into account. No one factor alone is decisive. 7-year) period to 2 years after the due date of Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700Among the factors to consider are whether: the return for the last year of the period. The
period is extended only for deductions of the Loss ....................... $(500)• You carry on the activity in a businesslike
activity and any related deductions that might bemanner,
affected. Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the• The time and effort you put into the activity gross income she earned from the activity. TheYou must file Form 5213 within 3 yearsindicate you intend to make it profitable, limit is reached in category (3), as follows.after the due date of your return (deter-
• You depend on the income for your liveli- mined without extensions) for the year
TIP
Limit on deduction ............. $3,200hood, in which you first carried on the activity, or, if
Category 1: Taxes andearlier, within 60 days after receiving written• Your losses are due to circumstances be-
interest ............... $1,600notice from the Internal Revenue Service pro-yond your control (or are normal in the Category 2: Insurance,posing to disallow deductions attributable to thestart-up phase of your type of business), utilities, and maintenance . . . 1,300 2,900activity.
• You change your methods of operation in Available for Category 3 ........ $ 300an attempt to improve profitability,
Limit on Deductions• You (or your advisors) have the knowl- The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-
edge needed to carry on the activity as a tween the automobile and machine as follows.If your activity is not carried on for profit, take
successful business, deductions in the following order and only to the
$600 depreciation for theextent stated in the three categories. If you are x $300 = $225• You were successful in making a profit in $800 automobilean individual, these deductions may be takensimilar activities in the past, only if you itemize. These deductions may be
• The activity makes a profit in some years, taken on Schedule A (Form 1040). $200 depreciation for thex  $300 = $75and $800 machineCategory 1. Deductions you can take for per-
• You can expect to make a future profit sonal as well as for business activities are al- The basis of each asset is reduced accord-from the appreciation of the assets used in lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness ingly.the activity. deductions, such as those for home mortgage The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible ininterest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interestthis category. Deduct them on the appropriatePresumption of profit. An activity is pre- on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts thelines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit remaining $1,600 ($1,300 for category (2) andduct a casualty loss on property you own forin at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the $300 for category (3)) as other miscellaneouspersonal use only to the extent it is more thancurrent year. Activities that consist primarily of deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) subject$100 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted grossbreeding, training, showing, or racing horses are to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.income. See Publication 547 for more informa-presumed carried on for profit if they produced a
tion on casualty losses. For the limits that applyprofit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- Partnerships and S corporations. If a part-
to mortgage interest, see Publication 936.ing the current year. The activity must be sub- nership or S corporation carries on a
stantially the same for each year within this not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at theCategory 2. Deductions that do not result inperiod. You have a profit when the gross income partnership or S corporation level. They are re-an adjustment to the basis of property are al-from an activity exceeds the deductions. flected in the individual shareholder’s or part-lowed next, but only to the extent your gross
ner’s distributive shares.If a taxpayer dies before the end of the income from the activity is more than your de-
5-year (or 7-year) period, the “test” period ends ductions under the first category. Most business More than one activity. If you have severalon the date of the taxpayer’s death. deductions, such as those for advertising, insur- undertakings, each may be a separate activity orIf your business or investment activity ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages, several undertakings may be combined. Thepasses this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRS belong in this category. following are the most significant facts and cir-will presume it is carried on for profit. This Category 3. Business deductions that de- cumstances in making this determination.means the limits discussed here will not apply. crease the basis of property are allowed last, butYou can take all your business deductions from • The degree of organizational and eco-only to the extent the gross income from thethe activity, even for the years that you have a nomic interrelationship of various under-activity exceeds the deductions you take underloss. You can rely on this presumption unless takings.the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-the IRS later shows it to be invalid. tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty loss • The business purpose that is (or might be)
an individual could not deduct in category (1) served by carrying on the various under-Using the presumption later. If you are start-
belong in this category. Where more than one takings separately or together in a busi-ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years
asset is involved, allocate depreciation and ness or investment setting.showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-
these other deductions proportionally.sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) years • The similarity of the undertakings.
of experience allowed by the test. Individuals must claim the amounts in
You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213. categories (2) and (3) as miscellane- The IRS will generally accept your characteri-
Filing this form postpones any determination ous deductions on Schedule A (Form zation if it is supported by facts and circum-
TIP
that your activity is not carried on for profit until 5 1040). They are subject to the stances.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are carrying on two or more dif-
ferent activities, keep the deductions Tests for Kinds of Payand income from each one separate.
TIP
Figure separately whether each is a Deducting Pay Some of the ways you may provide pay to yournot-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on employees in addition to regular wages or sala-deductions and losses separately for each activ- To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be ries are discussed next. For specialized andity that is not for profit. an ordinary and necessary expense and you detailed information on employees’ pay and themust pay or incur it. These and other require- employment tax treatment of employees’ pay,ments that apply to all business expenses are see Publication 15, Publication 15-A, and Publi-explained in chapter 1. cation 15-B.In addition, the pay must meet both of the
following tests.
Awards• Test 1. It must be reasonable.
2. You can generally deduct amounts you pay to• Test 2. It must be for services performed. your employees as awards, whether paid in
The form or method of figuring the pay does not cash or property. If you give property to an
affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses employee as an employee achievement award,Employees’ Pay and commissions based on sales or earnings, your deduction may be limited.
and paid under an agreement made before the
services were performed, are both deductible. Achievement awards. An achievementIntroduction award is an item of tangible personal property
Test 1—ReasonablenessYou can generally deduct the pay you give your that meets all the following requirements.
employees for the services they perform. The • It is given to an employee for length ofDetermine the reasonableness of pay by thepay may be in cash, property, or services. It may service or safety achievement.facts and circumstances. Generally, reasonableinclude wages, or salaries, or other compensa- pay is the amount that like enterprises pay fortion such as: vacation allowances, bonuses, • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-the same, or similar, services.commissions, and fringe benefits. For informa- entation.You must be able to prove that the pay istion about deducting employment taxes, see • It is awarded under conditions and circum-reasonable. Base this determination on the cir-chapter 5. cumstances that exist when you contract for the stances that do not create a significant
You can claim the following employ- services, not those that exist when the reasona- likelihood of disguised pay.
ment credits if you hire individuals who bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive,
meet certain requirements. the excess is disallowed. Length-of-service award. An award will
TIP
qualify as a length-of-service award only if either• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- Factors to consider. To determine if pay is of the following applies.nity employment credit. reasonable, consider the following items and
• The employee receives the award after hisany other pertinent facts.• Indian employment credit.
or her first 5 years of employment.• The duties performed by the employee.• Work opportunity credit.
• The employee did not receive another• The volume of business handled. length-of-service award (other than one ofReduce your deduction for employee wages
very small value) during the same year or• The character and amount of responsibil-by the amount of any employment credits you
in any of the prior 4 years.ity.claim. For more information about these credits,
see Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Dis- • The complexities of your business. Safety achievement award. An award fortressed Communities.
• The amount of time required. safety achievement will qualify as an achieve-
ment award unless one of the following applies.Topics • The cost of living in the locality.
This chapter discusses: 1. It is given to a manager, administrator,• The ability and achievements of the indi-
clerical employee, or other professionalvidual employee performing the service.• Tests for deducting pay employee.• The pay compared with the gross and net• Kinds of pay 2. During the tax year, more than 10% ofincome of the business, as well as with
your employees, excluding those listed indistributions to shareholders if the busi-
Useful Items (1), have already received a safetyness is a corporation.
You may want to see: achievement award (other than one of very• Your policy regarding pay for all your em- small value).ployees.Publication
• The history of pay for each employee. Deduction limit. Your deduction for the❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide cost of employee achievement awards given to
any one employee during the tax year is limited❏ 15-A Employer’s Supplemental Tax Test 2—For Services to the following.Guide
Performed • $400 for awards that are not qualified plan❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits awards.You must be able to prove the payment was
made for services actually performed. • $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual-See chapter 12 for information about getting ified plan awards.Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-publications and forms.
ration pays an employee who is also a share- A qualified plan award is an achievementholder a salary that is unreasonably high
award given as part of an established writtenconsidering the services actually performed, the
plan or program that does not favor highly com-excessive part of the salary may be treated as a
pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.constructive distribution to the em-
A highly compensated employee for 2007 isployee-shareholder. For more information on
an employee who meets either of the followingcorporate distributions to shareholders, see
tests.Publication 542, Corporations.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. The employee was a 5% owner at any employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate- Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefit
time during the year or the preceding year. fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementgory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-
having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals2. The employee received more than benefits to your employees, independent con-you furnish to employees as part of the cost of$100,000 in pay for the preceding year. tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsgoods sold. If you operate a nursing home,
You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- are any benefits other than deferred compensa-motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of
ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees tion or transfers of restricted property.furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesranked by pay for the preceding year. Your deduction for contributions to a welfarefor utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,An award is not a qualified plan award if the benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified costetc.average cost of all the employee achievement for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundDeduction limit on meals. You can gener-awards given during the tax year (that would be are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingqualified plan awards except for this limit) is over to the next tax year.more than $400. To figure this average cost, meals to your employees. However, you can Generally, the fund’s “qualified cost” is theignore awards of nominal value. deduct the full cost of the following meals. total of the following amounts, reduced by theDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage • Meals whose value you include in an em- after-tax income of the fund.business expense on your return or business ployee’s wages.schedule. • The cost you would have been able to
deduct using the cash method of account-• Meals that qualify as a de minimus fringeYou may not owe employment taxes ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-on the value of some achievement
cation 15-B. This generally includes mealsawards you provide to an employee. • The contributions added to a reserve ac-
TIP
you furnish to employees at your place ofSee Publication 15-B. count that are needed to fund claims in-
business if more than half of these em- curred but not paid as of the end of the
ployees are provided the meals for your year. These claims can be for supplemen-Bonuses convenience. tal unemployment benefits, severance
pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceYou can generally deduct a bonus paid to an • Meals you furnish to your employees at
benefits.employee if you intended the bonus as addi- the work site when you operate a restau-
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the rant or catering service.
For more information, see sections 419(c) andservices were performed. However, the total bo-
• Meals you furnish to your employees as 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thenuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona-
part of the expense of providing recrea- related regulations.ble for the services performed. If the bonus is
tional or social activities, such as a com-paid in property, see Property, later.
pany picnic. Loans or AdvancesGifts of nominal value. If, to promote em-
• Meals you are required by federal law toployee goodwill, you distribute food, or mer- You generally can deduct as wages an advancefurnish to crew members of certain com-chandise of nominal value to your employees at you make to an employee for services per-mercial vessels (or would be required toholidays, you can deduct the cost of these items formed if you do not expect the employee tofurnish if the vessels were operated atas a nonwage business expense. Your deduc- repay the advance. However, if the employeetion for de minimus gifts of food or drink are not sea). This does not include meals you fur- performs no services, treat the amount you ad-subject to the 50% deduction limit that generally nish on vessels primarily providing luxury vanced as a loan. If the employee does notapplies to meals. For more information on this water transportation. repay the loan, treat it as income to the em-deduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later. ployee.• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform
or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.Education Expenses This includes meals you furnish at a sup- Below-market interest rate loans. On cer-
tain loans you make to an employee or share-port camp that is near and integral to anIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for
holder, you are treated as having receivedoil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.an employee, you can deduct the payments if
interest income and as having paid compensa-they are part of a qualified educational assis-
tion or dividends equal to that interest. See Be-tance program. Deduct them on the “Employee Employee benefit programs. Employee ben- low-Market Loans in chapter 4.benefit programs” or other appropriate line of efit programs include the following.
your tax return. For information on educational
• Accident and health plans.assistance programs, see Educational Assis- Property
tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B. • Adoption assistance. If you transfer property (including your com-
• Cafeteria plans. pany’s stock) to an employee as payment forFringe Benefits services, you can generally deduct it as wages.• Dependent care assistance.
The amount you can deduct is the property’s fairA fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform- • Educational assistance. market value on the date of the transfer less anyance of services. You can generally deduct the
amount the employee paid for the property.cost of fringe benefits. • Life insurance coverage.
You may be able to exclude all or part of the You can claim the deduction only for the tax• Welfare benefit funds.value of some fringe benefits from your employ- year in which your employee includes the prop-
ees’ pay. You also may not owe employment erty’s value in income. Your employee isYou can generally deduct amounts you spendtaxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See deemed to have included the value in income ifon employee benefit programs on the applicableTable 2-1 in Publication 15-B for details. you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits  You treat the deductible amount as receivedvide dependent care by operating a dependentfor activities generally considered entertain- in exchange for the property, and you must rec-care facility for your employees, deduct yourment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer,costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,used in connection with such an activity (for unless it is the company’s stock transferred assalaries, etc.).example, a company aircraft) for certain officers, payment for services. Your gain or loss is the
directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is difference between the fair market value of theLife insurance coverage. You cannot de-limited. property and its adjusted basis on the date ofduct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,See Pub. 15-B for an extensive discussion of transfer.an employee, or any person with a financialfringe benefits. interest in your business, if you are directly or These rules also apply to property trans-
ferred to an independent contractor for services,indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct
generally reported on Form 1099-MISC.the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Restricted property. If the property you property) certain rent expenses at the end of the 11. Two S corporations or an S corporation
transfer for services is subject to restrictions that chapter. and a regular corporation if the same per-
affect its value, you generally cannot deduct it sons own more than 50% in value of the
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- outstanding stock of each corporation.
Topics
tially vested in the recipient. However, if the This chapter discusses: 12. An executor of an estate and a beneficiaryrecipient pays for the property, you must report of the estate unless the sale or exchangeany gain at the time of the transfer up to the • The definition of rent is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest.amount paid.
• Taxes on leased property To determine whether an individual directly“Substantially vested” means the property is
or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock ofnot subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This • The cost of getting a lease
a corporation, see Related Persons in Publica-means that the recipient is not likely to have to • Improvements by the lessee tion 542, Corporations. For rules that apply togive up his or her rights in the property in the
transactions between partners and partner-future. • Capitalizing rent expenses
ships, see Publication 541, Partnerships.
Reimbursements Rent on your home. If you rent your home
Rentfor Business Expenses and use part of it as your place of business, you
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatYou can generally deduct the amount you pay or Rent is any amount you pay for the use of part. You must meet the requirements for busi-reimburse employees for business expenses in- property you do not own. In general, you can ness use of your home. For more information,curred for your business. However, your deduc- deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for see Business use of your home in chapter 1.tion may be limited. property you use in your trade or business. If you
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-If you make the payment under an accounta- Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in
erty, the rent is not deductible.ble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense your trade or business is deductible in the year
paid. For example, if you pay an employee for paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you
Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rentaltravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct can deduct only the amount that applies to your
deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, thethis payment as a travel expense. If you make use of the rented property during the tax year.
issue of reasonableness arises only if you andthe payment under a nonaccountable plan, de- You can deduct the rest of your payment only
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a relatedduct it as wages and include it in the employee’s over the period to which it applies.
person (defined below) is reasonable if it is theW-2.
same amount you would pay to a stranger for Example 1. You are a calendar year tax-See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and
use of the same property. Rent is not unreason- payer and you leased a building for 5 yearsEntertainment in chapter 11 for more informa-
able just because it is figured as a percentage of beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year.tion about deducting reimbursements and an
gross sales. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) on Juneexplanation of accountable and nonaccountable
30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 × $12,000)plans. Related persons. For this purpose, the fol- for the rent that applies to the first year.lowing are considered related persons.
Sick and Vacation Pay Example 2. You are a calendar year tax-1. An individual and his or her brothers and
payer. Last January you leased property for 3sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to years for $6,000 a year. You paid the fullancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),your employees for sickness and injury, includ- $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of theand lineal descendants (children, grand-ing lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, lease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000,children, etc.).your deduction is limited to amounts not com- the part of the lease that applies to that year.pensated by insurance or other means. 2. An individual and a corporation if the indi-
vidual owns, directly or indirectly, more Canceling a lease. You generally can deduct
Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employee than 50% in value of the outstanding stock as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business
benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused of the corporation. lease.
vacation leave. You can deduct vacation pay 3. Two corporations that are members of theonly in the tax year in which the employee actu- Lease or purchase. There may be instancessame controlled group as defined in sec-ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of in which you must determine whether your pay-tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.whether you use the cash or accrual method of ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
accounting. property. You must first determine whether your4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.
agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the tract. Payments made under a conditional salessame person is a grantor of both trusts. contract are not deductible as rent expense.
6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the same Conditional sales contract. Whether antrust. agreement is a conditional sales contract de-
7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa- pends on the intent of the parties. Determine3. rate trusts if the same person is a grantor intent based on the provisions of the agreement
of both trusts. and the facts and circumstances that exist when
you make the agreement. No single test, or8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation if special combination of tests, always applies.Rent Expense the trust or a grantor of the trust owns, However, in general, an agreement may be con-directly or indirectly, more than 50% in sidered a conditional sales contract rather thanvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- a lease if any of the following is true.poration.Introduction • The agreement applies part of each pay-9. A person and a tax-exempt educational orThis chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent ment toward an equity interest you will re-charitable organization that is controlled di-or lease payments you make for property you ceive.rectly or indirectly by that person or byuse in your business but do not own. It also members of the family of that person. • You get title to the property after you makediscusses how to treat other kinds of payments a stated amount of required payments.you make that are related to your use of this 10. A corporation and a partnership if the
property. These include payments you make for same persons own more than 50% in • The amount you must pay to use the prop-
taxes on the property, improvements to the value of the outstanding stock of the cor- erty for a short time is a large part of the
property, and getting a lease. There is a discus- poration and more than 50% of the capital amount you would pay to get title to the
sion about capitalizing (including in the cost of or profits interest in the partnership. property.
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Leveraged leases of limited-use property.• You pay much more than the current fair The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever- mined by state or local law and the lease agree-rental value of the property.
ment. Economic performance occurs as you useaged leases of so-called limited-use property.• You have an option to buy the property at the property.Limited-use property is property not expected toa nominal price compared to the value of be either useful to or usable by a lessor at thethe property when you may exercise the Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendarend of the lease term except for continued leas-option. Determine this value when you year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-make the agreement. accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-dure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use
ness. Under state law, owners of real property• You have an option to buy the property at property and property that is not limited-use
become liable (incur a lien on the property) forproperty.a nominal price compared to the total
real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofamount you have to pay under the agree- that year. However, they do not have to payment. Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18vided for certain leases of tangible property. The• The agreement designates part of the pay- months later) when tax bills are issued. Underrules apply if the lease calls for total payments ofments as interest, or that part is easy to the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable formore than $250,000 and any of the followingrecognize as interest. the real estate taxes in the later year when theapply. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable for• Rents increase during the lease.
actions may not be considered leases. Lever- the taxes for that year.• Rents decrease during the lease.aged leases generally involve three parties: a Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as
• Rents are deferred (rent is payable afterlessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s
the end of the calendar year following theUsually the lease term covers a large part of the liability under the lease becomes fixed.
calendar year in which the use occurs anduseful life of the leased property, and the
Example 2. The facts are the same as inthe rent is allocated).lessee’s payments to the lessor are enough to
Example 1 except that, according to the terms ofcover the lessor’s payments to the lender. • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estateIf you plan to take part in what appears to be the end of the calendar year preceding the taxes when the owner of the property becomesa leveraged lease, you may want to get an calendar year in which the use occurs and liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct theadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on the rent is allocated). real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for thepage 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 earlier year. This is the year in which Oak’sThese rules do not apply if your lease specifiescontains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter- liability under the lease becomes fixed.equal amounts of rent for each month in themine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal
lease term and all rent payments are due in theincome tax purposes. Revenue Procedure
calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internal
preceding or following calendar year).Revenue Bulletin provides the information re-
Cost ofquired to be furnished in a request for an ad- Generally, if the special rules apply, you must
vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. use an accrual method of accounting (and time Getting a LeaseInternal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at value of money principles) for your rental ex-
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf. penses, regardless of your overall method of You may either enter into a new lease with theaccounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 lessor of the property or get an existing lease
the IRS has determined that a lease was de-provides that, for advance ruling purposes only, from another lessee. Very often when you get an
signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takethe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged existing lease from another lessee, you must
rent and stated or imputed interest into accountlease transaction to be the owner of the property pay the previous lessee money to get the lease,
under a constant rental accrual method in whichand the transaction to be a valid lease if all the besides having to pay the rent on the lease.
the rent is treated as accruing ratably over thefactors in the revenue procedure are met, in- If you get an existing lease on property or
entire lease term. For details, see section 467 ofcluding the following. equipment for your business, you generally
the Internal Revenue Code. must amortize any amount you pay to get that• The lessor must maintain a minimum un- lease over the remaining term of the lease. Forconditional “at risk” equity investment in example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease andthe property (at least 20% of the cost of there are 10 years remaining on the lease withthe property) during the entire lease term. no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 eachTaxes on
• The lessee may not have a contractual year.
right to buy the property from the lessor at Leased Property The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi-
less than fair market value when the right ble property is not subject to the amortization
If you lease business property, you can deductis exercised. rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay to chapter 8.• The lessee may not invest in the property, or for the lessor. When you can deduct theseexcept as provided by Revenue Procedure Option to renew. The term of the lease fortaxes as additional rent depends on your ac-2001-28. amortization includes all renewal options pluscounting method.
any other period for which you and the lessor• The lessee may not lend any money to the
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed.lessor to buy the property or guarantee the Cash method. If you use the cash method of
However, this applies only if less than 75% ofloan used by the lessor to buy the prop- accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-
the cost of getting the lease is for the termerty. tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay
remaining on the purchase date (not includingthem.• The lessor must show that it expects to any period for which you may choose to renew,
receive a profit apart from the tax deduc- extend, or continue the lease). Allocate theAccrual method. If you use an accrualtions, allowances, credits, and other tax lease cost to the original term and any optionmethod of accounting, you can deduct taxes asattributes. term based on the facts and circumstances. Inadditional rent for the tax year in which you can some cases, it may be appropriate to make thedetermine all the following.The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing allocation using a present value computation.
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue • That you have a liability for taxes on the For more information, see Regulations section
Procedure 2008-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve- leased property. 1.178-1(b)(5).
nue Bulletin No. 2008-1. Internal Revenue Bulle- • How much the liability is.tin 2008-1 is available at www.irs.gov/pub/ Example 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease
• That economic performance occurred.irs-irbs/irb08-01.pdf. with 20 years remaining on it and two options to
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid Assignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee rules, you must include the rent you paid to
$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the who makes permanent improvements to land occupy the facility in the cost of the tools you
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less than later assigns all lease rights to you for money produce.
75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or and you pay the rent required by the lease, the
More information. For more information on$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30 amount you pay for the assignment is a capital
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inyears. That is the remaining life of your present investment. If the rental value of the leased land
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-lease plus the periods for renewal. increased since the lease began, part of your
nal Revenue Code section 263A.capital investment is for that increase in the
Example 2. The facts are the same as in rental value. The rest is for your investment in
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the the permanent improvements.
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op- The part that is for the increased rental value
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease. amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was You can depreciate the part that is for your
not less than 75% of the total cost of the lease 4.investment in the improvements over the recov-
(or $7,500). ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement. You may
have to pay an additional “rent” amount over part Interest
of the lease period to change certain provisions
in your lease. You must capitalize these pay- Capitalizingments and amortize them over the remaining Introductionperiod of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay- Rent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de- This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-
scribed as rent in the agreement. ness interest expense. Business interest ex-Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must pense is an amount charged for the use ofcapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer money you borrowed for business activities.costs for certain production or resale activities.and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building Include these costs in the basis of property youstarting on January 1. However, before you oc- Topicsproduce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-cupy it, you decide that you really need less This chapter discusses:ing them as a current deduction. You recover thespace. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent costs through depreciation, amortization, or costfrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release • Allocation of interestof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwisethe excess space from the original lease. In dispose of the property. • Interest you can deductexchange, you agree to pay an additional rent Indirect costs include amounts incurred foramount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- • Interest you cannot deductrenting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.ments of $50 each. • Capitalization of interestYou must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize Uniform capitalization rules. You may beit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- • When to deduct interestsubject to the uniform capitalization rules if youtization deduction each year will be $150 do any of the following, unless the property is • Below-market loans($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × produced for your use other than in a business$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 or an activity carried on for profit.years as rent. Useful Items
1. Produce real property or tangible personal You may want to see:Commissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis- property. For this purpose, tangible per-sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you sonal property includes a film, sound re- Publicationpay to get a lease on property you use in your cording, video tape, book, or similarbusiness are capital costs. You must amortize ❏ 537 Installment Salesproperty.these costs over the term of the lease.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses2. Acquire property for resale.
Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If you ❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest DeductionHowever, these rules do not apply to the follow-sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you ing property.bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of Form (and Instructions)getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss 1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifand amortize it over the remaining term of the ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsyour average annual gross receipts arelease. $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years. ❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental
Income and Loss2. Property you produce if you meet either of
the following conditions. ❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner’s Share of
Improvements Income, Deductions, Credits, etc.a. Your indirect costs of producing the
property are $200,000 or less. ❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder’sby Lessee
Share of Income, Deductions,b. You use the cash method of accounting Credits, etc.If you add buildings or make other permanent and do not account for inventories.
improvements to leased property, depreciate ❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
the cost of the improvements using the modified
❏ 3115 Application for Change inaccelerated cost recovery system (MACRS). Example 1. You rent construction equip-
Accounting MethodDepreciate the property over its appropriate re- ment to build a storage facility. If you are subject
covery period. You cannot amortize the cost to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap- ❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense
over the remaining term of the lease. italize as part of the cost of the building the rent Deduction
If you do not keep the improvements when you paid for the equipment. You recover your
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsyou end the lease, figure your gain or loss based cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation on
on your adjusted basis in the improvements at the building.
See chapter 12 for information about gettingthat time.
publications and forms.For more information, see the discussion of Example 2. You rent space in a facility to
MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate conduct your business of manufacturing tools. If
Property. you are subject to the uniform capitalization
Page 10 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 11 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must reallocate the loan based on the use of Payments from checking accounts. Gen-Allocation of Interest erally, you treat a payment from a checking orthe funds.
similar account as made at the time the check isThe rules for deducting interest vary, depending Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax- written if you mail or deliver it to the payee withinon whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im- a reasonable period after you write it. You canness, personal, or investment activities. If you treat checks written on the same day as writtenmediately uses the proceeds to open a checkinguse the proceeds of a loan for more than one in any order.account. No other amounts are deposited in thetype of expense, you must make an allocation to account during the year and no part of the loan Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-determine the interest for each use of the loan’s principal is repaid during the year. On April 2, ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-proceeds. Connie uses $20,000 from the checking account ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatAllocate your interest expense to the follow- for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem- any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)ing categories. ber 4, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from made from any account you own, or from cash,• Nonpassive trade or business activity in- the account for personal purposes. as made from those proceeds. This applies toterest Under the interest allocation rules, the entire any payment made within 30 days before or
$100,000 loan is treated as property held for after the proceeds are received in cash or de-• Passive trade or business activity interest
investment for the period from January 4 posited in your account.• Investment interest through April 1. From April 2 through September If the loan proceeds are deposited in an
3, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as used• Portfolio interest account, you can apply this rule even if the rules
in the passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as stated earlier under Order of funds spent would• Personal interest property held for investment. From September 4 otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as
through December 31, she must treat $40,000In general, you allocate interest on a loan the used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to
of the loan as used for personal purposes,same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You any payments, disregard those payments (and
$20,000 as used in the passive activity, andallocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- the proceeds from which they are made) when
ments to specific uses. $40,000 as property held for investment. applying the rules stated under Order of funds
spent.Order of funds spent. Generally, you treatThe easiest way to trace disburse- If you received the loan proceeds in cash,loan proceeds deposited in an account as usedments to specific uses is to keep the you can treat the payment as made on the date(spent) before either of the following amounts.proceeds of a particular loan separate you received the cash instead of the date you
TIP
from any other funds. • Any unborrowed amounts held in the actually made the payment.
same account.
Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 onSecured loan. The allocation of loan pro- • Any amounts deposited after these loan August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.ceeds and the related interest is not generally proceeds. Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on Augustaffected by the use of property that secures the
18 and on August 28 writes a check on theloan.
Example. On January 9, Edith opened a account for a passive activity expense. Also,
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro- Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits otherExample. You secure a loan with property
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed loan proceeds, and pays his bills during theused in your business. You use the loan pro-
funds. The following table shows the transac- same period. Regardless of these other transac-ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.
tions in her account during the tax year. tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit heYou must allocate interest expense on the loan
made on August 18 as being paid on August 4to personal use (purchase of the automobile)
Date Transaction from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank caneven though the loan is secured by business
treat the passive activity expense he paid onproperty. January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A
August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-andIf the property that secures the loan is ceeds treated as deposited in the account.$1,000 unborrowed fundsyour home, you generally do not allo- deposited Optional method for determining date ofcate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP
reallocation. You can use the followingJanuary 13 $500 proceeds of Loan Binterest. The interest is usually deductible as
method to determine the date loan proceeds aredepositedqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of
reallocated to another use. You can treat allhow the loan proceeds are used. For more infor- February 18 $800 used for personal payments from loan proceeds in the accountmation, see Publication 936. purposes during any month as taking place on the later of
February 27 $700 used for passive the following dates.Allocation period. The period for which a activityloan is allocated to a particular use begins on the • The first day of that month.
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan Cdate the proceeds are used and ends on the • The date the loan proceeds are depositeddepositedearlier of the following dates. in the account.November 20 $800 used for an• The date the loan is repaid. However, you can use this optional method onlyinvestment
• The date the loan is reallocated to another if you treat all payments from the account duringDecember 18 $600 used for personaluse. the same calendar month in the same way.purposes
Interest on a segregated account. If youEdith treats the $800 used for personal pur-Proceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even have an account that contains only loan pro-poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loanif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a ceeds and interest earned on the account, youA and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. Shethird party, the allocation of the loan is still based can treat any payment from that account astreats the $700 used for a passive activity ason your use of the funds. This applies whether being made first from the interest. When the
made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofyou pay for property, services, or anything else interest earned is used up, any remaining pay-
Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. Sheby incurring a loan, or you take property subject ments are from loan proceeds.
treats the $800 used for an investment as madeto a debt.
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treats Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used
the $600 used for personal purposes as madeProceeds deposited in borrower’s account. the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan CTreat loan proceeds deposited in an account as account. When the account had earned interest
and $400 of unborrowed funds.property held for investment. It does not matter of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-
For the periods during which loan proceedswhether the account pays interest. Any interest poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming
are held in the account, Edith treats them asyou pay on the loan is investment interest ex- first from the interest earned on the account,
property held for investment.pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, $867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the its principal amount. The OID is the difference
between the stated redemption price at maturityloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- Interest You
and the issue price of the loan.count until the time of the withdrawal is invest-
ment interest expense. The interest charged on  A loan’s stated redemption price at maturityCan Deduct
the part of the proceeds used for personal pur- is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it You can generally deduct as a business ex- payable on it other than qualified stated interest.
until you either repay it or reallocate it to another pense all interest you pay or accrue during the Qualified stated interest is stated interest that is
use is personal interest expense. The interest tax year on debts related to your trade or busi- unconditionally payable in cash or property
charged on the loan proceeds you left in the ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if (other than another loan of the issuer) at least
account ($867) continues to be investment inter- you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or annually over the term of the loan at a single
est expense until you either repay it or reallocate business expense. It does not matter what type fixed rate.
it to another use. of property secures the loan. You can deduct You generally deduct OID over the term of
interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow- the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year
ing requirements.Loan repayment. When you repay any part of using the constant-yield method, unless the OID
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as on the loan is de minimis.• You are legally liable for that debt.being repaid in the following order. De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it• Both you and the lender intend that the is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the1. Personal use. debt be repaid. stated redemption price of the loan at maturity
2. Investments and passive activities (other • You and the lender have a true multiplied by the number of full years from the
than those included in (3)). debtor-creditor relationship. date of original issue to maturity (the term of the
loan).3. Passive activities in connection with a
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose onerental real estate activity in which you ac- Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a
of the following ways to figure the amount youtively participate. business debt, you can deduct only your share
can deduct each year.of the total interest paid or accrued.4. Former passive activities.
• On a constant-yield basis over the term of5. Trade or business use and expenses for Example. You and your brother borrow the loan.certain low-income housing projects. money. You are liable for 50% of the note. You
• On a straight-line basis over the term ofuse your half of the loan in your business, and
the loan.you make one-half of the loan payments. YouLine of credit (continuous borrowings). can deduct your half of the total interest pay- • In proportion to stated interest payments.The following rules apply if you have a line of ments as a business deduction.credit or similar arrangement. • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid
1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest You make this choice by deducting the OID in aor accrued on real estate you own legally or
accrues at the same fixed or variable rate manner consistent with the method chosen onequitably is deductible. However, rather than
as a single loan. your timely filed tax return for the tax year indeducting the interest currently, you may have
which the loan is issued.to add it to the cost basis of the property as2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed
explained later under Capitalization of Interest.funds on which interest accrues at different Example. On January 1, 2007, you took outfixed or variable rates as different loans. Statement. If you paid $600 or more of a $100,000 discounted loan and receivedTreat these loans as repaid in the order mortgage interest (including certain points) dur- $98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature onshown on the loan agreement. ing the year on any one mortgage, you generally January 1, 2017 (a 10-year term), and the
will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement. $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-
You will receive the statement if you pay interest est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of eachLoan refinancing. Allocate the replacement to a person (including a financial institution or a year, beginning January 1, 2008. The $1,500loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan cooperative housing corporation) in the course OID on the loan is de minimis because it is lesswas allocated. Make the allocation only to the of that person’s trade or business. A govern- than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). Youextent you use the proceeds of the new loan to mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishing choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basisrepay any part of the original loan. the statement. over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2007, you
If you receive a refund of interest you over- can deduct $150 each year for 10 years.Debt-financed distribution. A debt-financed paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor- Constant-yield method. If the OID is not deported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotporation borrows funds and allocates those minimis, you must use the constant-yielddeduct this amount. For information on how tofunds to distributions made to partners or share- method to figure how much you can deduct eachreport this refund, see Refunds of interest laterholders. The manner in which you report the year. You figure your deduction for the first yearin this chapter.interest expense associated with the distributed using the following steps.Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.debt proceeds depends on your use of those
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgageproceeds. 1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen-
cannot be deducted as interest. These ex- erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan.How to report. If the proceeds were used in penses, which include mortgage commissions, If you paid points on the loan (as dis-a nonpassive trade or business activity, report abstract fees, and recording fees, are capital cussed later), the issue price generally isthe interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28; expenses. If the property mortgaged is business the difference between the proceeds andenter “interest expense” and the name of the or income-producing property, you can amortize the points.partnership or S corporation in column (a) and the costs over the life of the mortgage.the amount in column (h). If the proceeds were 2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourused in a passive activity, follow the instructions maturity.
mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forfor Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- 3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-tions, to determine the amount of interest ex- ments from the result in (2). This is theest.pense that can be reported on Schedule E OID you can deduct in the first year.(Form 1040), line 28; enter “interest expense” Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-and the name of the partnership in column (a) To figure your deduction in any subsequentterest charged on employment taxes assessedand the amount in column (f). If the proceeds year, follow the above steps, except determineon your business is deductible.were used in an investment activity, enter the the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are used Original issue discount (OID). OID is a form adjusted issue price, add to the issue price any
for personal purposes, the interest is generally of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen- OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)
not deductible. erally has OID when its proceeds are less than and (3) above.
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The yield to maturity is generally shown in Who is a key person? A key person is an
officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofthe literature you receive from your lender. If you Interest You
individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-do not have this information, consult your lender
ited to the greater of the following.or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is Cannot Deduct
the discount rate that, when used in computing • Five individuals.the present value of all principal and interest Certain interest payments cannot be deducted.
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers andIn addition, certain other expenses that maypayments, produces an amount equal to the
employees of the company or 20 individu-seem to be interest are not, and you cannotprincipal amount of the loan.
als.deduct them as interest.
Example. The facts are the same as in the You cannot currently deduct interest that
Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.previous example, except that you deduct the must be capitalized, and you generally cannot
You can generally deduct the interest if the con-deduct personal interest.OID on a constant yield basis over the term of
tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and thethe loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi- covered individual is someone other than an10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2007, nal lender. If you use the cash method of employee, officer, or someone financially inter-you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay ested in your business. If the contract was pur-$10,000]. For 2008, you can deduct $103 with funds borrowed from the original lender chased before June 21, 1986, you can generally[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000]. through a second loan, an advance, or any other deduct the interest no matter who is covered byarrangement similar to a loan. You can deductLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan or the contract.the interest expense once you start making pay-mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any
ments on the new loan. Interest allocated to unborrowed policyremaining OID in the tax year in which the loan
When you make a payment on the new loan, cash value. Corporations and partnershipsor mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end
you first apply the payment to interest and then generally cannot deduct any interest expensedue to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,
to the principal. All amounts you apply to the allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-or similar event.
interest on the first loan are deductible, along surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. ThisIf you refinance with the original lender, with any interest you pay on the second loan, rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,you generally cannot deduct the re- subject to any limits that apply. 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,maining OID in the year in which theCAUTION
!
director, employee, or 20% owner. For moreCapitalized interest. You cannot currentlyrefinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- information, see section 264(f) of the Internaldeduct interest you are required to capitalizeduct it over the term of the new mortgage or Revenue Code.under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from
talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buyoriginal lender under Interest You Cannot De-
property and pay interest owed by the seller (forduct, later.
example, by assuming the debt and any interest
accrued on the property), you cannot deduct the CapitalizationPoints. The term “points” is used to describe interest. Add this interest to the basis of the
certain of the charges paid, or treated as paid, of Interestproperty.
by a borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage.
Commitment fees or standby charges.These charges are also called loan origination Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-Fees you incur to have business funds availablefees, maximum loan charges, discount points, or erally must capitalize interest on debt equal toon a standby basis, but not for the actual use ofpremium charges. If any of these charges your expenditures to produce real property orthe funds, are not deductible as interest pay-(points) are solely for the use of money, they are certain tangible personal property. The propertyments. You may be able to deduct them asinterest. must be produced by you for use in your trade orbusiness expenses.Because points are prepaid interest, you business or for sale to customers. You cannotIf the funds are for inventory or certain prop-generally cannot deduct the full amount in the capitalize interest related to property that youerty used in your business, the fees are indirectyear paid. However, you can choose to fully acquire in any other manner.costs and you generally must capitalize themdeduct points in the year paid if you meet certain Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see duction period must be capitalized if the propertytalization of Interest, later.Publication 936. produced is designated property. Designated
Interest on income tax. Interest charged on property is any of the following.The points reduce the issue price of the loan
income tax assessed on your individual incomeand result in original issue discount, deductible • Real property.tax return is not a business deduction evenas explained in the preceding discussion.
though the tax due is related to income from • Tangible personal property with a class life
your trade or business. Treat this interest as a of 20 years or more.Partial payments on a nontax debt. If you business deduction only in figuring a net operat-make partial payments on a debt (other than a • Tangible personal property with an esti-ing loss deduction.debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied, mated production period of more than 2
in general, first to interest and any remainder to Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien- years.
cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-principal. You can deduct only the interest. This
• Tangible personal property with an esti-est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, yourule does not apply when it can be inferred that
mated production period of more than 1cannot deduct any fines or penalties.the borrower and lender understood that a differ-
year if the estimated cost of production isent allocation of the payments would be made. Interest on loans with respect to life insur- more than $1 million.ance policies. You generally cannot deduct
Installment purchase. If you make an install- interest on a debt incurred with respect to any
ment purchase of business property, the con- Property you produce. You produce propertylife insurance, annuity, or endowment contract
tract between you and the seller generally if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-that covers any individual unless that individual
provides for the payment of interest. If no inter- velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatis a key person.
est or a low rate of interest is charged under the property produced for you under a contract asIf the policy or contract covers a key person,
contract, a portion of the stated principal amount produced by you up to the amount you pay oryou can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 of
incur for the property.payable under the contract may be recharacter- debt for that person. However, the deduction for
ized as interest (unstated interest). The amount any month cannot be more than the interest
recharacterized as interest reduces your basis Carrying charges. Carrying charges includefigured using Moody’s Composite Yield on Sea-
in the property and increases your interest ex- taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate orsoned Corporate Bonds (formerly known as
pense. For more information on installment to carry, transport, or install personal property.Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield Aver-
sales and unstated interest, see Publication You can choose to capitalize carrying chargesage-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody’s
537. not subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifrate) for that month.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Prepaid interest. See Prepaid interest, 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where the
mation, see chapter 7. forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).above.
2. Compensation-related loans (be-Discounted loan. See Discounted loan,Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter-
low-market loans between an employerabove.est as a cost of the property produced. You
and an employee or between an indepen-recover your interest when you sell or use the Tax deficiency. If you contest a federal in- dent contractor and a person for whom theproperty. If the property is inventory, recover come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue contractor provides services).capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If until the tax year the final determination of liabil-the property is used in your trade or business, 3. Corporation-shareholder loans.ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,recover capitalized interest through an adjust- then the interest accrues in the year the tax was 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or asserted and agreed to by you. where the avoidance of federal tax is oneother method.
However, if you contest but pay the pro- of the main purposes of the interest ar-
Partnerships and S corporations. The inter- posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do rangement).
est capitalization rules are applied first at the not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiespartnership or S corporation level. The rules are the interest is deductible in the year paid. under a continuing care contract (made af-then applied at the partners’ or shareholders’ Related person. If you use an accrual ter October 11, 1985).level to the extent the partnership or S corpora- method, you cannot deduct interest owed to ation has insufficient debt to support the produc- Except as noted in (5) above, these rulesrelated person who uses the cash method untiltion or construction costs. apply to demand loans (loans payable in full atpayment is made and the interest is includible inIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingthe gross income of that person. The relation-may have to capitalize interest you incur during after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatship is determined as of the end of the tax yearthe tax year for the production costs of the part- are not demand loans) made after that date.for which the interest would otherwise be de-nership or S corporation. You may also have to
ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve-capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or Treatment of gift and demand loans. If younue Code for more information.S corporation for your own production costs. To receive a below-market gift loan or demand
properly capitalize interest under these rules, loan, you are treated as receiving an additionalyou must be given the required information in an payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive forgone interest on the loan. You are thenfrom the partnership or S corporation. Below-Market Loans treated as transferring this amount back to the
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-Additional information. The procedures for If you receive a below-market gift or demand ered to occur annually, generally on Decemberapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be- loan and use the proceeds in your trade or 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade oryond the scope of this publication. For more business, you may be able to deduct the forgone business, you can deduct the forgone interestinformation, see sections 1.263A-8 through interest. See Treatment of gift and demand each year as a business interest expense. The1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. loans later in this discussion. lender must report it as interest income.Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2.
A below-market loan is a loan on which no Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofinterest is charged or on which interest is $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-charged at a rate below the applicable federal viduals, forgone interest treated as transferredrate. A gift or demand loan that is a be-When To back to the lender is limited to the borrower’s netlow-market loan generally is considered an investment income for the year. This limit ap-arm’s-length transaction in which you, the bor-Deduct Interest plies if the outstanding loans between the lenderrower, are considered as having received both and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor-
the following.If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed rower’s net investment income is $1,000 or less,
under Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do not it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a• A loan in exchange for a note that requiresapply to you, deduct interest as follows. loan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one ofthe payment of interest at the applicable
the main purposes of the interest arrangement.federal rate.Cash method. Under the cash method, you
can generally deduct only the interest you actu- • An additional payment in an amount equal Treatment of term loans. If you receive aally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct to the forgone interest. below-market term loan other than a gift or de-a promissory note you gave as payment be- mand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual tional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on thedend, contribution to capital, payment of com-payment.
date the loan is made. This payment is equal topensation, or other payment, depending on thePrepaid interest. You generally cannot de- the loan amount minus the present value, at thesubstance of the transaction.duct any interest paid before the year it is due. applicable federal rate, of all payments dueFor any period, forgone interest  is:Interest paid in advance can be deducted only in under the loan. The same amount is treated as
the tax year in which it is due. original issue discount on the loan. See Original1. The interest that would be payable for that issue discount (OID)  under Interest You CanDiscounted loan. If interest or a discount is period if interest accrued on the loan at the Deduct, earlier.subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a applicable federal rate and was payable
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it annually on December 31, Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. Thewhen you get the loan. For more information, minus rules for below-market loans do not apply to anysee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest
2. Any interest actually payable on the loan day on which the total outstanding loans be-You Can Deduct, earlier.
for the period. tween the borrower and lender is $10,000 orRefunds of interest. If you pay interest and less. This exception applies only to the follow-then receive a refund in the same tax year of any Applicable federal rates are published ing.part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc- by the IRS each month in the Internal
tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a 1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan isRevenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue
TIP
later tax year, include the refund in your income not directly used to buy or carry in-Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at
to the extent the deduction for the interest re- come-producing assets.www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRS
duced your tax. office to get these rates. 2. Compensation-related loans or corpora-
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance ofAccrual method. Under an accrual method,
Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be- any federal tax is not a principal purpose ofyou can deduct only interest that has accrued
low-market loans apply to the following.during the tax year. the interest arrangement.
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This exception does not apply to a term loan 1. The individual or individual’s spouse must Useful Items
described in (2) above that was previously sub- be entitled to use the facility for the rest of You may want to see:
ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules their life or lives.
Publicationwill continue to apply even if the outstanding 2. The individual or individual’s spouse will bebalance is reduced to $10,000 or less. provided with housing, as appropriate for ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide
the health of the individual or individual’sExceptions for loans without significant tax ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessspouse in an:effect. The following loans are specifically ex- ❏ 510 Excise Taxesempted from the rules for below-market loans a. independent living unit (which has addi-
because their interest arrangements do not ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodstional available facilities outside the unit
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil- for the provision of meals and other per- ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsity of the borrower or the lender. sonal care), and
Form (and Instructions)b. assisted living or nursing facility avail-1. Loans made available by lenders to the
able in the continuing care facility.general public on the same terms and con- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsditions that are consistent with the lender’s
3. The individual or individual’s spouse will be ❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employmentcustomary business practices.
provided with assisted living or nursing Tax2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or care available in the continuing care facil- ❏ 3115 Application for Change inmunicipal government that are made avail- ity, as required for the health of the individ- Accounting Methodable under a program of general applica- ual or the individual’s spouse.tion to the public.
For more information, see section 7872(h) of See chapter 12 for information about getting3. Certain employee-relocation loans. publications and forms.the Internal Revenue Code.
4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
unless the interest income would be effec- Sale or exchange of property. Different rulestively connected with the conduct of a U.S. generally apply to a loan connected with the saletrade or business and not exempt from When Toor exchange of property. If the loan does notU.S. tax under an income tax treaty. provide adequate stated interest, part of the Deduct Taxes5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show principal payment may be considered interest.
that the interest arrangement has no signif- However, there are exceptions that may require Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearicant effect on the federal tax liability of the you to apply the below-market interest rate rules you pay them. This applies whether you use thelender or the borrower. Whether an inter- to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi- cash method or an accrual method of account-est arrangement has a significant effect on nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537. ing.the federal tax liability of the lender or the Under an accrual method, you can deduct aborrower will be determined by all the facts tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptionMore information. For more information onand circumstances. Consider all the follow- for recurring items discussed under Economicbelow-market loans, see section 7872 of theing factors. Performance in Publication 538. You can alsoInternal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5T
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis-of the regulations.a. Whether items of income and deduction cussed later under Real Estate Taxes.generated by the loan offset each other.
Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic-b. The amount of the items. tion can require the use of a date for accruing
c. The cost of complying with the be- taxes that is earlier than the date it originally
low-market loan provisions if they were required. However, if you use an accrual
to apply. method, and can deduct the tax before you pay
it, use the original accrual date for the year of5.d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for change and all future years to determine whenstructuring the transaction as a be- you can deduct the tax.low-market loan.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-Taxes sonal property used in a trade or business con-Exception for loans to qualified continuing ducted in the state. This tax is assessed andcare facilities. The below-market interest becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). Inrules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualified 2007, the state changed the assessment andIntroductioncontinuing care facility under a continuing care lien dates from July 1, 2008, to December 31,contract if the lender or lender’s spouse is age You can deduct various federal, state, local, and 2007, for property tax year 2008. Use the origi-62 or older by the end of the calendar year. foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade or nal accrual date (July 1, 2008) to determine
A qualified continuing care facility is one or business as business expenses. when you can deduct the tax. You must also use
more facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet- the July 1 accrual date for all future years toYou cannot deduct federal incomeing the requirements listed below. determine when you can deduct the tax.taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state
inheritance, legacy, and succession1. Designed to provide services under contin- Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi-CAUTION
!
taxes.uing care contracts (defined below). talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who
produce real property or tangible personal prop-2. Includes an independent living unit, and erty for use in a trade or business or for sale toTopicseither an assisted living or nursing facility, customers. They also apply to certain taxpayersor both. This chapter discusses: who acquire property for resale. Under these
3. Substantially all of the independent living rules, you either include certain costs in inven-• When to deduct taxesunit residents are covered by continuing tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the
care contracts. property, such as taxes. For more information,• Real estate taxes
see chapter 1.A continuing care contract is a written con- • Income taxes
tract between an individual and a qualified con- Carrying charges. Carrying charges include• Employment taxestinuing care facility that includes all of the taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or
following conditions. • Other taxes to carry, transport, or install personal property.
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges not The buyer and seller must allocate the real Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue for
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if they estate taxes according to the number of days in a year after the first year in which you incur real
are otherwise deductible. For more information, the real property tax year (the period to which estate taxes or if you want to revoke your elec-
see chapter 7. the tax imposed relates) that each owned the tion to ratably accrue real estate taxes, file Form
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up 3115. For more information, including applicable
Refunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for to but not including the date of sale. Treat the time frames for filing, see the instructions for
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the Form 3115.
clude the refund in income to the extent the date of sale. You can usually find this informa-
deduction reduced your federal income tax in tion on the settlement statement you received at
the earlier year. For more information, see Re- closing.
covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule) in If you (the seller) use an accrual method and Income Taxeschapter 1. have not elected to ratably accrue real estate
taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourYou must include in income any inter- This section discusses federal, state, local, and
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.est you receive on tax refunds. foreign income taxes.TIP
Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual Federal income taxes. You cannot deduct
method taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm federal income taxes.
County. He has not elected to ratably accrue
property taxes. November 30 of each year is the State and local income taxes. A corporation
assessment and lien date for the current real or partnership can deduct state and local in-
Real Estate Taxes property tax year, which is the calendar year. He come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-
sold the property on June 30, 2007. Under his nership as business expenses. An individual
Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, accounting method he would not be able to can deduct state and local income taxes only as
or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the claim a deduction for the taxes because the sale an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
general public welfare. The taxing authority occurred before November 30. He is treated as 1040).
must base the taxes on the assessed value of having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- However, an individual can deduct a statethe real estate and charge them uniformly ary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct it tax on gross income (as distinguished from netagainst all property under its jurisdiction. De- for 2007. income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-ductible real estate taxes generally do not in- ness as a business expense.Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac-clude taxes charged for local benefits and
crual method, you can elect to accrue real estate Accrual of contested income taxes. If youimprovements that increase the value of the
tax related to a definite period ratably over that use an accrual method, and you contest a stateproperty. See Taxes for local benefits, later.
period. or local income tax liability, you must accrue andIf you use an accrual method, you generally
deduct any contested amount in the tax year incannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay
Example. John Smith is a calendar year which the liability is finally determined.them to the government authority. However, you
taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His realcan elect to ratably accrue the taxes during the If additional state or local income taxes for aestate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later. prior year are assessed in a later year, you can2007, to June 30, 2008, are $1,200. July 1 is the deduct the taxes in the year in which they wereassessment and lien date.Taxes for local benefits. Generally, you can- originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil-If John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and ity is not contested. You cannot deduct them in$600 will accrue in 2007 ($1,200 × 6/12, Julyimprovements that tend to increase the value of the year in which the liability is finally deter-1–December 31) and the balance will accrue inyour property. These include assessments for mined.2008.streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines,
The filing of an income tax return is notand public parking facilities. You should in- Separate elections. You can elect to rata- considered a contest and, in the ab-crease the basis of your property by the amount bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or sence of an overt act of protest, youof the assessment.
TIP
business and for nonbusiness activities if you can deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, youYou can deduct taxes for these local benefits account for them separately. Once you elect to can deduct any additional taxes in the prior yearonly if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use if you do not show some affirmative evidence ofinterest charges related to those benefits. If part that method unless you get permission from the denial of the liability.of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest, IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.you must be able to show how much of the tax is However, if you consistently deduct addi-
Making the election. If you elect to ratablyfor these expenses to claim a deduction for that tional assessments in the year they are paid or
accrue the taxes for the first year in which youpart of the tax. finally determined (including those for which
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement to there was no contest), you must continue to do
Example. Waterfront City, to improve down- your income tax return for that year. The state- so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier
town commercial business, converted a down- ment should show all the following items. year unless you receive permission to change
town business area street into an enclosed your method of accounting. For more informa-• The trades or businesses to which thepedestrian mall. The city assessed the full cost tion on accounting methods, see When Can Ielection applies and the accountingof construction, financed with 10-year bonds, Deduct an Expense? in chapter 1.method or methods used.against the affected properties. The city is pay-
ing the principal and interest with the annual • The period to which the taxes relate. Foreign income taxes. Generally, you can
payments made by the property owners. take either a deduction or a credit for income• The computation of the real estate tax de-The assessments for construction costs are taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or aduction for that first year.not deductible as taxes or as business ex- U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot
penses, but are depreciable capital expenses. take a deduction or credit for foreign incomeGenerally, you must file your return by the dueThe part of the payments used to pay the inter- taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S.date (including extensions). However, if youest charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes. tax under the foreign earned income exclusiontimely filed your return for the year without elect-
or the foreign housing exclusion. For informationing to ratably accrue, you can still make theCharges for services. Water bills, sewerage, on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Taxelection by filing an amended return within 6and other service charges assessed against Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliensmonths after the due date of the return (exclud-your business property are not real estate taxes, Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,ing extensions). Attach the statement to thebut are deductible as business expenses. see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-amended return and write “Filed pursuant to
viduals.Purchase or sale of real estate. If real estate section 301.9100-2” on the statement. File the
is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocated amended return at the same address where you
between the buyer and the seller. filed the original return.
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the basis for depreciation. For more information ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and TheftsEmployment Taxes on basis, see Publication 551.
Form (and Instructions)Do not deduct state and local salesIf you have employees, you must withhold vari-
taxes imposed on the buyer that youous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em- ❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
must collect and pay over to the stateployers must withhold their employees’ share of CAUTION
!
or local government. Also, do not include thesesocial security and Medicare taxes along with See chapter 12 for information about getting
taxes in gross receipts or sales.state and federal income taxes. You may also publications and forms.
need to pay certain employment taxes from your
own funds. These include your share of social Self-employment tax. You can deduct
security and Medicare taxes as an employer, one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-
along with unemployment taxes. ness expense in figuring your adjusted gross Deductible PremiumsYou should treat the taxes you withhold from income. This deduction only affects your income
your employees’ pay as wages on your tax re- tax. It does not affect your net earnings from You generally can deduct premiums you pay forturn. You can deduct the employment taxes you self-employment or your self-employment tax. the following kinds of insurance related to yourmust pay from your own funds as taxes. To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line trade or business. 
27, the amount shown on the Deduction for
Example. You pay your employee $18,000 1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-one-half of self-employment tax line of Schedule
a year. However, after you withhold various cident, or similar losses.SE (Form 1040).
taxes, your employee receives $14,500. You For more information on self-employment 2. Credit insurance that covers losses fromalso pay an additional $1,500 in employment tax, see Publication 334. business bad debts.taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-
your own funds as taxes. ance for employees, including long-term
For more information on employment taxes, care insurance.
see Publication 15 (Circular E).
a. If a partnership pays accident and
Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer, health insurance premiums for its part-6.you may have to make payments to a state ners, it generally can deduct them as
unemployment compensation fund or to a state guaranteed payments to partners.
disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments
b. If an S corporation pays accident andas taxes. Insurance health insurance premiums for its
more-than-2% shareholder-employees,
it generally can deduct them, but must
also include them in the shareholder’s
What’s NewOther Taxes wages subject to federal income tax
withholding. See Publication 15-B.The following are other taxes you can deduct if Self-employed health insurance deduction.
you incur them in the ordinary course of your Partners and more-than-2% shareholders in an 4. Liability insurance.trade or business. S corporation may be able to claim this deduc-
5. Malpractice insurance that covers yourtion when the policy is in the name of the partnerExcise taxes. You can deduct as a business personal liability for professional negli-or shareholder. See Self-Employed Health In-expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-surance Deduction.necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or tients or clients.business. However, see Fuel taxes, later.
6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by
Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporate state law that covers any claims for bodily
franchise taxes as a business expense. Introduction injuries or job-related diseases suffered by
employees in your business, regardless ofYou generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,
fault.essary cost of insurance as a business expenseand other motor fuels that you use in your busi-
if it is for your trade, business, or profession.ness are usually included as part of the cost of a. If a partnership pays workers’ compen-However, you may have to capitalize certainthe fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa- sation premiums for its partners, it gen-insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationrate item. erally can deduct them as guaranteedrules. For more information, see CapitalizedYou may be entitled to a credit or refund for payments to partners.Premiums, later.federal excise tax you paid on fuels used for
b. If an S corporation pays workers’ com-certain purposes. For more information, see
pensation premiums for itsPublication 510. Topics
more-than-2% shareholder-employees,This chapter discusses:Occupational taxes. You can deduct as a it generally can deduct them, but must
business expense an occupational tax charged also include them in the shareholder’s• Deductible premiumsat a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of wages.• Nondeductible premiumsworking or conducting a business in the locality.
7. Contributions to a state unemployment in-• Capitalized premiumsPersonal property tax. You can deduct any surance fund are deductible as taxes iftax imposed by a state or local government on • When to deduct premiums they are considered taxes under state law.personal property used in your trade or busi-
ness. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business
Useful Items overhead expenses you have during longSales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a You may want to see: periods of disability caused by your injuryservice or on the purchase or use of property as or sickness.part of the cost of the service or property. If the Publication
service or the cost or use of the property is a 9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-
deductible business expense, you can deduct ❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe ers vehicles used in your business for lia-
the tax as part of that service or cost. If the Benefits bility, damages, and other losses. If you
property is merchandise bought for resale, the operate a vehicle partly for personal use,❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomesales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If deduct only the part of the insurance pre-
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsthe property is depreciable, add the sales tax to mium that applies to the business use of
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the vehicle. If you use the standard mile- plan will not be considered to be estab- days, to perform at least two activities of
lished under your business.age rate to figure your car expenses, you daily living without substantial assistance
cannot deduct any car insurance premi- from another individual. Activities of daily
ums. living are eating, toileting, transferringPartners and more-than-2% share- (general mobility), bathing, dressing, andholders may be able to amend prior10. Life insurance covering your officers and continence.year returns to take any self-employedemployees if you are not directly or indi-
TIP
health insurance deductions allowed under therectly a beneficiary under the contract. • An individual who requires substantial su-
new rules explained above. Shareholders pervision to be protected from threats to11. Business interruption insurance that pays should write ‘‘Filed Pursuant to Notice 2008-1’’ health and safety due to severe cognitivefor lost profits if your business is shut down at the top of any amended return. impairment.due to a fire or other cause. Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29. The certification must have been made by a
licensed health care practitioner within the previ-Qualified long-term care insurance. YouSelf-Employed Health ous 12 months.can include premiums paid on a qualified
Insurance Deduction long-term care insurance contract for you, your Benefits received. For information on ex-spouse, or your dependents when figuring your cluding benefits you receive from a long-termYou may be able to deduct premiums paid for deduction. But, for each person covered, you care contract from gross income, see Publica-medical and dental insurance and qualified can include only the smaller of the following tion 525.long-term care insurance for you, your spouse, amounts.
and your dependents if you are one of the follow- Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-ing. 1. The amount paid for that person. tion for any month you were eligible to partici-
• A self-employed individual with a net profit 2. The amount shown below. Use the per- pate in any employer (including your spouse’s)
reported on Schedule C (Form 1040), son’s age at the end of the year. subsidized health plan at any time during that
Profit or Loss From Business, Schedule month. This rule is applied separately to plansa. Age 40 or younger–$290C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi- that provide long-term care insurance and plans
ness, or Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or that do not provide long-term care insurance.b. Age 41 to 50–$550
Loss From Farming. However, any medical insurance payments notc. Age 51 to 60–$1,110 deductible on Form 1040, line 29, can be in-• A partner with net earnings from cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Ad. Age 61 to 70–$2,950self-employment reported on Schedule (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, if you item-K-1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share of In- e. Age 71 or older–$3,680 ize deductions.come, Deductions, Credits, etc., box 14,
code A. Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract theQualified long-term care insurance con-
• A shareholder owning more than 2% of health insurance deduction from your medicaltract. A qualified long-term care insurance
the outstanding stock of an S corporation insurance when figuring medical expenses oncontract is an insurance contract that only pro-
with wages from the corporation reported Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-
on Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. tions.ices. The contract must meet all the following
requirements.
Effect on self-employment tax. Do not sub-The insurance plan must be established • It must be guaranteed renewable. tract the health insurance deduction when figur-under your business.
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.• It must provide that refunds, other than• For self-employed individuals filing a refunds on the death of the insured orSchedule C, C-EZ, or F, the policy can be How to figure the deduction. Generally, youcomplete surrender or cancellation of theeither in the name of the business or in the can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-contract, and dividends under the contractname of the individual. tions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofmay be used only to reduce future premi-
the following apply, you must use Worksheet• For partners, the policy can be either in ums or increase future benefits.
6-A in this chapter.the name of the partnership or in the name • It must not provide for a cash surrenderof the partner. You can either pay the pre- • You had more than one source of incomevalue or other money that can be paid,miums yourself or your partnership can subject to self-employment tax.assigned, pledged, or borrowed.pay them and report the premium amounts
• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaran- • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-
come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earnedteed payments to be included in your penses incurred for services or items that
Income Exclusion.gross income. However, if the policy is in would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
your name and you pay the premiums cept where Medicare is a secondary payer • You are using amounts paid for qualifiedyourself, the partnership must reimburse or the contract makes per diem or other long-term care insurance to figure the de-you and report the premium amounts on periodic payments without regard to ex- duction.Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed penses.
If you are claiming the health coverage taxpayments to be included in your gross in-
credit, complete Form 8885, Health Coveragecome. Otherwise, the insurance plan will Qualified long-term care services. Quali-
Tax Credit, before you figure this deduction.not be considered to be established under fied long-term care services are:
your business. Health coverage tax credit. You may be• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
able to take this credit only if you were an eligible• For more-than-2% shareholders, the pol- peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al-icy can be either in the name of the S habilitative services, and
ternative TAA recipient, or Pension Benefitcorporation or in the name of the share- • Maintenance or personal care services. Guaranty Corporation pension recipient. Useholder. You can either pay the premiums
Form 8885 to figure the amount, if any, of thisyourself or your S corporation can pay The services must be required by a chronically ill
credit.them and report the premium amounts on individual and prescribed by a licensed health
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1Form W-2 as wages to be included in your care practitioner.
of Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following.gross income. However, if the policy is in Chronically ill individual. A chronically illyour name and you pay the premiums • Any amounts you included on Form 8885,individual is a person who has been certified asyourself, the S corporation must reimburse line 4.one of the following.you and report the premium amounts on
• Any qualified health insurance premiumsForm W-2 as wages to be included in your • An individual who has been unable, due to
you paid to “U.S. Treasury-HCTC.”gross income. Otherwise, the insurance loss of functional capacity for at least 90
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any health coverage tax credit advance Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed
payments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Insurance Deduction
Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad- Worksheet Keep for Your Records
vance Payments.
1. Enter total payments made during the year for health insuranceMore than one health plan and business.
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse,If you have more than one health plan during the
and your dependents. Do not include payments for any monthyear and each plan is established under a differ-
you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by yourent business, you must use separate work-
or your spouse’s employer or:sheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan’s net
• Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that wereearnings limit. Include the premium you paid
nontaxable because you are a retired public safety officer,under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-
rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) • Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4,
from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a • Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to “U.S.
plan that provides long-term care insurance, the Treasury-HCTC,” or
total of the amounts entered for each person on • Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown in
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the box 1 of Form 1099-H.
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care
insurance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................ 1.
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract,
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following
Nondeductible amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year.Premiums b) The amount shown below. Use the person’s age at the end of
the year.You cannot deduct premiums on the following $290—if that person is age 40 or youngerkinds of insurance.
$550—if age 41 to 50
1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot $1,110—if age 51 to 60
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set $2,950—if age 61 to 70
up for self-insurance. This applies even if $3,680—if age 71 or older
you cannot get business insurance cover- Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to
age for certain business risks. However, participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by
your actual losses may be deductible. See your or your spouse’s employer. If more than one person is
Publication 547. covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each
person. Then enter the total of those amounts . . . . . . . . . . . 2.2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-
3. Add the total of lines 1 and 2 . . ....................... 3.miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from theings due to sickness or disability. However,
trade or business under which the insurance plan is established. Ifsee the discussion on overhead insurance,
the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . 4.item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear-
lier. 5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040),
line 31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), line 3; Schedule F (Form3. Certain life insurance and annuities. 1040), line 36; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus
any other income allocable to the profitable businesses. See the
a. For contracts issued before June 9,
instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do not include any1997, you cannot deduct the premiums
net losses shown on these schedules. . . . . . . ............. 5.on a life insurance policy covering you,
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 ............................... 6.an employee, or any person with a fi-
nancial interest in your business if you 7. Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 6 . . . . . . 7.
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of 8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 . . . . . . . . . ................... 8.
the policy. You are included among 9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to
possible beneficiaries of the policy if the the same trade or business in which the insurance plan is
policy owner is obligated to repay a established . . . . . . . . . . . . . ........................ 9.
loan from you using the proceeds of the 10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 . . . . . . . . . ................... 10.
policy. A person has a financial interest 11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an Sin your business if the person is an corporation in which you are a more-than-2% shareholder and inowner or part owner of the business or which the insurance plan is established . . . . . ............. 11.has lent money to the business. 12. Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the
amount entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Formb. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,
2555-EZ, line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11you generally cannot deduct the premi-
above ......................................... 12.ums on any life insurance policy, en-
dowment contract, or annuity contract if 13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ........ 13.
you are directly or indirectly a benefi- 14. Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller
ciary. The disallowance applies without of the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do not
regard to whom the policy covers. include this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction
on Schedule A (Form 1040). . . . . . . . . . ................. 14.c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
ship, you take out an insurance policy
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from anyon your own life and name your part- business, do not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable toners as beneficiaries to induce them to that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 4b.retain their investments in the partner- * *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property youship, you are considered a beneficiary. created. However, it does not include capital gain income.
You cannot deduct the insurance premi-
ums.
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out even if you incurred them in an earlier year. income in either the year you incur i t or the year
a policy on your life or on the life of an- However, see Prepayment, later. you pay it.
other person with a financial interest in If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to
Accrual method. If you use an accrualyour business to get or protect a business recover it over a period of years through periodic
method of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-
ance premiums before the tax year in which youa business expense. Nor can you deduct ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to
incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannotthe premiums as interest on business the basis of property to which it relates.
deduct insurance premiums before the tax yearloans or as an expense of financing loans. A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust
in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-In the event of death, the proceeds of the makes the election to deduct or capitalize the
ception for recurring items applies). For morepolicy are not taxed as income even if they costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-
information about the accrual method of ac-are used to liquidate the debt. ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individual
counting, see chapter 1. For information about partner, shareholder, or beneficiary elects
the exception for recurring items, see Publica- whether to deduct or capitalize exploration
tion 538. costs.
You may be subject to the alternativeCapitalized Premiums Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in
minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-advance, even if you pay them in advance. This
search and experimental, intangibleUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you must CAUTION
!
rule applies to any expense paid far enough in
drilling, exploration, development, circulation,capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect advance to, in effect, create an asset with a
and business organizational costs.costs for certain production or resale activities. useful life extending substantially beyond the
For more information on the alternative mini-Include these costs in the basis of property you end of the current tax year.
mum tax, see the instructions for one of theproduce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- Expenses such as insurance are generally
following forms.ing them as a current deduction. You recover the allocable to a period of time. You can deduct
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost insurance expenses for the year to which they • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise are allocable. dividuals.dispose of the property.
• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax—Indirect costs include premiums for insur- Example. In 2007, you signed a 3-year in-
Corporations.ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip- surance contract. Even though you paid the pre-
ment, materials, property produced, or property miums for 2007, 2008, and 2009 when you
acquired for resale. signed the contract, you can only deduct the Topics
premium for 2007 on your 2007 tax return. You This chapter discusses:Uniform capitalization rules. You may be can deduct in 2008 and 2009 the premium allo-subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you cable to those years. • Carrying chargesdo any of the following, unless the property is
produced for your use other than in a business • Research and experimental costsDividends received. If you receive dividendsor an activity carried on for profit. from business insurance and you deducted the • Intangible drilling costs
premiums in prior years, at least part of the1. Produce real property or tangible personal • Exploration costsdividends generally are income. For more infor-property. For this purpose, tangible per- mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax • Development costssonal property includes a film, sound re- benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can Icording, video tape, book, or similar • Circulation costsDeduct?property.
• Environmental cleanup costs2. Acquire property for resale.
• Business start-up and organizational costsHowever, these rules do not apply to the follow-
• Reforestation costsing property.
• Retired asset removal costs1. Personal property you acquire for resale if
7.your average annual gross receipts are • Barrier removal costs
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years. • Film and television production costs
2. Property you produce if you meet either of
the following conditions. Costs You Useful Items
You may want to see:a. Your indirect costs of producing the
property are $200,000 or less. Can Deduct
Publicationb. You use the cash method of accounting
and do not account for inventories. or Capitalize ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
More information. For more information on Form (and Instructions)these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in What’s New
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter- ❏ 3468 Investment Credit
nal Revenue Code section 263A. Environmental cleanup costs. The election ❏ 8826 Disabled Access Creditto deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs
expired for costs paid or incurred after Decem- See chapter 12 for information about gettingber 31, 2007. See  Environmental Cleanup publications and forms.Costs.When To Deduct
Premiums
Carrying ChargesYou can usually deduct insurance premiums in Introduction
the tax year to which they apply.
This chapter discusses costs you can elect to Carrying charges include the taxes and interest
Cash method. If you use the cash method of deduct or capitalize. you pay to carry or develop real property or to
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre- You generally deduct a cost as a current carry, transport, or install personal pr operty.
miums in the tax year you actually paid them, business expense by subtracting it from your Certain carrying charges must be capit alized
Page 20 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 21 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-
mation on capitalization of interest, see chapter Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in the4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying charges experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all laternot subject to the uniform capitalization rules, business expense years.but only if they are otherwise deductible.
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you firstseparately for each project you have and for
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. Seeeach type of carrying charge. For unimproved
Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.and unproductive real property, your election is
good for only 1 year. You must decide whether
to capitalize carrying charges each year the
• Formula. You can elect to deduct only the costs ofproperty remains unimproved and unproductive.
items with no salvage value. These includeFor other real property, your election to capital- • Invention. wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-ize carrying charges remains in effect until con-
• Patent. lated to drilling wells and preparing them forstruction or development is completed. For
production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-personal property, your election is effective until • Pilot model. ment work done by contractors under any formthe date you install or first use it, whichever is
• Process. of contract is also an IDC. However, seelater.
Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-• Technique.How to make the election. To make the elec- ized, later.
tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state- • Property similar to the items listed above. You can also elect to deduct the cost of
ment saying which charges you elect to drilling exploratory bore holes to determine theIt also includes products used by you in yourcapitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbontrade or business or held for sale, lease, orthe year the election is to be effective. However, deposits if the shaft is capable of conductinglicense.if you timely filed your return for the year without hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It
making the election, you can still make the elec- Costs not included. Research and experi- does not matter whether there is any intent to
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months mental costs do not include expenses for any of produce hydrocarbons.
of the due date of the return (excluding exten- the following activities. If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a
sions). Attach the statement to the amended current business expense, you can elect to de-• Advertising or promotions.return and write “Filed pursuant to section duct them over the 60-month period beginning
301.9100-2” on the statement. File the amended • Consumer surveys. with the month they were paid or incurred.
return at the same address you filed the original • Efficiency surveys. Amounts paid to contractor that must bereturn.
capitalized.  Amounts paid to a contractor• Management studies. must be capitalized if they are either:
• Quality control testing. • Amounts properly allocable to the cost of
• Research in connection with literary, his-Research and depreciable property, or
torical, or similar projects. • Amounts paid only out of production orExperimental Costs • The acquisition of another’s patent, model, proceeds from production if these
production, or process. amounts are depletable income to the re-The costs of research and experimentation are cipient.generally capital expenses. However, you can
elect to deduct these costs as a current business When and how to elect. You make the elec-
expense. Your election to deduct these costs is tion to deduct research and experimental costs How to make the election.  You elect to de-
binding for the year it is made and for all later by deducting them on your tax return for the year duct IDCs as a current business expense by
years unless you get IRS approval to make a in which you first pay or incur research and taking the deduction on your income tax return
change. experimental costs. If you do not make the elec- for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No
If you meet certain requirements, you may tion to deduct research and experimental costs formal statement is required. If you file Schedule
elect to defer and amortize research and experi- in the first year in which you pay or incur the C (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Other
mental costs. For information on electing to de- costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year expenses.”
fer and amortize these costs, see Research and only with approval from the IRS. For oil and gas wells, your election is binding
Experimental Costs in chapter 8. for the year it is made and for all later years. For
Research credit. If you pay or incur qualified geothermal wells, your election can be revokedResearch and experimental costs defined. research expenses, you may be able to take the by the filing of an amended return on which youResearch and experimental costs are reasona- research credit. For more information about the do not take the deduction. You can file theble costs you incur in your trade or business for research credit, see the instructions to Form amended return for the year up to the normalactivities intended to provide information that 6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities. time of expiration for filing a claim for credit orwould eliminate uncertainty about the develop- refund, generally, within 3 years after the datement or improvement of a product. Uncertainty you filed the original return or within 2 years afterexists if the information available to you does not the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.establish how to develop or improve a product or Intangible Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.the appropriate design of a product. Whether
If you capitalize the drilling and developmentcosts qualify as research and experimental Drilling Costs costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-costs depends on the nature of the activity to
ice during the tax year, you may be able to claimwhich the costs relate rather than on the nature The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal a business energy credit. See the instructionsof the product or improvement being developed wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You for Form 3468 for more information.or the level of technological advancement. can usually recover them through depreciationThe costs of obtaining a patent, including or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct Nonproductive well. If you capitalize yourattorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi- IDCs, you have another option if the well isperfecting a patent application, are research and ness expense. These are certain drilling and nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of theexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in- development costs for wells in the United States nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. Youcurred to obtain another’s patent are not re- in which you hold an operating or working inter- must indicate and clearly state your election onsearch and experimental costs. est. You can deduct only costs for drilling or your tax return for the year the well is completed.
Product. The term “product” includes any of preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, or Once made, the election for oil and gas we lls is
the following items. geothermal steam or hot water. binding for all later years. You can revoke your
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
election for a geothermal well by filing an reaches the producing stage. Your election Instead of deducting development costs in
amended return that does not claim the loss. the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treatmust be clearly indicated on the return. In-
them as deferred expenses and deduct themcrease your adjusted basis in the mine byCosts incurred outside the United States. ratably as the units of produced ores or mineralsthe amount included in income. Generally,You cannot deduct as a current business ex- benefited by the expenses are sold. This elec-you must elect this recapture method by thepense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, tion applies each tax year to expenses paid ordue date (including extensions) of your re-gas, or geothermal well located outside the incurred in that year. Once made, the election isturn. However, if you timely filed your returnUnited States. However, you can elect to include binding for the year and cannot be revoked forfor the year without making the election,the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to any reason.you can still make the election by filing anfigure depletion or depreciation. If you do not amended return within 6 months of the duemake this election, you can deduct the costs How to make the election. The election todate of the return (excluding extensions).over the 10-year period beginning with the tax deduct development costs ratably as the ores orMake the election on your amended returnyear in which you paid or incurred them. These minerals are sold must be made for each mineand write “Filed pursuant to sectionrules do not apply to a nonproductive well. or other natural deposit by a clear indication on301.9100-2” on the form where you are in- your return or by a statement filed with the IRScluding the income. File the amended re- office where you file your return. Generally, youturn at the same address you filed the must make the election by the due date of theoriginal return. return (including extensions). However, if youExploration Costs
timely filed your return for the year without mak-Method 2—Do not claim any depletion de-
ing the election, you can still make the electionThe costs of determining the existence, location, duction for the tax year the mine reaches
by filing an amended return within 6 months ofextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are the producing stage and any later tax years
the due date of the return (excluding exten-ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead until the depletion you would have deducted
sions). Clearly indicate the election on yourto the development of a mine. You recover these equals the exploration costs you deducted.
amended return and write “Filed pursuant tocosts through depletion as the mineral is re-
section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return atmoved from the ground. However, you can elect You also must recapture deducted explora-
the same address you filed the original return.to deduct domestic exploration costs paid or tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from
incurred before the beginning of the develop- mine property before it reaches the producing Foreign development costs. The rules dis-ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas, stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applyand geothermal wells). the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and to foreign development costs.any later tax years, until the depletion you wouldHow to make the election. You elect to de- have deducted equals the exploration costs you Reduced corporate deductions for develop-duct exploration costs by taking the deduction deducted. ment costs. The rules discussed earlier foron your income tax return, or on an amended reduced corporate deductions for explorationGenerally, if you dispose of the mine beforeincome tax return, for the first tax year for which costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-you have fully recaptured the exploration costsyou wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred velopment costs.you deducted, recapture the balance by treatingduring the tax year. Your return must adequately
all or part of your gain as ordinary income.describe and identify each property or mine, and
Under these circumstances, you generallyclearly state how much is being deducted for
treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it iseach one. The election applies to the tax year
Circulation Costsless than your adjusted exploration costs withyou make this election and all later tax years.
respect to the mine. If your gain is more thanPartnerships. Each partner, not the part- A publisher can deduct as a current businessyour adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-nership, elects whether to capitalize or to deduct expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,nary income only a part of your gain, up to thethat partner’s share of exploration costs. or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,amount of your adjusted exploration costs.
magazine, or other periodical. For example, aReduced corporate deductions for explora- publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraForeign exploration costs. If you pay or incurtion costs. A corporation (other than an S employees for a limited time to get new sub-exploration costs for a mine or other naturalcorporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- scriptions through telephone calls. Circulationdeposit located outside the United States, youtic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- costs are deductible even if they normally wouldcannot deduct all the costs in the current year.maining 30% of costs and amortize them over be capitalized.You can elect to include the costs (other than forthe 60-month period starting with the month the This rule does not apply to the followingan oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjustedexploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- costs that must be capitalized.basis of the mineral property to figure cost de-ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize
pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chaptermining exploration costs over a 10-year period. • The purchase of land or depreciable prop-
9.) If you do not make this election, you mustFor more information on this method of amorti- erty.
deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-zation, see Internal Revenue Code section • The acquisition of circulation through thening with the tax year in which you pay or incur59(e). purchase of any part of the business ofThe 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot them. These rules also apply to foreign develop- another publisher of a newspaper, maga-be added to its basis in the property to figure ment costs. zine, or other periodical, including thecost depletion. However, the amount amortized purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-is treated as additional depreciation and is sub- scribers.ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-
sition of the property. See Section 1250 Development CostsProperty under Depreciation Recapture in chap- Other treatment of circulation costs. If you
ter 3 of Publication 544. do not want to deduct circulation costs as aYou can deduct costs paid or incurred during the
These rules also apply to the deduction of current business expense, you can elect one oftax year for developing a mine or any other
development costs by corporations. See Devel- the following ways to recover these costs.natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)
opment Costs, later. located in the United States. These costs must • Capitalize all circulation costs that are
be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or properly chargeable to a capital account.Recapture of exploration expenses. When minerals in commercially marketable quantities.your mine reaches the producing stage, you • Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearDevelopment costs include those incurred formust recapture any exploration costs you period beginning with the tax year theyyou by a contractor. Also, development costselected to deduct. Use either of the following were paid or incurred.include depreciation on improvements used inmethods.
the development of ores or minerals. They do
not include costs for the acquisition or improve-Method 1—Include the deducted costs in How to make the election. You elect to capi-
ment of depreciable property.gross income for the tax year the mine talize circulation costs by attaching a statement
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to your return for the first tax year the election are deducted differently depending on the type begins. However, if you timely filed your return
applies. Your election is binding for the year it is of business entity involved. for the year without making the election, you c an
made and for all later years, unless you get IRS still make the election by filing an amendedIndividuals. Deduct the environmentalapproval to revoke it. return within 6 months of the due date of thecleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line of return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicateSchedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule the election on your amended return and writerequires you to separately identify each expense “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File theincluded in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198 amended return at the same address you filedEnvironmental Cleanup Election” on the line next to the environmental the original return. The election applies whencleanup costs. computing taxable income for the current taxCosts
All other entities. All other taxpayers (in- year and all subsequent years.
cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)Environmental cleanup costs are generally capi-
deduct the environmental cleanup costs on thetal expenditures. However, you can elect to de-
“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed-duct these costs as a current business expense
eral income tax return. On a schedule attachedif certain requirements (discussed later) are met. Reforestation Costs
to the return that separately identifies each ex-This special tax treatment is generally available
pense included in “Other Deductions” writefor environmental cleanup costs you pay or incur Reforestation costs are generally capital expen-
“Section 198 Election” on the line next to thebefore January 1, 2008. ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to
amount for environmental cleanup costs. $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0
Environmental cleanup costs. Environmen- for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paidMore than one environmental cleanuptal cleanup costs are generally costs you pay or or incurred after October 22, 2004, for eachcost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur moreincur to abate or control hazardous substances qualified timber property. This limit is increasedthan one environmental cleanup cost, you canat a qualified contaminated site. for small timber producers with qualified timberelect to deduct one or more of such expendi-
property located in certain areas affected bytures for that year. You can elect to deduct oneHazardous substance. Hazardous sub-
Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. For moreexpenditure and elect to capitalize another ex-stances are defined in section 101(14) of the
information, see Publication 4492. The remain-penditure (whether or not they are of the sameComprehensive Environmental Response,
ing costs can be amortized over an 84-monthtype or paid or incurred with respect to the sameCompensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and
period. For information about amortizing refor-qualified contaminated site). An election to de-certain substances are designated as hazard-
estation costs, see chapter 8.duct an expenditure for one year has no effectous in section 102 of the Act. For costs paid or
 Qualifying reforestation costs are the directon other years. You must make a separate elec-incurred after December 31, 2005 (after August
costs of planting or seeding for forestation ortion for each year in which you intend to deduct28, 2005, if for a Gulf Opportunity (GO) Zone
reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop-environmental cleanup costs.site), petroleum products are treated as hazard-
erty that contains trees in significant commercialous substances. Substances are not hazardous Recapture. This deduction may have to be quantities. See chapter 8 for more informationif a removal or remedial action is prohibited recaptured as ordinary income under section on qualifying reforestation costs and qualifiedunder sections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act. For 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the timber property.more information on the GO Zone, see Publica- property that would have received an addition to If you elect to deduct qualified reforestationtion 4492, Information for Taxpayers Affected by basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- costs, create and maintain separate timber ac-Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. diture. For more information on recapturing the counts for each qualified timber property and
Qualified contaminated site. A qualified deduction, see Depreciation and amortization include all reforestation costs and the dates
contaminated site is any area that meets both of under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- each was applied. Do not include this qualified
the following requirements. lication 544. timber property in any account (for example,
depletion block) for which depletion is allowed.More information. For more information1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,
about the environmental cleanup cost deduc-for the production of income, or as inven- How to make the election. You elect to de-tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198.tory. duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming
the deduction on your timely filed income tax2. There has been a release, threat of re-
return (including extensions) for the tax year thelease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim-stance at or on the site. Business Start-Up and ber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required,You must get a statement from the designated complete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is notOrganizational Costsstate environmental agency that the site meets required, attach a statement containing the fol-requirement (2). lowing information for each qualified timberBusiness start-up and organizational costs areA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for, property for which an election is being made.generally capital expenditures. However, youthe national priorities list under section
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business • The unique stand identification numbers.105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-
start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paidmental Response, Compensation, and Liability • The total number of acres reforested dur-or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the national ing the tax year.deduction is reduced by the amount your totalpriorities list, contact the U.S. Environmental
start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000. • The nature of the reforestation treatments.Protection Agency.
Any remaining costs must be amortized. For • The total amounts of qualified reforesta-Expenditures for depreciable property. information about amortizing start-up and orga- tion expenditures eligible to be amortizedYou cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre- nizational costs, see chapter 8. or deducted.ciable property used in connection with the Start-up costs include any amounts paid orabatement or control of hazardous substances incurred in connection with creating an active  However, if you timely filed your return for theat a qualified contaminated site. However, the trade or business or investigating the creation or year without making the election, you can stillpart of the depreciation for such property that is acquisition of an active trade or business. Orga- make the election by filing an amended returnotherwise allocated to the qualified contami- nizational costs include the costs of creating a within 6 months of the due date of the returnnated site shall be treated as an environmental corporation. For more information on start-up (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate thecleanup cost. and organizational costs, see chapter 8. election on your amended return and write “Filed
When and how to elect. You elect to deduct How to make the election.  You elect to de- pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File the
environmental cleanup costs by taking the de- duct the start-up or organizational costs by amended return at the same address you  filed
duction on the income tax return (filed by the due claiming the deduction on the income tax return the original return. The elect ion applies when
date including extensions) for the tax year in (filed by the due date including extensions) for computing taxable income for the current tax
which the costs are paid or incurred. The costs the tax year in which the active trade or business year and all subsequent years.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you elected to deduct qualified timber costs partner in the partnership. A partner can allocate • Rapid and light rail vehicles.
on a federal income tax return filed before June the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part- You can find the guidelines and requirements for15, 2006, but did not include the above informa- ner’s individually incurred costs and the part- transportation barrier removal at www.fta.dot.tion, complete Part IV of Form T or the required ner’s distributive share of partnership costs. If govstatement and attach it to the first federal income the partner cannot deduct the entire share of
 Also, you can access the ADA website attax return you file after June 14, 2006. If you partnership costs, the partnership can add any
www.ada.gov for additional information.have not elected to deduct qualified timber costs costs not deducted to the basis of the improved
in a prior year you may be able to do so by filing property. Other barrier removals. To be deductible,Form 3115, Application for Change in Account- A partnership must be able to show that any expenses of removing any barrier not covereding Method. For more information, see Notice amount added to basis was not deducted by the by the above standards must meet all three of2006-47 on page 892 of Internal Revenue Bulle- partner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000 the following tests. tin 2006-20. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20 limit (as determined by the partner). If the part-
is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20. nership cannot show this, it is presumed that the 1. The removed barrier must be a substantial
pdf. partner was able to deduct the distributive share barrier to access or use of a facility or
For additional information on reforestation of the partnership’s costs in full. public transportation vehicle by persons
costs, see chapter 8. who have a disability or are elderly.
Example. John Duke’s distributive share of
Recapture. This deduction may have to be 2. The removed barrier must have been aABC partnership’s deductible expenses for the
recaptured as ordinary income under section barrier for at least one major group of per-removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the sons who have a disability or are elderlyJohn had $12,000 of similar expenses in his sole
property that would have received an addition to (such as people who are blind, deaf, orproprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 of
basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- wheelchair users).them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of
diture. For more information on recapturing the the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex- 3. The barrier must be removed without cre-deduction, see Depreciation and amortization penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his ating any new barrier that significantly im-under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- own expenses to the basis of the property used pairs access to or use of the facility orlication 544. in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John vehicle by a major group of persons who
could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) of have a disability or are elderly.
his share of the partnership’s expenses because
of how John applied the limit, ABC can add How to make the election. If you elect toRetired Asset Removal $6,000 to the basis of its property. deduct your costs for removing barriers to the
disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onQualification standards. You can deductCosts
your income tax return (partnership return foryour costs as a current expense only if the bar-
partnerships) for the tax year the expenses wereIf you retire and remove a depreciable asset in rier removal meets the guidelines and require-
paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as aconnection with the installation or production of ments issued by the Architectural and
separate item. The election applies to all thea replacement asset, you can deduct the costs Transportation Barriers Compliance Board
qualifying costs you have during the year, up toof removing the retired asset. However, if you under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, youreplace a component (part) of a depreciable of 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa-
must maintain adequate records to support yourasset, capitalize the removal costs if the re- bilities Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm.
deduction.placement is an improvement and deduct the  The following is a list of some architectural
costs if the replacement is a repair. barrier removal costs that can be deducted. For your election to be valid, you generally
must file your return by its due date, including• Ground and floor surfaces. extensions. However, if you timely filed your
• Walks. return for the year without making the election,
you can still make the election by filing anBarrier Removal Costs • Parking lots. amended return within 6 months of the due date
• Ramps. of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-The cost of an improvement to a business asset
cate the election on your amended return andis normally a capital expense. However, you can • Entrances. write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” Fileelect to deduct the costs of making a facility or
• Doors and doorways. the amended return at the same address youpublic transportation vehicle more accessible to
filed the original return. Your election is irrevoca-and usable by those who are disabled or elderly. • Stairs. ble after the due date, including extensions, ofYou must own or lease the facility or vehicle for
• Floors. your return.use in connection with your trade or business.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc- • Toilet rooms. Disabled access credit. If you make yourtures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or
• Water fountains. business accessible to persons with disabilitiessimilar real or personal property. A public trans-
and your business is an eligible small business,portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or • Telephones. you may be able to claim the disabled accessrailroad car, that provides transportation service
• Elevators. credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you mustto the public (including service for your custom-
reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize byers, even if you are not in the business of provid- • Controls. the amount of the credit.ing transportation services).
• Signage. For more information about the disabled ac-You cannot deduct any costs that you paid or
cess credit, see Form 8826.incurred to completely renovate or build a facility • Alarms.
or public transportation vehicle or to replace
• Protruding objects.depreciable property in the normal course of
business. • Symbols of accessibility.
Film and TelevisionDeduction limit. The most you can deduct as You can find the ADA guidelines and require-
a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and ments for architectural barrier removal at www. Production Coststhe elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However, usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.
you can add any costs over this limit to the basis Film and television production costs are gener-The following is a list of some deductibleof the property and depreciate these excess ally capital expenses. However, you can elect totransportation barrier removal costs.costs. deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc-• Rail facilities. tions that begin after October 22, 2004. ForPartners and partnerships. The $15,000
more information, see section 181 of the Internallimit applies to a partnership and also to each • Buses.
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Revenue Code and Temporary Regulations trade or business (in the same field as the
sections 1.181-1T through 1.181-6T. one you entered into).How To Deduct
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day
Amortization your active trade or business begins.
To deduct amortization that begins during the Start-up costs include amounts paid for the
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562 following:
and attach it to your income tax return.
• An analysis or survey of potential markets,8. To report amortization from previous years,
products, labor supply, transportation facil-in addition to amortization that begins in the
ities, etc.current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa-
rately. For example, in 2006 you began to amor- • Advertisements for the opening of theAmortization tize a lease. In 2007, you began to amortize a business.
second lease. Report amortization from the new
• Salaries and wages for employees wholease on line 42 of your 2007 Form 4562. Report
are being trained and their instructors.amortization from the 2006 lease on line 43 ofIntroduction
your 2007 Form 4562. • Travel and other necessary costs for se-Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct- If you do not have any new amortizable ex- curing prospective distributors, suppliers,ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of penses for the current year, you are not required or customers.time. It is similar to the straight line method of to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claimingdepreciation. • Salaries and fees for executives and con-depreciation). Report the current year’s deduc-The various amortizable costs covered in sultants, or for similar professional serv-tion for amortization that began in a prior yearthis chapter are included in the list below. How- ices.directly on the “Other deduction” or “Other ex-ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization pense line” of your return.of bond premium. For information on that topic, Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do notsee chapter 3 of Publication 550. include deductible interest, taxes, or research
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-Topics perimental Costs, later.Starting a BusinessThis chapter discusses:
Purchasing an active trade or business.When you start a business, treat all eligible costs• Deducting amortization Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-you incur before you begin operating the busi-
tive trade or business include only investigative• Amortizing costs of starting a business ness as capital expenditures which are part of
costs incurred in the course of a general searchyour basis in the business. Generally, you re-• Amortizing costs of getting a lease for or preliminary investigation of the business.cover costs for particular assets through depre-
These are costs that help you decide whether to• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles ciation deductions. Generally, you cannot
purchase a business. Costs you incur in anrecover other costs until you sell the business or• Amortizing reforestation costs attempt to purchase a specific business are cap-otherwise go out of business. See Capital Ex-
ital expenses that you cannot amortize.• Amortizing costs of geological and geo- penses in chapter 1 for a discussion on how to
physical costs treat these costs if you do not go into business.
Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac-However, you can elect to amortize certain• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili- counting firm and a law firm to assist you in thecosts for setting up and organizing your busi-ties potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researchedness. For costs paid or incurred before October XYZ’s industry and analyzed the financial pro-• Amortizing costs of research and experi- 23, 2004, you can elect an amortization period of jections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firmmentation 60 months or more. For costs paid or incurred prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ,after October 22, 2004, you can elect to deduct a• Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences Inc. The letter stated that a binding commitmentlimited amount of start-up and organizational would result only after a purchase agreementcosts (see chapter 7). The costs that are not was signed. The law firm and accounting firmUseful Items deducted currently can be amortized ratably continued to provide services including a reviewYou may want to see: over a 180-month period. The amortization pe- of XYZ’s books and records and the preparationriod starts with the month you begin operating of a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, youPublication your active trade or business. See Code section signed a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.195(b) for limitations.❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of All amounts paid or incurred to investigateThe cost must qualify as one of the following.Assets the business before October 22nd are amortiz-
• A business start-up cost. able investigative costs. Amounts paid on or❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses after that date relate to the attempt to purchase• An organizational cost for a corporation.❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property the business and therefore must be capitalized.
• An organizational cost for a partnership.
Disposition of business. If you completelyForm (and Instructions)
dispose of your business before the end of the
Business Start-Up Costs❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization amortization period, you can deduct any remain-
ing deferred start-up costs. However, you can❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum Tax — Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for: deduct these deferred start-up costs only to theCorporations (a) creating an active trade or business; or (b) extent they qualify as a loss from a business.investigating the creation or acquisition of an❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—
active trade or business. Start-up costs includeIndividuals Organizational Costsamounts paid or incurred in connection with an
existing activity engaged in for profit; and for theSee chapter 12 for information about getting Amounts paid to organize a corporation are theproduction of income in anticipation of the activ-publications and forms. direct costs of creating the corporation.ity becoming an active trade or business.
Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza-Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz- tional cost it must be:able if it meets both the following tests.
• For the creation of the corporation,• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or
incurred it to operate an existing active • Chargeable to a capital account,
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 25

Page 26 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Amortized over the life of the corporation if • The cost of acquiring assets for the part- If your business is organized as a corpora-
tion or partnership, only the corporation or part-nership or transferring assets to the part-the corporation had a fixed life, and.
nership can elect to amortize its start-up ornership.• Incurred before the end of the first tax year organizational costs. A shareholder or partner• The cost of admitting or removing part-in which the corporation is in business. cannot make this election. You, as a share-ners, other than at the time the partnership holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs youA corporation using the cash method of ac- is first organized. incur in setting up your corporation or partner-
counting can amortize organizational costs in- ship. Only the corporation or partnership can• The cost of making a contract concerningcurred within the first tax year, even if it does not amortize these costs.the operation of the partnership trade orpay them in that year. However, you, as an individual, can elect tobusiness including a contract between a
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-Examples of organizational costs include: partner and the partnership.
est in an existing partnership. These costs qual-• The cost of temporary directors. • The costs for issuing and marketing inter- ify as business start-up costs if you acquire theests in the partnership such as brokerage,• The cost of organizational meetings. partnership interest.
registration, and legal fees and printing
• State incorporation fees. costs. These “syndication fees” are capital Start-up costs election statement. If you
expenses that cannot be depreciated or elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach a• The cost of legal services.
amortized. separate statement that contains the following
information.Nonqualifying costs. The following items are
Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is • A description of the business to which thecapital expenses that cannot be amortized:
liquidated before the end of the amortization start-up costs relate.• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se- period, the unamortized amount of qualifying • A description of each start-up cost in-curities, such as commissions, profes- organizational costs can be deducted in the curred.sional fees, and printing costs. partnership’s final tax year. However, these
• The month your active business began (orcosts can be deducted only to the extent they• Costs associated with the transfer of as-
was acquired).qualify as a loss from a business.sets to the corporation.
• The number of months in your amortiza-
How To Amortize tion period (which is generally 180Costs of Organizing months).Deduct start-up and organizational costs ina Partnership
equal amounts over the applicable amortization Filing the statement early. You can elect
The costs to organize a partnership are the period (discussed earlier). You can choose an to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-
amortization period for start-up costs that is dif-direct costs of creating the partnership. ment with a return for any tax year before the
ferent from the period you choose for organiza- year your active business begins. If you file the
tional costs, as long as both are not less than the statement early, the election becomes effectiveQualifying costs. You can amortize an orga- applicable amortization period. Once you in the month of the tax year your active businessnizational cost only if it meets all the following choose an amortization period, you cannot begins.tests. change it. Revised statement. You can file a revised• It is for the creation of the partnership and To figure your deduction, divide your total statement to include any start-up costs not in-not for starting or operating the partner- start-up or organizational costs by the months in cluded in your original statement. However, youship trade or business. the amortization period. The result is the amount cannot include on the revised statement anyyou can deduct for each month. cost you previously treated on your return as a• It is chargeable to a capital account.
cost other than a start-up cost. You can file the• It could be amortized over the life of the Cash method partnership. A partnership us- revised statement with a return filed after thepartnership if the partnership had a fixed ing the cash method of accounting can deduct return on which you elected to amortize yourlife. an organizational cost only if it has been paid by start-up costs.
the end of the tax year. However, any cost the• It is incurred by the due date of the part-
Organizational costs election statement. Ifpartnership could have deducted as an organi-nership return (excluding extensions) for you elect to amortize your corporation’s or part-zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had beenthe first tax year in which the partnership nership’s organizational costs, attach a sepa-paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year ofis in business. However, if the partnership rate statement that contains the followingpayment.uses the cash method of accounting and information.pays the cost after the end of its first tax
• A description of each cost.year, see Cash method partnership under How To Make the ElectionHow To Amortize, later. • The amount of each cost.
To elect to amortize start-up or organizational• It is for a type of item normally expected to • The date each cost was incurred.costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562benefit the partnership throughout its en- and an accompanying statement (explained • The month your corporation or partnershiptire life. later) to your return for the first tax year you are began active business (or acquired the
in business. If you have both start-up and orga- business).Organizational costs include the following nizational costs, attach a separate statement tofees. • The number of months in your amortiza-your return for each type of cost. tion period (which is generally 180• Legal fees for services incident to the or- Generally, you must file the return by the due months).ganization of the partnership, such as ne- date (including any extensions). However, if you
gotiation and preparation of the timely filed your return for the year without mak- Partnerships. The statement prepared forpartnership agreement. ing the election, you can still make the election a cash basis partnership must also indicate the
by filing an amended return within 6 months of amount paid before the end of the year for each• Accounting fees for services incident to
the due date of the return (excluding exten- cost.the organization of the partnership.
sions). For more information, see the instruc- You do not need to separately list any part-• Filing fees. tions for Part VI of Form 4562. nership organizational cost that is less than $10.
Once you make the election to amortize Instead, you can list the total amount of these
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs start-up or organizational costs, you cannot re- costs with the dates the first and last costs were
cannot be amortized. voke it. incurred.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
After a partnership makes the election to organization, governmental unit, or foreign per- such as the use of earnings during any  period in
amortize organizational costs, it can later file an son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not which the business would not otherwise be
amended return to include additional organiza- be less than 125 percent of the lease term. available or operational.
tional costs not included in the partnership’s Workforce in place, etc. This includes theCost attributable to other property. Theoriginal return and statement. composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to
perience, education, or training). It also includesany amount that is included in determining the
the terms and conditions of employment,cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-
whether contractual or otherwise, and any otherble. For example, if the cost of computerGetting a Lease value placed on employees or any of their attrib-software is not separately stated from the cost of
utes.hardware or other tangible property and youIf you get a lease for business property, you For example, you must amortize the part ofconsistently treat it as part of the cost of therecover the cost by amortizing it over the term of the purchase price of a business that is for thehardware or other tangible property, these rulesthe lease. The term of the lease for amortization existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, youdo not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-purposes generally includes all renewal options must amortize the cost of acquiring an existingquiring real property held for the production of(and any other period for which you and the employment contract or relationship with em-rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re- ployees or consultants.going concern value, or any other section 197newed). However, renewal periods are not in- intangible. Business books and records, etc. This in-cluded if 75% or more of the cost of acquiring the
cludes the intangible value of technical manuals,lease is for the term of the lease remaining on
Section 197 training manuals or programs, data files, andthe acquisition date (not including any period for
accounting or inventory control systems. It alsowhich you may choose to renew, extend, or Intangibles Defined
includes the cost of customer lists, subscriptioncontinue the lease).
lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,The following assets are section 197 intangibles
and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, andand must be amortized over 180 months:How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Part
television advertisers.VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza-
1. Goodwill;tion that begins during the current year, or on the Patents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack-appropriate line of your tax return if you are not 2. Going concern value; age design, computer software, and any interestotherwise required to file Form 4562. in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or3. Workforce in place;For more information on the costs of getting other similar property, except as discussed latera lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in 4. Business books and records, operating under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-chapter 3. systems, or any other information base, tangibles.
including lists or other information concern-
Customer-based intangible. This is the com-ing current or prospective customers;
position of market, market share, and any other5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de- value resulting from the future provision ofSection 197 Intangibles sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar goods or services because of relationships withitem; customers in the ordinary course of business.Generally, you may amortize the capitalized
For example, you must amortize the part of the6. A customer-based intangible;costs of “section 197 intangibles”(defined later)
purchase price of a business that is for theratably over a 15-year period. You must amor- 7. A supplier-based intangible; existence of the following intangibles.tize these costs if you hold the section 197
8. Any item similiar to items (3) through (7);intangibles in connection with your trade or busi- • A customer base.
ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc- 9. A license, permit, or other right granted by • A circulation base.tion of income. a governmental unit or agency (including
• An undeveloped market or market growth.issuances and renewals);You may not be able to amortize sec-
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans- • Insurance in force.10. A covenant not to compete entered into inaction that did not result in a significantCAUTION
!
connection with the acquisition of an inter- • A mortgage servicing contract.change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churning est in a trade or business; andRules, later. • An investment management contract.11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name.Your amortization deduction each year is the • Any other relationship with customers in-applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basis 12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest volving the future provision of goods or(for purposes of determining gain), figured by in, any item in this list. services.amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).
The 15-year period begins with the later of: You cannot amortize any of the in- Accounts receivable or other similar rights totangibles listed in items (1) through (8)• The month the intangible is acquired, or income for goods or services provided to cus-that you created rather than acquiredCAUTION
!
tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-• The month the trade or business or activity unless you created them in acquiring assets that ness are not section 197 intangibles.engaged in for the production of income make up a trade or business or a substantial part
begins. Supplier-based intangible. This is the valueof a trade or business.
resulting from the future acquisition of goods orYou cannot deduct amortization for the month services used or sold by the business becauseGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-you dispose of the intangible. of business relationships with suppliers.ness based on expected continued customer
If you pay or incur an amount that increases For example, you must amortize the part ofpatronage due to its name, reputation, or any
the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi- the purchase price of a business that is for theother factor.
ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize it existence of the following intangibles.
Going concern value. This is the additionalover the remainder of the 15-year period begin- • A favorable relationship with distributorsvalue of a trade or business that attaches toning with the month the basis increase occurs. (such as favorable shelf or display spaceproperty because the property is an integral partYou are not allowed any other depreciation at a retail outlet).of an ongoing business activity. It includes valueor amortization deduction for an amortizable
based on the ability of a business to continue to • A favorable credit rating.section 197 intangible.
function and generate income even though • A favorable supply contract.Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease. there is a change in ownership (but does not
The amortization period for any section 197 in- include any other section 197 intangible). It also
tangible leased under a lease agreement en- includes value based on the immediate use or Government-granted license, permit, etc.
tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exempt availability of an acquired trade or business, This is any right granted by a go vernmental unit
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen- d. Certain rights that have a fixed duration unit-of-production method of cost rec ov-
tal unit. For example, you must amortize the or amount. (See Rights of fixed duration ery.
capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing or amount, later.) However, this does not apply to the followingor renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal- intangibles.6. An interest under either of the following.lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-
• Goodwill.ing license.
a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-
• Going concern value.ble property.Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-
• A covenant not to compete.b. A debt that was in existence when thetangibles include a covenant not to compete (or
interest was acquired.similar arrangement) entered into in connection • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or
• A customer-related information base, cus-7. A right to service residential mortgages un-business, or a substantial portion of a trade or
tomer-based intangible, or similar item.less the right is acquired in connection withbusiness. An interest in a trade or business
the acquisition of a trade or business or aincludes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-
substantial part of a trade or business.ration engaged in a trade or business. Safe Harbor for CreativeAn arrangement that requires the former 8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par- Property Costsowner to perform services (or to provide prop- ties to a corporate organization or reorgan-erty or the use of property) is not similar to a ization in which any part of a gain or loss is If you are engaged in the trade or business ofcovenant not to compete to the extent the not recognized. film production, you may be able to amortize theamount paid under the arrangement represents creative property costs for properties not set forIntangible property that is not amortizablereasonable compensation for those services or production within 3 years of the first capitalizedunder the rules for section 197 intangibles canfor that property or its use. transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-be depreciated if it meets certain requirements. bly over a 15-year period beginning on the firstYou generally must use the straight line methodFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A day of the second half of the tax year in whichover its useful life. For certain intangibles, thefranchise, trademark, or trade name is a section you properly write off the costs for financial ac-depreciation period is specified in the law and197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,regulations. For example, the depreciation pe-or renewal costs, other than certain contingent you dispose of the creative property rights, youriod for computer software that is not a sectionpayments that you can deduct currently. For must continue to amortize the costs over the197 intangible is generally 36 months.information on currently deductible contingent remainder of the 15-year period.For more information on depreciating intan-payments, see chapter 11. gible property, see Intangible Property  under Creative property costs include costs paid or
Professional sports franchise. A What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,
franchise engaged in professional sports and Property? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. scripts, story outlines, motion picture production
any intangible assets acquired in connection rights to books and plays, and other similar
with acquiring the franchise (including player properties for purposes of potential future filmComputer software. Section 197 intangiblescontracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz- development, production, and exploitation.do not include the following types of computerable over a 15-year period. software. Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-
enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,1. Software that meets all the following re-Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, a see Revenue Procedure 2004-36 in Internalquirements.section 197 intangible. Section 197 in- Revenue Bulletin 2004-24, which is available attangibles include any right under a license, con- www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-24.pdf.a. It is, or has been, readily available fortract, or other arrangement providing for the use purchase by the general public.of any section 197 intangible. It also includes A change in the treatment of creative
any term interest in any section 197 intangible, property costs is a change in method ofb. It is subject to a nonexclusive license.
whether the interest is outright or in trust. accounting.CAUTION
!
c. It has not been substantially modified.
This requirement is considered met ifAssets That Are Not the cost of all modifications is not more Anti-Churning RulesSection 197 Intangibles than the greater of 25% of the price of
Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizingthe publicly available unmodified
The following assets are not section 197 in- most section 197 intangibles if the transaction insoftware or $2,000.
tangibles. which you acquired them did not result in a
significant change in ownership or use. These2. Software that is not acquired in connection1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership, rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,with the acquisition of a trade or businesstrust, or estate. and to any other section 197 intangible that isor a substantial part of a trade or business.
2. Any interest under an existing futures con- not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.
tract, foreign currency contract, notional Computer software defined. Computer Under the anti-churning rules, you cannotprincipal contract, interest rate swap, or software includes all programs designed to use 15-year amortization for the intangible if anysimilar financial contract. cause a computer to perform a desired function. of the following conditions apply.It also includes any database or similar item that3. Any interest in land. is in the public domain and is incidental to the 1. You or a related person (defined later) held
4. Most computer software. (See Computer operation of qualifying software. or used the intangible at any time from July
software, later.) 25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.
Rights of fixed duration or amount. Section5. Any of the following assets not acquired in 2. You acquired the intangible from a person197 intangibles do not include any right under aconnection with the acquisition of a trade who held it at any time during the period incontract or from a governmental agency if theor business or a substantial part of a trade (1) and, as part of the transaction, the userright is acquired in the ordinary course of a tradeor business. did not change.or business (or in an activity engaged in for the
3. You granted the right to use the intangiblea. An interest in a film, sound recording, production of income) but not as part of a
to a person (or a person related to thatvideo tape, book, or similar property. purchase of a trade or business and either:
person) who held or used it at any timeb. A right to receive tangible property or • Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or during the period in (1). This applies only ifservices under a contract or from a gov- • Is of a fixed amount that, except for the the transaction in which you granted theernmental agency. rules for section 197 intangibles, would be right and the transaction in which you ac-
c. An interest in a patent or copyright. recovered under a method similar to the quired the intangible are part of a series of
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
related transactions. See Related person, of the capital or profits interests in both basis in the intangible that is more than the gain
later, for more information. partnerships. recognized by the transferor.
• A partnership and a person who owns, Notification. If the person you acquired the
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the intangible from chooses to recognize gain underExceptions. The anti-churning rules do not
capital or profits interests in the partner- the rules for this exception, that person mustapply in the following situations.
ship. notify you in writing by the due date of the return• You acquired the intangible from a dece- on which the choice is made.• Two persons who are engaged in tradesdent and its basis was stepped up to its
or businesses under common control (asfair market value. Anti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize anydescribed in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal• The intangible was amortizable as a sec- section 197 intangible acquired in a transactionRevenue Code).tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans- for which the principal purpose was either of the
feror you acquired it from. This exception following.When to determine relationship. Personsdoes not apply if the transaction in which are treated as related if the relationship existed • To avoid the requirement that the intangi-you acquired the intangible and the trans- at the following time. ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.action in which the seller or transferor ac-
• In the case of a single transaction, imme-quired it are part of a series of related • To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
transactions. diately before or immediately after the
transaction in which the intangible was ac-• The gain-recognition exception, discussed More information. For more informationquired.later, applies. about the anti-churning rules, including addi-
• In the case of a series of related transac- tional rules for partnerships, see Regulations
tions (or a series of transactions that com- section 1.197-2(h).Related person. For purposes of the prise a qualified stock purchase underanti-churning rules, the following are related per- section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenuesons. Incorrect Amount ofCode), immediately before the earliest Amortization Deducted• An individual and his or her brothers, sis- transaction or immediately after the last
ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, transaction. If you later discover that you deducted an incor-ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
rect amount for amortization for a section 197and lineal descendants (children, grand- Ownership of stock. In determining intangible in any year, you may be able to makechildren, etc.). whether an individual directly or indirectly owns a correction for that year by filing an amendedany of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the• A corporation and an individual who owns, return. See Amended Return, next. If you are notfollowing rules apply.directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the allowed to make the correction on an amendedvalue of the corporation’s outstanding Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by return, you can change your accounting methodstock. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust to claim the correct amortization. See Changing
is considered owned proportionately by or for its Your Accounting Method, later.• Two corporations that are members of the
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.same controlled group as defined in sec-
tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Rule 2. An individual is considered to own Amended ReturnCode, except that “more than 20%” is sub- the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for hisstituted for “at least 80%” in that definition or her family. Family includes only brothers and If you deducted an incorrect correct amount forand the determination is made without re- sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, amortization, you can file an amended return togard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of ancestors, and lineal descendants. correct the following.section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
Rule 3. An individual owning (other than bytion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.) • A mathematical error made in any year.
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more • A posting error made in any year.considered to own the stock directly or indirectlythan 20% of the value of the corporation’s owned by or for his or her partner. • An amortization deduction for a sectionoutstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
197 intangible for which you have notdirectly, by or for the trust or grantor of the Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2,
adopted a method of accounting.trust. or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci- person. Do not treat stock constructively owned When to file. If an amended return is allowed,ary and beneficiary, of any trust. by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by you must file it by the later of the following dates.
• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif- another person the constructive owner of the nal return for the year in which you did notferent trusts, if the same person is the stock. deduct the correct amount. (A return filedgrantor of both trusts.
early is considered filed on the due date.)Gain-recognition exception. This exception• The executor and beneficiary of an estate.
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax forto the anti-churning rules applies if the person
• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or- that year.you acquired the intangible from (the transferor)
ganization and a person who directly or meets both of the following requirements.indirectly controls the organization (or
• That person would not be related to you Changing Yourwhose family members control it).
(as described under Related person, ear- Accounting Method• A corporation and a partnership if the lier) if the 20% test for ownership of stocksame persons own more than 20% of the Generally, you must get IRS approval to changeand partnership interests were replaced byvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor- your method of accounting. File Form 3115,a 50% test.poration and more than 20% of the capital Application for Change in Accounting Method, to
• That person chose to recognize gain onor profits interest in the partnership. request a change to a permissible method of
the disposition of the intangible and pay accounting for amortization.• Two S corporations, and an S corporation income tax on the gain at the highest tax The following are examples of a change inand a regular corporation, if the same per- rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for method of accounting for amortization.sons own more than 20% of the value of information on making this choice.the outstanding stock of each corporation. • A change in the amortization method, pe-
riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-If this exception applies, the anti-churning• Two partnerships if the same persons
rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted tizable asset.own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A change in the accounting for amortiz- • The numerator is the adjusted basis of the estate and the income beneficiary based on
each remaining intangible on the date of the income of the estate allocable to each.able assets from a single asset account to
the disposition.a multiple asset account (pooling), or vice Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are theversa. • The denominator is the total adjusted ba- direct costs of planting or seeding for forestation
ses of all remaining amortizable section or reforestation. Qualifying costs include only• A change in the accounting for amortiz-
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi- those costs you must capitalize and include inable assets from one type of multiple as-
tion. the adjusted basis of the property. They includeset account to a different type of multiple
costs for the following items.asset account.
Covenant not to compete. A covenant not to • Site preparation.Changes in amortization that are not a change compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid- • Seeds or seedlings.in method of accounting include the following: ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-
pose of your entire interest in the trade or • Labor.• A change in computing amortization in the
business for which you entered into the cove-tax year in which your use of the asset • Tools.nant.changes.
• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-• An adjustment in the useful life of an am- Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a ing and seeding.
ortizable asset. section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-
fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect Qualifying costs do not include costs for which• Generally, the making of a late amortiza- to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi- the government reimburses you under ation election or the revocation of a timely ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad- cost-sharing program, unless you include thevalid amortization election. justed basis. You amortize this part of the reimbursement in your income.
• Any change in the placed-in-service date adjusted basis over the intangible’s remaining
Qualified timber property. Qualified timberof an amortizable asset. amortization period in the hands of the trans-
property is property that contains trees in signifi-feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers
cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotSee section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii(a) of the Regula- to a corporation, partnership contributions and
or other site that you own or lease. The propertytions for more information and examples. distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-
qualifies only if it meets all of the following re-tary conversions.
quirements.Automatic approval. In some instances, you In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-
may be able to get automatic approval from the version of a section 197 intangible, you must • It is located in the United States.
continue to amortize the part of your adjustedIRS to change your method of accounting for • It is held for the growing and cutting ofbasis in the acquired intangible that is not moreamortization. For a list of automatic accounting timber you will either use in, or sell for usethan your adjusted basis in the exchanged ormethod changes, see the Instructions for Form in, the commercial production of timberconverted intangible over the remaining amorti-3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115 products.zation period of the exchanged or convertedfor more information on getting approval, auto-
intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year periodmatic approval procedures, and a list of excep- • It consists of at least one acre planted with
the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired tree seedlings in the manner normallytions to the automatic approval process.
intangible that is more than your adjusted basis used in forestation or reforestation.For additional guidance, see Revenue Pro-
in the exchanged or converted intangible.cedure 2006-12 on page 310 of Internal Reve-
Qualified timber property does not includenue Bulletin 2006-3, available at www.irs.gov/ Example. You own a section 197 intangible property on which you have planted shelter beltspub/irs-irbs/irb06-03.pdf. you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
Disposition of Amortization period. The 84-month amorti-exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind
zation period starts on the first day of the firstSection 197 Intangibles section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-
month of the second half of the tax year youvisions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-
incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia- tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the
payer), regardless of the month you actuallyble property used in your trade or business. If acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining
incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-you held the intangible for more than 1 year, any in the original 15-year amortization period for the
ductions for no more than 6 months of the firstgain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow- transferred asset. You amortize the other
and last (eighth) tax years of the period.able amortization, is ordinary income (section $10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year
1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangibles period. Life tenant and remainderman. If one per-are disposed of in a single transaction or a son holds the property for life with the remainder
series of related transactions, treat all of the going to another person, the life tenant is entitled
section 197 intangibles as if they were a single to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-
asset for purposes of determining the amount of Reforestation Costs tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-
gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining mainder interest in the property is ignored for
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. If You can elect to deduct a limited amount of amortization purposes.
you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gain reforestation costs paid or incurred during the Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timberor loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain or tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. property within 10 years after the tax year youloss. For more information on ordinary or capital You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs incur qualifying reforestation expenses, reportgain or loss on business property, see chapter 3 that are not deducted currently over an any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-in Publication 544. 84-month period. There is no limit on the amount tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544of your amortization deduction for reforestation for more information.Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct any costs paid or incurred during the tax year.
loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a The election to amortize reforestation costs How to make the election. To elect to amor-
section 197 intangible that you acquired in the incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es- tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part
same transaction (or series of related transac- tate must be made by the partnership, corpora- VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that
tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or contains the following information.
have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of beneficiary cannot make that election. • A description of the costs and the dateseach remaining amortizable section 197 intangi- A partner’s or shareholder’s share of amor- you incurred them.ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible tizable costs is figured under the general rules
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non- for allocating items of income, loss, deduction, • A description of the type of timber being
deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi- etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am- grown and the purpose for which it is
ble by the following fraction. ortizable costs of an estate are divided between grown.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Attach a separate statement for each property amortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am- costs, deduct them in equal amount s over 60
for which you amortize reforestation costs. ortizable basis) by the amount of any special months or more. The amortization period  begins
allowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica- the month you first receive an economic benefitGenerally, you must make the election on a tion 946. from the costs. For a definition of “research andtimely filed return (including extensions) for the A certified pollution control facility is a new experimental costs” and information on deduct-tax year in which you incurred the costs. How- identifiable treatment facility used in connection ing them as current business expenses, seeever, if you timely filed your return for the year with a plant or other property in operation before chapter 7.without making the election, you can still make 1976, to reduce or control water or atmosphericthe election by filing an amended return within 6 Optional write-off method. Rather thanpollution or contamination. The facility must domonths of the due date of the return (excluding amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, orextensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state- rent expense, you have the option of deductingpreventing the creation or emission of pollu-ment to the amended return and write “Filed (writing off) research and experimental coststants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facilitypursuant to section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. ratably over a 10-year period beginning with themust be certified by state and federal certifyingFile the amended return at the same address tax year in which you incurred the costs.authorities.you filed the original return. The facility must not significantly increase
Costs you can amortize. You can amortizethe output or capacity, extend the useful life, orRevoking the election. You must get IRS ap- costs chargeable to a capital account if you meetreduce the total operating costs of the plant orproval to revoke your election to amortize quali- both the following requirements.other property. Also, it must not significantlyfying reforestation costs. Your application to
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro-revoke the election must include your name, • You paid or incurred the costs in your
duction process or facility.address, the years for which your election was in trade or business.
The federal certifying authority will not certifyeffect, and your reason for revoking it. You, or • You are not deducting the costs currently.your property to the extent it appears you willyour duly authorized representative, must sign
recover (over the property’s useful life) all or partthe application and file it at least 90 days before
of its cost from the profit based on its operation How to make the election. To elect to amor-the due date (without extensions) for filing your
(such as through sales of recovered wastes). tize research and experimental costs, completeincome tax return for the first tax year for which
The federal certifying authority will describe the Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-your election is to end.
nature of the potential cost recovery. You must come tax return. Generally, you must file the
then reduce the amortizable basis of the facility return by the due date (including extensions).
by this potential recovery. However, if you timely filed your return for theSend the application to: year without making the election, you can stillNew identifiable treatment facility. A newInternal Revenue Service make the election by filing an amended returnidentifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-Associate Chief Counsel within 6 months of the due date of the returnciable property that is identifiable as a treatmentPassthroughs and Special Industries (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to thefacility. It does not include a building and itsCC:PSI amended return and write “Filed pursuant tostructural components unless the building is ex-1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300 section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File theclusively a treatment facility.Washington, DC 20224 amended return at the same address you filed
the original return.Atmospheric pollution control facilities.
Your election is binding for the year it isCertain atmospheric pollution control facilities
made and for all later years unless you obtaincan be amortized over 84 months. To qualify,
Geological and approval from the IRS to change to a differentthe following must apply.
method.• The facility must be acquired and placedGeophysical Costs
in service after April 11, 2005. If acquired,
the original use must begin with you afterYou can amortize the cost of geological and
April 11, 2005.geophysical expenses paid or incurred in con- Optional Write-offnection with oil and gas exploration or develop- • The facility must be used in connection
ment within the U.S. These costs can be with an electric generation plant or other of Certain Tax
amortized ratably over a 24-month period begin- property placed in operation after Decem-
ning on the mid-point of the tax year in which the Preferencesber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.
expenses were paid or incurred. For major inte-
• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect thegrated oil companies (as defined in section You can elect to amortize certain tax preferencefacility, only the basis attributable to the167(h)(5)) these costs must be amortized rata- items over an optional period beginning in theconstruction, reconstruction, or erectionbly over a 5-year period for costs paid or in- tax year in which you incurred the costs. If youcompleted after April 11, 2005, qualifies.curred after May 12, 2006 (a 7-year period for make this election there is no AMT adjustment.
costs paid or incurred after December 19, 2007). The applicable costs and the optional recovery
If you retire or abandon the property during periods are as follows:Basis reduction for corporations. A corpo-
the amortization period, no amortization deduc- ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a • Circulation costs — 3 years,tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban- pollution control facility by 20% before figuring
donment. • Intangible drilling and development coststhe amortization deduction.
— 60 months,
More information. For more information on • Mining exploration and development coststhe amortization of pollution control facilities, — 10 years, andsee Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re-Pollution
lated regulations. • Research and experimental costs — 10
Control Facilities years.
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified How to make the election. To elect to amor-pollution control facility over 60 months. How- Research and tize qualifying costs over the optional recoveryever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilities period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-for an exception. The cost of a pollution control Experimental Costs tach a statement containing the following infor-facility that is not eligible for amortization can be mation to your return for the tax year in which thedepreciated under the regular rules for deprecia- You can elect to amortize your research and election begins:tion. Also, you can claim a special depreciation experimental costs, deduct them as current
allowance on a certified pollution control facility business expenses, or write them off over a • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
that is qualified property even if you elect to 10-year period. If you elect to amortize these cation number; and
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The type of cost and the specific amount 1. Amounts recoverable through:
of the cost for which you are making the Who Can a. Depreciation deductions,election.
b. Deferred expenses (including deferredClaim Depletion?
Generally, the election must be made on a exploration and development costs),
timely filed return (including extensions) for the andIf you have an economic interest in mineral prop-
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How- erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction c. Deductions other than depletion.ever, if you timely filed your return for the year for depletion. More than one person can have an
without making the election, you can still make economic interest in the same mineral deposit or 2. The residual value of land and improve-timber.the election by filing an amended return within 6 ments at the end of operations.months of the due date of the return (excluding You have an economic interest if both the
3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended following apply.
poses other than mineral production.return and write “Filed pursuant to section • You have acquired by investment any in-301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the amended terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of yourreturn at the same address you filed the original ber. property is your original cost or other basis, plusreturn. certain additions and improvements, and minus• You have a legal right to income from the
certain deductions such as depletion allowed orextraction of the mineral or cutting of theRevoking the election. You must obtain con- allowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedtimber to which you must look for a returnsent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your basis can never be less than zero. See Publica-of your capital investment.request to revoke the election must be submit- tion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before A contractual relationship that allows you an on adjusted basis.the end of the tax year in which the optional economic or monetary advantage from products
Total recoverable units. The total recover-recovery period ends. The request must contain of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not,
able units is the sum of the following.all of the information necessary to demonstrate in itself, an economic interest. A production pay-
ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,the rare and unusual circumstances that would • The number of units of mineral remaining
mineral property is not an economic interest.justify granting revocation. If the request for rev- at the end of the year (including units re-
ocation is approved, any unamortized costs are covered but not sold).
Individuals, corporations, estates, anddeductible in the year the revocation is effective. • The number of units of mineral sold duringtrusts who claim depletion deductions
the tax year (determined under yourmay be liable for alternative minimumCAUTION
!
method of accounting, as explained next).tax.
You must estimate or determine recoverable
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-9. Mineral Property ucts using the current industry method and the
most accurate and reliable information you can
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, obtain.
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-
Number of units sold. You determine theDepletion othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term
number of units sold during the tax year based“property” means each separate interest you
on your method of accounting. Use the followingown in each mineral deposit in each separate
table to make this determination.tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or moreWhat’s New for 2008 separate interests as one property or as sepa- IF you THEN the units soldrate properties. See section 614 of the Internal use ... during the year are ...Marginal production of oil and gas. For tax Revenue Code and the related regulations for
years beginning after December 31, 2007, the rules on how to treat separate mineral interests. The cash The units sold for which
temporary suspension of the taxable income method of you receive paymentThere are two ways of figuring depletion on
limit on percentage depletion from the marginal accounting during the tax yearmineral property.
(regardless of the year ofproduction of oil and natural gas is scheduled to • Cost depletion. sale).expire. See Percentage Depletion.
• Percentage depletion. An accrual The units sold based on
method of your inventories andGenerally, you must use the method that gives
accounting method of accounting foryou the larger deduction. However, unless you
inventory.Introduction are an independent producer or royalty owner,
you generally cannot use percentage depletionDepletion is the using up of natural resources by The number of units sold during the tax yearfor oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells,mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple- does not include any for which depletion deduc-later.tion deduction allows an owner or operator to tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.account for the reduction of a product’s
Figuring the cost depletion deduction.Cost Depletionreserves.
Once you have figured your property’s basis forThere are two ways of figuring depletion: To figure cost depletion you must first determine depletion, the total recoverable units, and thecost depletion and percentage depletion. For the following. number of units sold during the tax year, you canmineral property, you generally must use the figure your cost depletion deduction by taking• The property’s basis for depletion.method that gives you the larger deduction. For the following steps.standing timber, you must use cost depletion. • The total recoverable units of mineral in
the property’s natural deposit.
Topics • The number of units of mineral sold duringThis chapter discusses: the tax year.
• Who can claim depletion
Basis for depletion. To figure the property’s• Mineral property basis for depletion, subtract all the following
• Timber from the property’s adjusted basis.
Page 32 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 33 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Step Action Result gross income from the property is defined later Independent Producers and
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Royalty Owners 1 Divide your property’s Rate per
basis for depletion by unit. If you are an independent producer or royaltytotal recoverable units. Taxable income limit. The percentage deple- owner, you figure percentage depletion using a
tion deduction generally cannot be more than rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop- 2 Multiply the rate per Cost
50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your erty based on your average daily production ofunit by units sold depletion
domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toduring the tax year. deduction. taxable income from the property figured without
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-the depletion deduction and the domestic pro-
ever, certain refiners, as explained next, andduction activities deduction.
certain retailers and transferees of proven oilNote. You must keep accounts for the de- Taxable income from the property means and gas properties, as explained later, cannotpletion of each property and adjust these ac- gross income from the property minus all allowa- claim percentage depletion. For information oncounts each year for units sold and depletion
ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de- figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentageclaimed.
pletion or qualified domestic production depletion, later.
activities) attributable to mining processes, in-Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-cluding mining transportation. These deductibleproperty. Owners of oil and gas property may pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-use an elective safe harbor in determining the items include, but are not limited to, the follow- tion if you or a related person refine crude oil andproperty’s recoverable reserves for purposes of ing. you and the related person refined more thancomputing cost depletion. If this election is • Operating expenses. 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax yearmade, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce- based on average (rather than actual) daily re-dure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Revenue • Certain selling expenses. finery runs for the tax year. The average dailyBulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/ • Administrative and financial overhead. refinery run is computed by dividing total refineryirs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf. runs for the tax year by the total number of days• Depreciation.To make the election, attach a statement to in the tax year.your timely filed (including extensions) original • Intangible drilling and development costs. Related person. You and another personreturn for the first tax year for which the safe
• Exploration and development expendi- are related persons if either of you holds a signif-harbor is elected. The statement must indicate
icant ownership interest in the other person or iftures.that you are electing the safe harbor provided by
a third person holds a significant ownership in-Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, if
The following rules apply when figuring your terest in both of you.made, is effective for the tax year in which it is
For example, a corporation, partnership, es-made and all subsequent years. It cannot be taxable income from the property for purposes
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significantrevoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but of the taxable income limit.
ownership interest in it are related persons. Amay be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it • Do not deduct any net operating loss de- partnership and a trust are related persons if onecannot be re-elected for the next 5 years.
duction from the gross income from the person holds a significant ownership interest in
property. each of them.Percentage Depletion
For purposes of the related person rules,• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
significant ownership interest means direct orTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply a tributions from the gross income from the indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one ofcertain percentage, specified for each mineral, property. the following.by your gross income from the property during
• If, during the year, you dispose of an itemthe tax year. • The value of the outstanding stock of aof section 1245 property that was used inThe rates to be used and other conditions corporation.
connection with mineral property, reduceand qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-
• The interest in the profits or capital of acussed later under Independent Producers and any allowable deduction for mining ex-
partnership.Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells. penses by the part of any gain you must
Rates and other rules for percentage depletion report as ordinary income that is allocable • The beneficial interests in an estate or
of other specific minerals are found later in trust.to the mineral property. See sectionMines and Geothermal Deposits. 1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-
Any interest owned by or for a corporation,mation on how to figure the ordinary gainGross income. When figuring your percent- partnership, trust, or estate is considered to beallocable to the property.age depletion, subtract from your gross income owned directly both by itself and proportionately
from the property the following amounts. by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Oil and Gas Wells• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-for the property. pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oil
• The part of any bonus you paid for a lease tion if both the following apply.or gas well unless at least one of the following
on the property allocable to the product applies. 1. You sell oil or natural gas or theirsold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
by-products directly or through a related• You are either an independent producer orincome) for the tax year.
person in any of the following situations.a royalty owner.A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as
• The well produces natural gas that is ei- a. Through a retail outlet operated by youa lessee to satisfy a production payment re-
ther sold under a fixed contract or pro- or a related person.tained by the lessor.
duced from geopressured brine. b. To any person who is required under anUse the following fraction to figure the part of
agreement with you or a related personthe bonus you must subtract. If you are an independent producer or royalty to use a trademark, trade name, or
owner, see Independent Producers and RoyaltyNo. of units sold in the tax year service mark or name owned by you orBonus Owners, next.Recoverable units from the × a related person in marketing or distrib-Paymentsproperty uting oil, natural gas, or theirFor information on the depletion deduction
by-products.for wells that produce natural gas that is eitherFor oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-
sold under a fixed contract or produced fromits, gross income from the property is defined c. To any person given authority under an
geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property other agreement with you or a related person
than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well, later. to occupy any retail outlet owned,
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
leased, or controlled by you or a related property (defined later) by 15%. If your average proportion to each entity’s or family member’s
person. daily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds production of domestic oil or gas for the year.
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must • Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or2. The combined gross receipts from sales make an allocation as explained later under Av- more of the beneficial interest is owned by(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or erage daily production exceeds depletable the same or related persons (consideringtheir by-products by all retail outlets taken quantities. only persons that own at least 5% of theinto account in (1) are more than $5 million In addition, there is a limit on the percentage beneficial interest).for the tax year. depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,
• You and your spouse and minor children.later.For the purpose of determining if this rule
applies, do not count the following. A related person is anyone mentioned in theAverage daily production. Figure your aver- related persons discussion under Nondeduct-• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) age daily production by dividing your total do- ible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, exceptof oil or natural gas to commercial or in- mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by that for purposes of this allocation, item (1) industrial users. the number of days in your tax year. that discussion includes only an individual, his or
• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart- Partial interest. If you have a partial inter- her spouse, and minor children.
ment of Defense. est in the production from a property, figure your Controlled group of corporations. Mem-share of the production by multiplying total pro-• Sales of oil or natural gas or their bers of the same controlled group of corpora-duction from the property by your percentage ofby-products outside the United States if tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringinterest in the revenues from the property.none of your domestic production or that the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. TheyYou have a partial interest in the productionof a related person is exported during the share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, afrom a property if you have a net profits interesttax year or the prior tax year. controlled group of corporations is defined inin the property. To figure the share of production section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,for your net profits interest, you must first deter-Related person. To determine if you and except that the stock ownership requirement inmine your percentage participation (as mea-another person are related persons, see Re- that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “atsured by the net profits) in the gross revenuelated person under Refiners who cannot claim least 80%.”from the property. To figure this percentage, youpercentage depletion, earlier. divide the income you receive for your net profits Gross income from the property. For pur-Sales through a related person. You are interest by the gross revenue from the property. poses of percentage depletion, gross incomeconsidered to be selling through a related per- Then multiply the total production from the prop- from the property (in the case of oil and gasson if any sale by the related person produces erty by your percentage participation to figure wells) is the amount you receive from the sale ofgross income from which you may benefit be- your share of the production. the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well.cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter- If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,est in the person. Example. John Oak owns oil property in but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod-You are not considered to be selling through which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest. uct before sale or transport it before sale, thea related person who is a retailer if all the follow- During the year, the property produced 10,000 gross income from the property is the represen-ing apply. barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000. tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil orJohn had expenses of $90,000 attributable to• You do not have a significant ownership gas, before conversion or transportation.the property. The property generated a net profitinterest in the retailer. If you sold gas after you removed it from theof $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-
premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,• You sell your production to persons who ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for
determine gross income from the property forare not related to either you or the retailer. his net profits interest.
percentage depletion purposes without regardPaul determined his percentage participation• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas to the RMFP.to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income hefrom your customers or persons related to Gross income from the property does notreceived) by $200,000 (the gross revenue fromyour customers. include lease bonuses, advance royalties, orthe property). Paul determined his share of the
• There are no arrangements for the retailer other amounts payable without regard to pro-oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-
to acquire oil or natural gas you produced duction from the property.rels × 11%).
for resale or made available for purchase
Average daily production exceeds deplet-by the retailer. Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen-
able quantities. If your average daily produc-erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-• Neither you nor the retailer knows of or tion for the year is more than your depletable oilrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity iscontrols the final disposition of the oil or or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number ofnatural gas you sold or the original source depletion for each domestic oil or natural gasbarrels of your depletable oil quantity that youof the petroleum products the retailer ac- property as follows.choose to apply. If you claim depletion on bothquired for resale. oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de- 1. Figure your average daily production of oilpletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num- or natural gas for the year.Transferees who cannot claim percentage ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de- natural gas quantity. 2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas
pletion if you received your interest in a proven quantity for the year.
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and Example. You have both oil and natural gas 3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gasbefore October 12, 1990. For a definition of the production. To figure your depletable natural produced from the property using a per-term “transfer,” see section 1.613A-7(n) of the gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of centage depletion rate of 15%.regulations. For a definition of the term “interest your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Your
in proven oil or gas property,” see section depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million 4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-
1.613A-7(p) of the regulations. cubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduce tion, the numerator of which is the result
your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 figured in (2) and the denominator of whichFiguring percentage depletion. Generally, − 360). is the result figured in (1). This is youras an independent producer or royalty owner,  If you have production from marginal wells, depletion allowance for that property foryou figure your percentage depletion by comput- see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue the year.ing your average daily production of domestic oil Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gasor gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or quantity. Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-gas quantity. If your average daily production
dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan- Business entities and family members.
your deduction for percentage depletion is lim-tity, you figure your percentage depletion by You must allocate the depletable oil or gas
ited to the smaller of the following.multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas quantity among the following related persons in
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• 100% of your taxable income from the your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper- Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual-
property figured without the deduction for ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-
depletion and the deduction for domestic tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.
production activities under section 199 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas This is natural gas that is both the following.
the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini- depletion for your partnership or S corporation • Produced from a well you began to drilltion of taxable income from the property, interest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple- after September 1978 and before 1984.see Taxable income limit, earlier, under tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur-
Mineral Property. ing income or loss from rental real estate or • Determined in accordance with section
royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978• 65% of your taxable income from all E explain where to report this income or loss and to be produced from geopressured brine.sources, figured without the depletion al- whether you need to file either of the followinglowance, the deduction for domestic pro- forms.duction activities, any net operating loss Mines andcarryback, and any capital loss carryback. • Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
Geothermal Deposits
You can carry over to the following year any • Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
amount you cannot deduct because of the tions. Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de- including geothermal deposits, qualify for per-
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) for centage depletion.Electing large partnerships must figure de-the following year. pletion allowance. An electing large partner-
ship, rather than each partner, generally must Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat-
figure the depletion allowance. The partnershipNote. For tax years beginning before Janu- ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in-
figures the depletion allowance without takingary 1, 2008, depletion on the marginal produc- come from the property that you can deduct as
into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-incometion of oil or natural gas is not limited to your depletion depends on the type of deposit.
limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-taxable income from the property figured without The following is a list of the percentage de-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter-the depletion deduction. For information on mar- pletion rates for the more common minerals. est in the partnership is not affected by theginal production, see section 613A(c)(6) of the
depletion allowance.Internal Revenue Code. DEPOSITS RATEAn electing large partnership is one that
meets both the following requirements. Sulphur, uranium, and, if fromPartnerships and S Corporations deposits in the United States,• The partnership had 100 or more partners
asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickelin the preceding year.Generally, each partner or shareholder, and not ore, and mica ............. 2 2 %the partnership or S corporation, figures the de- • The partnership chooses to be an electing
Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, andpletion allowance separately. (However, see large partnership. certain oil shale, if from deposits inElecting large partnerships must figure deple-
the United States ........... 1 5 %tion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share- Disqualified persons. An electing large
holder must decide whether to use cost or partnership does not figure the depletion allow- Borax, granite, limestone, marble,
percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholder mollusk shells, potash, slate,ance of its partners that are disqualified per-
uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap- soapstone, and carbon dioxidesons. Disqualified persons must figure it
ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his or produced from a well ........ 1 4 %themselves, as explained earlier.
her taxable income from all sources. All the following are disqualified persons. Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%
Partner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis. • Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- Clay and shale used or sold forThe partnership or S corporation must allocate pletion (discussed under Independent Pro- use in making sewer pipe or bricksto each partner or shareholder his or her share ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). or used or sold for use as sinteredof the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property or burned lightweight aggregates 7 1/2%• Retailers who cannot claim percentageheld by the partnership or S corporation. The
Clay used or sold for use indepletion (discussed under Independentpartnership or S corporation makes the alloca- making drainage and roofing tile,Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier).tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas flower pots, and kindred products,property. • Any partner whose average daily produc- and gravel, sand, and stone (otherEach partner’s share of the adjusted basis of tion of domestic crude oil and natural gas than stone used or sold for use bythe oil or gas property generally is figured ac- is more than 500 barrels during the tax a mine owner or operator ascording to that partner’s interest in partnership year in which the partnership tax year dimension or ornamental stone) 5%capital. However, in some cases, it is figured ends. Average daily production is dis-
according to the partner’s interest in partnership You can find a complete list of minerals andcussed earlier.
income. their percentage depletion rates in section
The partnership or S corporation adjusts the 613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.Natural Gas Wellspartner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted
Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal.basis of the oil and gas property for any capital You can use percentage depletion for a well that The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-expenditures made for the property and for any produces natural gas either sold under a fixed ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) ischange in partnership or S corporation interests. contract or produced from geopressured brine. reduced by 20% of:
Each partner or shareholder must sep-
• The percentage depletion deduction forNatural gas sold under a fixed contract.arately keep records of his or her share
the tax year (figured without regard to thisNatural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesof the adjusted basis in each oil andRECORDS
reduction), minusfor a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isgas property of the partnership or S corporation.
domestic natural gas sold by the producer underThe partner or shareholder must reduce his or • The adjusted basis of the property at thea contract that does not provide for a price in-her adjusted basis by the depletion allowed or close of the tax year (figured without thecrease to reflect any increase in the seller’s taxallowable on the property each year. The part- depletion deduction for the tax year).liability because of the repeal of percentage de-ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-
pletion for gas. The contract must have been injusted basis to figure cost depletion or his or her
Gross income from the property. For prop-effect from February 1, 1975, until the date ofgain or loss if the partnership or S corporation
erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orsale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,disposes of the property.
gas well, gross income from the property means1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax
the gross income from mining. Mining includesReporting the deduction. Information that liability into account unless demonstrated other-
all the following.you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure wise by clear and convincing evidence.
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Extracting ores or minerals from the • A person owned or controlled by the same royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-
ground. duced before termination. Increase your ad-interests that own or control you.
justed basis in the property by the amount you• Applying certain treatment processes. include in income.Geothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits• Transporting ores or minerals (generally, located in the United States or its possessionsnot more than 50 miles) from the point of Delay rentals. These are payments for defer-qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Aextraction to the plants or mills in which ring development of the property. Since delaygeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir ofthe treatment processes are applied. rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid come that is not subject to depletion. Theseor vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, aExcise tax. Gross income from mining in- rentals can be avoided by either abandoning thegeothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.cludes the separately stated excise tax received lease, beginning development operations, or
Figure gross income from the property for aby a mine operator from the sale of coal to obtaining production.
compensate the operator for the excise tax the geothermal steam well in the same way as for oil
mine operator must pay to finance black lung and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-
benefits. erty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent-
age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannot TimberExtraction. Extracting ores or minerals
be more than 50% of your taxable income fromfrom the ground includes extraction by mine
You can figure timber depletion only by the costthe property.owners or operators of ores or minerals from the
method. Percentage depletion does not apply towaste or residue of prior mining. This does not
timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherapply to extraction from waste or residue of prior Lessor’s Gross Income
basis in the timber. Your cost does not includemining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
the cost of land or any amounts recoverableA lessor’s gross income from the property thator the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
through depreciation.qualifies for percentage depletion usually is theminerals from the waste or residue.
Depletion takes place when you cut standingtotal of the royalties received from the lease.Treatment processes. The processes in- timber. You can figure your depletion deductionHowever, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineral when the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelygross income does not include lease bonuses,mined. To qualify as mining, the treatment measured in the process of exploitation.advanced royalties, or other amounts payableprocesses must be applied by the mine owner or
without regard to production from the property.operator. For a listing of treatment processes Figuring cost depletion. To figure your costconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) of depletion allowance, you multiply the number ofBonuses and advanced royalties. Bonusesthe Internal Revenue Code and the related regu- timber units cut by your depletion unit.and advanced royalties are payments a lesseelations.
makes before production to a lessor for the grant Timber units. When you acquire timberTransportation of more than 50 miles. If property, you must make an estimate of theof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tothe IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be quantity of marketable timber that exists on thebe extracted from leased property. If you are thetransported more than 50 miles to plants or mills property. You measure the timber using boardlessor, your income from bonuses and ad-to be treated because of physical and other feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you latervanced royalties received is subject to an allow-requirements, the additional authorized trans- determine that you have more or less units ofance for depletion.portation is considered mining and included in timber, you must adjust the original estimate.the computation of gross income from mining. Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de- The term “timber property” means your eco-
pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orIf you wish to include transportation of
in the property by a fraction, the numerator of block representing a separate timber account.more than 50 miles in the computation
which is the bonus and the denominator of whichof gross income from mining, file an Depletion unit. You figure your depletionis the total bonus and royalties expected to beapplication in duplicate with the IRS. Include on unit each year by taking the following steps.received. To figure cost depletion on advancedthe application the facts concerning the physical
royalties, use the computation explained earlierand other requirements which prevented the 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of
under Cost Depletion, treating the number ofconstruction and operation of the plant within 50 the timber on hand at the beginning of the
units for which the advanced royalty is receivedmiles of the point of extraction. Send this appli- year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost
cation to: as the number of units sold. Depletion in the discussion on Mineral
Internal Revenue Service Property.Figuring percentage depletion. In theAssociate Chief Counsel case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 2. Add to the amount determined in (1) thePassthroughs and Special Industries other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you cost of any timber units acquired duringCC:PSI:FO may use the percentage rates discussed earlier the year and any additions to capital.1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300 under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo- 3. Figure the number of timber units to takeWashington, DC 20224 nus or advanced royalty payments are generally into account by adding the number of tim-part of the gross income from the property to ber units acquired during the year to theDisposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take which the rates are applied in making the calcu- number of timber units on hand in the ac-a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite) lation. However, in the case of independent pro- count at the beginning of the year and thenor iron ore mined in the United States if both the ducers and royalty owners of oil and gas adding (or subtracting) any correction tofollowing apply. property, bonuses and advance royalty pay- the estimate of the number of timber units
ments are not a part of gross income.• You disposed of it after holding it for more remaining in the account.
than 1 year. Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo- 4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).
nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is• You disposed of it under a contract under This is your depletion unit.
abandoned before you derive any income fromwhich you retain an economic interest in
the coal or iron ore. the extraction of mineral, include in income for Example. You bought a timber tract forthe year of expiration, termination, or abandon- $160,000 and the land was worth as much asTreat any gain on the disposition as a capital ment, the depletion deduction you took. Also the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.gain. increase your adjusted basis in the property to Based on an estimated one million board feetDisposal to related person. This rule does restore the depletion deduction you previously (1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yournot apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore to subtracted. depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷one of the following persons. For advanced royalties, include in income for 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple-
the year of lease termination, the depletion• A related person (as listed in chapter 2 of tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF ×
claimed on minerals for which the advancedPublication 544). $80).
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When to claim depletion. Claim your deple- All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad You can claim a bad debt deduction
tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale only if the amount owed to you wasdebts and are deductible only as short-term cap-
or other disposition of the products cut from the previously included in gross income.ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more CAUTION
!
timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of This applies to amounts owed to you from allinformation on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-
timber as a sale or exchange (explained below). sources of taxable income, including sales,lication 550.
Include allowable depletion for timber products services, rents, and interest.
not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as a Topics Accrual method. If you use the accrualcost item in the closing inventory of timber prod- This chapter discusses: method of accounting, generally, you report in-ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis for
come as you earn it. You can only claim a baddetermining gain or loss in the tax year you sell • Definition of business bad debt debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable ifthe timber products.
you have previously included the entire uncol-• When a debt becomes worthless
Example. Assume the same facts as in the lectible amount in income.• How to claim a business bad debtprevious example except that you sold only half If you qualify, you can use the nonac-
of the timber products in the cutting year. You • Recovery of a bad debt crual-experience method of accounting dis-
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletion cussed later. Under this method, you do not
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000 have to accrue income that, based on your ex-Useful Itemsdepletion to your closing inventory of timber perience, you do not expect to collect.
products. You may want to see:
Cash method. If you use the cash method
Electing to treat the cutting of timber as a of accounting, generally, you report incomePublication
sale or exchange. You can elect, under cer- when you receive payment. You cannot claim a
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incometain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timber bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you
held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange. because you never included those amounts in❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) forYou must make the election on your income tax income. For example, a cash basis architectIndividuals, Estates, and Trustsreturn for the tax year to which it applies. If you cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails
make this election, subtract the adjusted basis ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of to pay the bill because the architect’s fee was
for depletion from the fair market value of the Assets never included in income.
timber on the first day of the tax year in which ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesyou cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting. Debts from a former business. If you sell
You generally report the gain as long-term capi- ❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal your business but retain its receivables, thesetal gain. The fair market value then becomes Rights, and Claims for Refund debts are business debts because they aroseyour basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss out of your trade or business. If any of theseon the sale or other disposition of the products See chapter 12 for information about getting receivables subsequently become worthless,cut from the timber. For more information, see publications and forms. the loss is still a business bad debt.Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Sales
Debt acquired from a decedent. The char-and Other Dispositions of Assets.
acter of a loss from debts of a business acquiredYou may revoke an election to treat the cut-
from a decedent is determined in the same wayting of timber as a sale or exchange without Definition of Business as debts sold by a business. The executor of theIRS’s consent. The prior election (and revoca-
tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a decedent’s estate treats any loss from the debtsBad Debtsubsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For- as a business bad debt if the debts were closely
est Activities Schedule, for more information. related to the decedent’s trade or businessA business bad debt is a loss from the worth- when they became worthless. Otherwise, a losslessness of a debt that was either:Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber) from these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad
to your income tax return if you claim a deduc- • Created or acquired in your trade or busi- debt for the decedent’s estate.
tion for timber depletion, choose to treat the ness, or Liquidation. If you liquidate your businesscutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or make
• Closely related to your trade or business and some of your accounts receivable becomean outright sale of timber.
when it became partly or totally worthless. worthless, they become business bad debts.
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi- Types of Business Bad
ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt Debtsis business related. Bad debts of a corporation
are always business bad debts. The following are situations that may result in a
10. business bad debt.
Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainly
Loans to clients and suppliers. If you loanthe result of credit sales to customers. Goods
money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-that have been sold, but not yet paid for, andBusiness utor for a business reason and subsequently,services that have been performed, but not yet
after making attempts to collect, the loan receiv-paid for are recorded in your books as either
able becomes worthless, you have a businessBad Debts accounts receivable or notes receivable. After a
bad debt.reasonable period of time, if you have tried to
collect the amount due, but are unable to do so,
Debts of political parties. If a political partythe uncollectible part becomes a business badIntroduction (or other organization that accepts contributionsdebt.If someone owes you money that you are not or spends money to influence elections) owes Accounts or notes receivable valued at fairgoing to be able to collect, you have a bad debt. you money and the debt becomes worthless,market value (FMV) when received are deducti-There are two kinds of bad debts—business you can claim a bad debt deduction only if youble only at that value, even though the FMV mayand nonbusiness. This chapter discusses only use an accrual method of accounting and meetbe less than the face value. If you purchased anbusiness bad debts. all the following tests.
account receivable for less than its face value,Generally, a business bad debt is one that
and the receivable subsequently becomes 1. The debt arose from the sale of goods orcomes from operating your trade or business.
services in the ordinary course of yourworthless, the most you are allowed to deduct isYou can deduct business bad debts on your
trade or business.the amount you paid to acquire it.business income tax return.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 37

Page 38 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. More than 30% of your receivables ac- the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a later tax year, you can deduct the amo unt you
crued in the year of the sale were from bad debt. charge off in that year plus the disallowed
sales to political parties. amount charged-off in the earlier year. The
charge off in the earlier year, unless reversed on
3. You made substantial and continuing ef- your books, fulfills the charge-off requirement forforts to collect on the debt. the later year.When a Debt Becomes
Loan or capital contribution. You cannot Totally worthless debts. If a debt becomesWorthlessclaim a bad debt deduction for a loan you made totally worthless in the current tax year, you can
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir- deduct the entire amount, less any amount de-You do not have to wait until a debt is due tocumstances, the loan is actually a contribution to ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt wasdetermine whether it is worthless. A debt be-capital. only partly worthless.comes worthless when there is no longer any
You do not have to make an actualchance the amount owed will be paid.Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi-
charge-off on your books to claim a bad debtIt is not necessary to go to court if you canness partnership breaks up and one of your
deduction for a totally worthless debt. However,show that a judgment from the court would beformer partners becomes insolvent, you may
you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSuncollectible. You must only show that you havehave to pay more than your pro rata share. If you
later rules the debt is only partly worthless, youtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt.pay any part of the insolvent partner’s share of
will not be allowed a deduction for the debt inBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-the debts, you can claim a bad debt deduction
that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessdence of the worthlessness of at least a part offor the amount you paid that is attributable to the
bad debt is limited to the amount actuallyan unsecured and unpreferred debt.insolvent partner’s share.
charged off.
Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee a Property received for debt. If you receive
debt that subsequently becomes worthless, the Filing a claim for refund. If you did not deductproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reduce
debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all the a bad debt on your original return for the year itthe debt by the FMV of the property received.
following requirements are met. became worthless, you can file a claim for aYou can deduct the remaining debt as a bad
credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-debt if and when it becomes worthless.• You made the guarantee in the course of less, you must file the claim by the later of theIf you later sell the property, any gain on theyour trade or business. following dates.sale is due to the appreciation of the property. It
• You have a legal duty to pay the debt. is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information • 7 years from the date your original returnon the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.• You made the guarantee before the debt was due (not including extensions).
became worthless. You meet this require- • 2 years from the date you paid the tax.ment if you reasonably expected you
would not have to pay the debt without full If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt,How To Claim areimbursement from the issuer. you must file the claim by the later of the follow-
• You receive reasonable consideration for ing dates.Business Bad Debt
making the guarantee. You meet this re- • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-quirement if you made the guarantee in There are two methods to claim a business bad nal return.accord with normal business practice or debt.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.for a good faith business purpose.
• The specific charge-off method.
You may have longer to file the claim if you were
• The nonaccrual-experience method.Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne unable to manage your financial affairs due to a
Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of a physical or mental impairment. Such an impair-Generally, you must use the specific charge-off
$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out- ment requires proof of existence. See Code sec-method. However, you may use the nonac-
let that is not a “related person.” Elegant Fash- tion 6511(h).crual-experience method if you meet the re-
ions is one of Zayne’s largest clients. Elegant quirements discussed later under For details and more information about filing aFashions later defaulted on the loan. As a result, Nonaccrual-Experience Method. claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol-Ms. Zayne paid the remaining balance of the lowing forms to file a claim.loan in full to the bank. Specific Charge-Off MethodShe can claim a business bad debt deduc- Table 10-1. Forms Used To File ation only for the amount she paid, since her If you use the specific charge-off method, you Claimguarantee was made in the course of her trade can deduct specific business bad debts thator business for a good faith business purpose. become either partly or totally worthless during IF you filed asShe was motivated by the desire to retain one of the tax year. a... THEN file...her better clients and keep a sales outlet.
Sole proprietor orPartly worthless debts. You can deduct spe-Deductible in the year paid. If you make a  Form 1040Xfarmercific bad debts that become partly uncollectiblepayment on a loan you guaranteed, you can during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limiteddeduct it in the year paid, unless you have rights Corporation  Form 1120Xto the amount you charge off on your booksagainst the borrower. during the year. You do not have to charge off S corporation  Form 1120S
Rights against a borrower. When you and deduct your partly worthless debts annually. (check box H(4))
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you You can delay the charge off until a later year. Partnership  Form 1065may have the right to take the place of the However, you cannot deduct any part of a debt (check box G(5))lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have after the year it becomes totally worthless.
this right, or some other right to demand pay- Significantly modified debt.  An exceptionment from the borrower, you cannot claim a bad to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has Nonaccrual-Experiencedebt deduction until these rights become partly been significantly modified and on which theor totally worthless. Methodholder recognized gain. For more information,
Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointly see Regulations section 1.166-(3)(a)(3). If you use an accrual method of accounting andowe you money, your inability to collect from one Deduction disallowed. Generally, you can qualify under the rules explained in this section,does not enable you to deduct a proportionate claim a partial bad debt deduction only in the you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodamount as a bad debt. year you make the charge-off on your books. If, for bad debts. Under this method, you do not
Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or under audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc- accrue service related income you expect to be
pledged property is sold for less than the debt, tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a uncollectible.
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, you can use the nonac- or part of it, you may have to include all or part of See chapter 12 for information about getting
crual-experience method for accounts receiva- publications and forms.the recovery in gross income. The amount you
ble for services you performed only if: include is limited to the amount you actually
deducted. However, you can exclude the• The services are provided in the fields of amount deducted that did not reduce your tax.accounting, actuarial science, architecture,
Report the recovery as “Other income” on the Reimbursement ofconsulting, engineering, health, law, or the
appropriate business form or schedule.performing arts, or
Travel, Meals, andSee  Recoveries in Publication 525 for more• You meet the $5 million gross receipts test information.for all prior years. Entertainment
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If a
bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover The following discussion explains how to handleService related income. You can use the that has not expired before the beginning of the any reimbursements or allowances you maynonaccrual-experience method only for tax year in which the recovery takes place, you provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex-amounts earned by performing services. You treat the deduction as having reduced your tax. penses when incurred by your employees. If youcannot use this method for amounts owed to you A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net are self-employed and report your income andfrom activities such as lending money, selling operating loss helps lower taxes in the year to expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040),goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights to
which you carry the net operating loss. See see Publication 463.receive payment.
Publication 536 for more information about net To be deductible for tax purposes, expenses
operating losses.Gross receipts test.  You meet the gross re- incurred for travel, meals, and entertainment
ceipts test if your average annual gross receipts must be ordinary and necessary expenses in-
for the 3 prior tax years does not exceed curred while carrying on your trade or business.
$5,000,000. Generally, you also must show that entertain-
ment expenses (including meals) are directlyInterest or penalty charged. Generally, you related to, or associated with, the conduct ofcannot use the nonaccrual-experience method your trade or business. For more information onfor amounts due on which you charge interest or 11. travel, meals, and entertainment, including de-a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a ductibility, see Publication 463.discount offered for early payment as the charg-
ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
Reimbursementsapply. Other Expenses
• You otherwise accrue the full amount due A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement”
as gross income at the time you provide provides for payment of advances, reimburse-
the services. ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-Introduction tainment expenses incurred by your employees• You treat the discount allowed for early This chapter covers business expenses that during the ordinary course of business. Uponpayment as an adjustment to gross in- may not have been explained to you, as a busi- satisfying your established substantiation re-come in the year of payment. ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica- quirements, you can deduct the allowable
tion. amount on your tax return. Because of differ-
Methods available. You can use any of the ences between accounting methods and tax
following nonaccrual-experience methods. Topics law, these amounts may not be the same. For
example, you may deduct 100% of the cost ofThis chapter discusses:• Revenue-based moving average method.
meals on your business books and records.• Actual experience method. However, for tax purposes, only 50% of these• Travel, meals, and entertainment
costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction.• Modified Black Motor method. • Bribes and kickbacks A reimbursement or allowance arrangement• Modified moving average method. • Charitable contributions (including per diem allowances, discussed later)
• Alternative nonaccrual-experience depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta-• Education expensesmethod. ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If you
• Lobbying expenses reimburse these expenses under an accounta-Apply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa-
ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-• Penalties and finesrately to each account receivable.
able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,
• Repayments (claim of right)Generally, you cannot change from one and entertainment expenses on your tax return.
method to another without IRS approval. You  If you reimburse these expenses under a• Other miscellaneous expensesmay be able to obtain automatic consent to nonaccountable plan, then you must report thechange your method of accounting. See Regula- reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wagetions section 1.448-2 for more information on Useful Items and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wagesobtaining consent to change to a nonac- You may want to see: on the appropriate line of your tax return. If youcrual-experience method (other than one of the make a single payment to your employees and itsafe harbor methods) or to change from one Publication includes both wages and an expense reim-method to another. bursement, you must specify the amount attribu-❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to FringeFor more information about the nonac- table to reimbursement and report it accordingly.Benefitscrual-experience method, including the $5 mil- See Table 11–1,  Reporting Reimbursements.lion gross receipts test, see Code section ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car448(d)(5) and Regulations section 1.448-2. Expenses
Accountable Plans❏ 526 Charitable Contributions
An accountable plan, requires your employees❏ 529 Miscellaneous DeductionsRecovery of a Bad to meet all of the following requirements. They
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of must:
AssetsDebt
1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education while performing services as your employ-If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on your
ees,income tax return and later recover (collect) all ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Adequately account to you for these ex- Table 11–1.  Reporting Reimbursements
penses within a reasonable period of time,
IF the type of reimbursement (or otherand
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-23. Return any excess reimbursement or al-
An accountable plan with:lowance within a reasonable period of
time. Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
An arrangement under which you advance Adequate accounting made and excess
returnedmoney to employees is treated as meeting (3)
above only if the following requirements are also Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.met. Adequate accounting and return of excess
both required but excess not returned• The advance is reasonably calculated not
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex- Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.penses. federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess• You make the advance within a reasona-
returnedble period of time.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. TheIf any expenses reimbursed under this ar- federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyrangement are not substantiated, or an excess Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.reimbursement is not returned within a reasona- both required but excess not returned
ble period of time by an employee, you are not
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. Theallowed to deduct these expenses as reim-
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlybursed under an accountable plan. Instead,
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.treat the reimbursed expenses as paid under a
rate only and excess not returnednonaccountable plan, discussed later.
A nonaccountable plan with:Adequate accounting. Your employees must
adequately account to you for their travel, Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
meals, and entertainment expenses. They must excess, or both, not required by plan
give you documentary evidence of their travel,
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.mileage, and other employee business ex-
penses. This evidence should include items
such as receipts, along with either a statement
the amount you can deduct for meals and enter- a. The standard mileage rate.of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or
tainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussedsimilar record in which the employee entered b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).later. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as aeach expense at or near the time the expense
single member limited liability company, deductwas incurred.
the reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C Car allowance. Your employee is consideredExcess reimbursement or allowance. An (Form 1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form to have accounted to you for car expenses thatexcess reimbursement or allowance is any 1040). do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Foramount you pay to an employee that is more If you are filing an income tax return for a 2007, the standard mileage rate for each busi-than the business-related expenses for which corporation, the reimbursement should be in- ness mile is 48.5 cents per mile for all businessthe employee adequately accounted. The em- cluded with the amount claimed on the Other miles.ployee must return any excess reimbursement deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporationor other expense allowance to you within a rea- You can choose to reimburse your employ-Income Tax Return. If you are filing any othersonable period of time. ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-business income tax return, such as a partner- lowance. This is an allowance that includes aship or S corporation return, deduct the reim-Reasonable period of time. A reasonable combination of payments covering fixed and va-bursement on the appropriate line of the returnperiod of time depends on the facts and circum- riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate toas provided in the instructions for that return.stances. Generally, actions that take place cover your employees’ variable operating costswithin the times specified in the following list will (such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to coverbe treated as taking place within a reasonable your employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-
Per Diem and Car Allowancesperiod of time. tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a
FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure1. You give an advance within 30 days of the You may reimburse your employees under an
2007-63 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2007-42.time the employee has incurred the ex- accountable plan based on travel days, miles, or
You can read Revenue Procedure 2007-63 atpense. some other fixed allowance. In these cases,
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb07-42.pdf.your employee is considered to have accounted2. Your employees adequately account for to you for the amount of the expense that doestheir expenses within 60 days after the ex- Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-not exceed the rates established by the federalpenses were paid or incurred. ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-government. Your employee must actually sub-
cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed3. Your employees return any excess reim- stantiate to you the other elements of the ex-
using the per diem allowance, how you reportbursement within 120 days after the ex- pense, such as time, place, and business
and deduct the allowance depends on whetherpenses were paid or incurred. purpose.
the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses4. You give a periodic statement (at least or for meal expenses only and whether the al-Federal rate. The federal rate can be figuredquarterly) to your employees that asks lowance is more than the federal rate.using any one of the following methods.them to either return or adequately ac-
Regular federal per diem rate. The regularcount for outstanding advances and they 1. For per diem amounts: federal per diem rate is the highest amount thecomply within 120 days of the date of the
federal government will pay to its employeesstatement. a. The regular federal per diem rate.
while away from home on travel. It has two
b. The standard meal allowance. components:How to deduct. You can claim a deduction for
travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if c. The high-low rate. 1. Lodging expense, andyou reimburse your employees for these ex-
penses under an accountable plan. Generally, 2. For car expenses: 2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE).
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Company cafeteria or executive diningThe rates are different for different locations. reimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex-
room. The cost of food and beverages youPublication 1542 lists the rates in the continental plained later under Nonaccountable Plans.
United States. provide primarily to your employees on your
business premises is deductible. This includesStandard meal allowance. The federal rate Meals and Entertainment the cost of maintaining the facilities for providingfor meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the the food and beverages. These expenses arestandard meal allowance. You may pay only an Under an accountable plan, you can generally subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as aM & IE allowance to employees who travel away deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible de minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica-from home if: business-related meal and entertainment ex- tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation topenses you reimburse your employees. The de-• You pay the employee for actual expenses your employees and you treat them as providedduction limit applies even if you reimburse themfor lodging based on receipts submitted to under a nonaccountable plan.for 100% of the expenses.you,
Employee activities. The expense of provid-• You provide for the lodging, Application of the 50% limit. The 50% de-
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-duction limit applies to reimbursements you• You pay for the actual expense of the cluding the use of a facility) for your employeesmake to your employees for expenses they incurlodging directly to the provider, is deductible. The benefit must be primarily forfor meals while traveling away from home on
• You do not have reasonable belief that your employees who are not highly compen-business and for entertaining business custom-
lodging expenses were incurred by the sated.ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or
employee, or another location. It applies to expenses incurred For this purpose, a highly compensated em-
at a business convention or reception, business ployee is an employee who meets either of the• The allowance is computed on a basis
meeting, or business luncheon at a club. The following requirements.similar to that used in computing the em-
deduction limit may also apply to meals youployee’s wages (that is, number of hours
1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-furnish on your premises to your employees.worked or miles traveled).
ness during the year or the preceding year.Related expenses. Taxes and tips relating An employee is treated as owning any in-Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail- to a meal or entertainment activity you reim- terest owned by his or her brother, sister,able on the Internet. You can access per diem burse to your employee under an accountable spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-rates at www.gsa.gov. plan are included in the amount subject to the ants.50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-High-low method. This is a simplified
penses, such as cover charges for admission to 2. Received more than $100,000 in pay formethod of computing the federal per diem rate
a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner the preceding year. You may choose tofor lodging and meal expenses for traveling
or cocktail party, or the amount you pay forwithin the continental United States. It elimi- include only employees who were also in
parking at a sports arena, are all subject to thenates the need to keep a current list of the per the top 20% of employees when ranked by
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation todiem rate in effect for each city in the continental pay for the preceding year.
and from an otherwise allowable business mealUnited States.  For example, the expenses for food, bever-or a business-related entertainment activity isUnder the high-low method, the per diem ages, and entertainment for a company-widenot subject to the 50% limit.amount for travel during 2007 is $246 ($58 for M picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.& IE) for certain high-cost locations. All other
Amount subject to 50% limit. If you provideareas have a per diem amount of $145 ($48 for
your employees with a per diem allowance onlyM & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for the Nonaccountable Plansfor meal and incidental expenses, the amount$246 per diem amount under the high-low
treated as an expense for food and beverages ismethod are listed in Publication 1542. A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thatthe lesser of the following.
does not meet the requirements for an account-Reporting per diem and car allowances. • The per diem allowance. able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,The following discussion explains how to report
under a nonaccountable plan are reported asper diem and car allowances. The manner in • The federal rate for M & IE.
wages on Form W-2. The payments are subjectwhich you report them depends on how the
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-allowance compares to the federal rate. See If you provide your employees with a per diem
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canTable 11-1. allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-
deduct the reimbursement as compensation ordental expenses, you must treat an amountAllowance less than or equal to the federal equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-rate. If your allowance for the employee is less travel as an expense for food and beverages. If ity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. Deductthan or equal to the appropriate federal rate, that the per diem allowance you provide is less than the allowable amount as compensation orallowance is not included as part of the em- the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, wages on the appropriate line of your income taxployee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as return, as provided in its instructions.W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses the amount for food and beverages. Generally, amounts paid for meals, enter-(including meals that may be subject to the 50%
tainment, and amusement provided to individu-limit, discussed later). See How to deduct under Meal expenses when subject to “hours ofAccountable Plans, earlier. als who are not your employees are not subjectservice” limits. For tax years beginning in to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directly2007, 75% of the reimbursed meals your em-Allowance more than the federal rate. If related to the active conduct of your trade orployees consume while away from their taxyour employee’s allowance is more than the business. Examples include:home on business during, or incident to, anyappropriate federal rate, you must report the
period subject to the Department of Transporta-allowance as two separate items. • Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,
tion’s hours of service limits are deductible.Include the allowance amount up to the fed- or the use of a facility. You are allowed a
eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’s See Publication 463 for a detailed discussion deduction only to the extent it is included
Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as of individuals subject to the Department of in the gross income of the recipient as
explained above). This part of the allowance is Transportation’s hours of service limits. compensation for services or as a prize or
treated as reimbursed under an accountable award.De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. Theplan.
•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-50% limit does not apply to an expense for foodInclude the amount that is more than the
quired to be reported on an informationor beverage that is excluded from the grossfederal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if they
return, for example, Form 1099-MISC.income of an employee because it is a deapply) of the employee’s Form W-2. Deduct it as
See the General Instructions for Formsminimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B forwages subject to income tax withholding, social
1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G for more in-additional information on de minimis fringe ben-security, Medicare, and federal unemployment
efits. formation about reporting requirements.taxes. This part of the allowance is treated as
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The cost of providing meals, entertain- Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per- yours. Your payment is not a charitable co ntribu-
ment, goods and services, or use of facili- son in violation of any federal or state law (but tion. However, you may deduct it as  a business
ties you sell to the public. For example, if only if that state law is generally enforced, de- expense.
you operate a nightclub, your expense for fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty See Publication 526 for a discussion of
the entertainment you furnish to your cus- or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage donated inventory, including capit al gain prop-
tomers, such as a floor show, is a busi- in a trade or business are also not allowed as a erty.
ness expense that is fully deductible. deduction for tax purposes.
Club dues and membership fees. Generally,
• The cost of providing meals, entertain- Meaning of “generally enforced.” A state amounts paid or incurred for membership in any
ment, or recreational facilities to the gen- law is considered generally enforced unless it is club organized for business, pleasure, recrea-
eral public as a means of advertising or never enforced or enforced only for infamous tion, or any other social purpose are not deducti-
promoting goodwill in the community is persons or persons whose violations are ex- ble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure,
fully deductible. traordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is recreation, or other social purpose include, but
generally enforced unless proper reporting of a are not limited to country clubs, golf and athletic
violation of the law results in enforcement only clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs,
under unusual circumstances. and clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be condu-Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re-Miscellaneous cive to business discussions.ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com-
mon kickback situation occurs when money orExpenses Exception. The following organizations are
property is given to someone as payment for not treated as clubs organized for business,
influencing a third party to purchase from, useIn addition to travel, meal, and entertainment pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un-
the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-expenses, other miscellaneous expenses that less one of the main purposes is to conduct
son who pays the kickback. In many cases, theare deductible, subject to limitations, include: entertainment activities for members or their
person whose business is being sought or en- guests or to provide members or their guests• Amounts paid for the reasonable cost of joyed by the person who pays the kickback is not with access to entertainment facilities.advertising that are directly related to your aware of the payment.business activities. Generally, amounts • Boards of trade.For example, the Yard Corporation is in thepaid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying) business of repairing ships. It engages in the • Business leagues.are not deductible for tax purposes. See practice of returning 10% of the repair bills asLobbying expenses, later. • Chambers of commerce.kickbacks to the captains and chief officers of
the vessels it repairs. Although this practice is• Amounts paid that are directly related to • Civic or public service organizations.
considered an ordinary and necessary expensethe conduct of business meetings of your
• Professional organizations such as bar as-of getting business, it is clearly a violation of aemployees, partners, stockholders,
sociations and medical associations.state law that is generally enforced. These ex-agents, or directors. Some minor social
penditures are not deductible for tax purposes,activities may be allowed, however, these • Real estate boards.
whether or not the owners of the shipyard areexpenses are subject to the 50% limit.
• Trade associations.subsequently prosecuted.• Amounts paid that are directly related to
Form 1099-MISC. It does not matterand necessary for attending business Credit card convenience fees. Credit cardwhether any kickbacks paid during the tax yearmeetings or conventions of certain companies charge a fee to businesses who ac-are deductible on your income tax return in re-tax-exempt organizations. These organi- cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurredgards to information reporting. See Formzations include business leagues, cham- by the business can be deducted as a business1099-MISC for more information.bers of commerce, real estates boards, expense.and trade and professional associations.
Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat- Damages recovered. Special rules apply toing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business compensation you receive for damages sus-Advertising expenses. You can usually de- are deductible. For more information on how to tained as a result of patent infringement, breachduct as a business expense the cost of institu- figure your deduction, see Publication 463. of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-tional or goodwill advertising to keep your name
tions. You must include this compensation inbefore the public if it relates to business you Charitable contributions. Cash payments to
your income. However, you may be able to takereasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex- an organization, charitable or otherwise, may be
a special deduction. The deduction applies onlyample, the cost of advertising that encourages deductible as business expenses if the pay-
to amounts recovered for actual injury, not anypeople to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy ments are not charitable contributions or gifts. If
additional amount. The deduction is the smallerU.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar the payments are charitable contributions or
of the following.causes is usually deductible. gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-
penses. However, corporations (other than S • The amount you received or accrued forAnticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities corporations) can deduct charitable contribu- damages in the tax year reduced by theor reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de- tions on their income tax returns, subject to amount you paid or incurred in the year toductible. For example, assume you sold 1-year limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120 recover that amount.TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000. for more information. Sole proprietors, partnersFrom experience, you know you will have ex- • Your losses from the injury you have notin a partnership, or shareholders in an S corpo-penses of about $15,000 in the coming year for deducted.ration may be able to deduct charitable contribu-these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the tions made by their business on Schedule A$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a (Form 1040). Demolition expenses or losses. Amountsreserve or liability account. You can deduct your
paid or incurred to demolish a structure are notexpenses only when you actually pay or accrue Example. You paid $15 to a local church for deductible. These amounts are added to thethem, depending on your accounting method. a half-page ad in a program for a concert it is basis of the land where the demolished structure
Bribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay- sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en- was located. Any loss for the remaining un-
ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal courage readers to buy your products. Your pay- depreciated basis of a demolished structure
matter. Such activity could result in criminal ment is not a charitable contribution. However, would not be recognized until the property is
prosecution. Any payments that appear to have you may deduct it as an advertising expense. disposed.
been made, either directly or indirectly, to an
official or employee of any government or an Example. You made a $100,000 donation Education expenses. Ordinary and neces-
agency or instrumentality of any government are to a committee organized by the local Chamber sary expenses paid for the cost of the education
not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola- of Commerce to bring a convention to your city, and training of your employees are deductible.
tion of the law. intended to increase business activity, including See Education Expenses in chapter 2.
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You may also deduct the cost of your own only for your work. You can deduct your ex- • Participating in or intervening in any politi-
education (including certain related travel) re- penses for the reader as a business expense. cal campaign for, or against, any c andi-
lated to your trade or business. You must be date for public office.Internet-related expenses. Generally, youable to show the education maintains or im- • Attempting to influence the general public,can deduct internet-related expenses includingproves skills required in your trade or business, or segments of the public, about elections,domain registrations fees and webmaster con-or that it is required by law or regulations, for legislative matters, or referendums.sulting costs. If you are starting a business youkeeping your license to practice, status, or job. may have to amortize these expenses as • Communicating directly with covered ex-For example, an attorney can deduct the cost of start-up costs. For more information about am- ecutive branch officials (defined later) inattending Continuing Legal Education (CLE) ortizing start-up and organizational costs, see any attempt to influence the official actionsclasses that are required by the state bar associ- chapter 8. or positions of those officials.ation to maintain his or her license to practice
law. Interview expense allowances. Reimburse- • Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-Education expenses you incur to meet the ments you make to job candidates for transpor- dinating any of the preceding activities.minimum requirements of your present trade or tation or other expenses related to interviews for
business, or those that qualify you for a new possible employment are not wages. You can Your expenses for influencing legislation andtrade or business, are not deductible. This is true deduct the reimbursements as a business ex- communicating directly with a covered execu-even if the education maintains or improves pense. However, expenses for food, beverages, tive branch official include a portion of your laborskills presently required in your business. For and entertainment are subject to the 50% limit costs and general and administrative costs ofmore information on education expenses, see discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- your business. For information on making thisPublication 970. ment. allocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-
tions.Legal and professional fees. Fees chargedFranchise, trademark, trade name. If you You cannot claim a charitable or businessby accountants and attorneys that are ordinarybuy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you expense deduction for amounts paid to an or-and necessary expenses directly related to op-can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a ganization if both of the following apply.erating your business are deductible as busi-business expense only if your payments are part
ness expenses. However, usually legal fees youof a series of payments that are: • The organization conducts lobbying activi-
pay to acquire business assets are not deducti- ties on matters of direct financial interest1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi- ble. These costs are added to the basis of the to your business.tion of the item, property.
• A principal purpose of your contribution isFees that include payments for work of a2. Payable at least annually for the entire to avoid the rules discussed earlier thatpersonal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-term of the transfer agreement, and prohibit a business deduction for lobbyingages arising from a personal injury), are not
expenses.3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable allowed as a business deduction on Schedule C
under a fixed formula). or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both business
If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-and personal charges, compute the businessWhen determining the term of the transfer tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with aportion as follows: multiply the total amount ofagreement, include all renewal options and any notice on the part of dues that is allocable tothe bill by a fraction, the numerator of which isother period for which you and the transferrer nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,the amount attributable to business matters, thereasonably expect the agreement to be re- you cannot deduct that part of the dues.denominator of which is the total amount paid.newed. The result is the portion of the invoice attributa- Covered executive branch official. ForA franchise includes an agreement that gives ble to business expenses. The portion attributa- purposes of this discussion, a covered executiveone of the parties to the agreement the right to ble to personal matters is the difference branch official is any of the following.distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or between the total amount and the business por-facilities within a specified area. 1. The President.tion (computed above).
Legal fees relating to personal tax adviceImpairment-related expenses. If you are dis- 2. The Vice President.may be deductible on Line 22, Schedule Aabled, you can deduct expenses necessary for
3. Any officer or employee of the White(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How-you to be able to work (impairment-related ex-
House Office of the Executive Office of theever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita-penses) as a business expense, rather than as a
President and the two most senior leveltion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. Seemedical expense.
officers of each of the other agencies inPublication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.You are disabled if you have either of the
the Executive Office.following. Tax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a
4. Any individual who:tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
that part of your tax return relating to your busi-ple, blindness or deafness) that function- a. Is serving in a position in Level I of theness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched-ally limits your being employed. Executive Schedule under section 5312ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost
of title 5, United States Code,• A physical or mental impairment that sub- may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
stantially limits one or more of your major you itemize deductions. b. Has been designated by the Presidentlife activities. You can also claim a business deduction for as having Cabinet-level status, or
amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted c. Is an immediate deputy of an individualThe expense qualifies as a business expense tax deficiencies for your business operated as a listed in item (a) or (b).if all the following apply. sole proprietor.
• Your work clearly requires the expense for Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and Exceptions to denial of deduction. Theyou to satisfactorily perform that work. regulatory fees for your trade or business paid general denial of the deduction does not apply toannually to state or local governments generally• The goods or services purchased are the following.are deductible. Some licenses and fees mayclearly not needed or used, other than in-
have to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more • Expenses of appearing before, or commu-cidentally, in your personal activities.
information. nicating with, any local council or similar• Their treatment is not specifically provided governing body concerning its legislationLobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex-for under other tax law provisions. (local legislation) if the legislation is of di-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses rect interest to you or to you and an organ-include amounts paid or incurred for any of theExample. You are blind. You must use a ization of which you are a member. Anfollowing activities.reader to do your work, both at and away from Indian tribal government is treated as a
your place of work. The reader’s services are • Influencing legislation. local council or similar governing body.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any in-house expenses for influencing leg- • Fines for violating city housing codes. • Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace-
islation and communicating directly with a ment of fixtures).• Fines paid by truckers for violating statecovered executive branch official if those maximum highway weight laws.expenses for the tax year do not exceed Repayments. If you had to repay an amount$2,000 (excluding overhead expenses). • Fines for violating air quality laws. you included in your income in an earlier year,
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid for• Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged • Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-
the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amountin the trade or business of lobbying (pro- garding mining safety standards and dis-
you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be ablefessional lobbyists) on behalf of another charges into navigable waters.
to take a credit against your tax for the year inperson (but does apply to payments by the
which you repaid it.other person to the lobbyist for lobbying A fine or penalty does not include any of the
activities). following. Type of deduction. The type of deduction
you are allowed in the year of repayment de-• Legal fees and related expenses to defend
Moving machinery. Generally, the cost of pends on the type of income you included in theyourself in a prosecution or civil action for
moving machinery from one city to another is a earlier year. For instance, if you repay ana violation of the law imposing the fine or
deductible expense. So is the cost of moving amount you previously reported as a capitalcivil penalty.machinery from one plant to another, or from gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on
• Court costs or stenographic and printingone part of your plant to another. You can de- Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as
charges.duct the cost of installing the machinery in the self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-
new location. However, you must capitalize the ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-costs of installing or moving newly purchased C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).ment.machinery. If you reported the amount as wages, unem-
ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessPolitical contributions. Contributions or giftsOutplacement services. The costs of out- ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Formpaid to political parties or candidates are notplacement services you provide to your employ- 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deduction
deductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-ees to help them find new employment, such as that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if
curred to take part in any political campaign of acareer counseling, r´esum´e assistance, skills as- the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1
sessment, etc. are deductible. candidate for public office are not deductible. (discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule
The costs of outplacement services may A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-Indirect political contributions. You can-cover more than one deduction category. For duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.not deduct indirect political contributions andexample, deduct as a utilities expense the cost costs of taking part in political activities as busi- Repayment—$3,000 or less. If theof telephone calls made under this service and ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex- amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct itdeduct as rental expense the cost of renting penses include the following. from your income in the year you repaid it.machinery and equipment for this service.
For information on whether the value of out- • Advertising in a convention program of a Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount
placement services is includable in your employ- political party, or in any other publication if you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-
ees’ income, see Publication 15-B. any of the proceeds from the publication duct the repayment, as described earlier. How-
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax creditare for, or intended for, the use of a politi-
Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for late for the year of repayment if you included thecal party or candidate.
performance or nonperformance of a contract income under a “claim of right.” This means that• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-are generally deductible. For instance, you own at the time you included the income, it appeareding, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmand operate a construction company. You have that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youpresentations, parties, and sportingbeen contracted to construct a building by a qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothevents) if any of the proceeds from thecertain date. Due to construction delays, the methods and use the method that results in lessfunction are for, or intended for, the use ofbuilding is not completed and ready for occu- tax.
a political party or candidate.pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. You Method 1. Figure your tax for 2007 claimingare now required to pay an additional amount for • Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, a deduction for the repaid amount.each day that completion is delayed beyond the parade, concert, or similar event if identi-completion date stipulated in the contract. Method 2. Figure your tax for 2007 claimingfied with a political party or candidate.These additional costs are deductible business a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these
expenses. steps.
Repairs. The cost of repairing or improvingOn the other hand, penalties or fines paid to
property used in your trade or business is either 1. Figure your tax for 2007 without deductingany government agency or instrumentality be-
the repaid amount.a deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte-cause of a violation of any law are not deducti-
nance that keeps your property in a normal effi-ble. These fines or penalties include the 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearcient operating condition, but that does notfollowing amounts. without including in income the amountmaterially increase the value or substantially you repaid in 2007.• Paid because of a conviction for a crime or prolong the useful life of the property is deducti-after a plea of guilty or no contest in a 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, thecriminal proceeding. on your return for the earlier year. This iscost must be depreciated over the useful life of
the amount of your credit.• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, the property. See Form 4562 and its instructions
state, or local law in a civil action, includ- for how to compute and claim the depreciation 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for
ing certain additions to tax and additional deduction. 2007 figured without the deduction (step
amounts and assessable penalties im- The cost of repairs includes the costs of 1).
posed by the Internal Revenue Code. labor, supplies, and certain other items. The If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct thevalue of your own labor is not deductible. Exam-• Paid in settlement of actual or possible amount repaid as discussed earlier under Typeples of repairs include:liability for a fine or penalty, whether civil of deduction.
or criminal. • Reconditioning floors (but not replace- If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the
ment),• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro- credit on line 70 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.
ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- 1341” next to line 70.• Repainting the interior and exterior wallsalty. of a building, Example. For 2006, you filed a return and
• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters,Examples of nondeductible penalties and reported your income on the cash method. In
fines include the following. and 2006, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2006
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income under a claim of right. Your filing beyond the year they are placed in service, you tax education and outreach for t axpayers with
status in 2007 and 2006 is single. Your income generally must recover their costs through de- limited English proficiency or who speak English
and tax for both years are as follows: preciation. For more information regarding de- as a second language. Publication 4134, Low
preciation see Publication 946, How to Income Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informa-
2006 2006 Depreciate Property. tion on clinics in your area. It is available at www.
With Income Without Income irs.gov or at your local IRS office.Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights,Taxable power, telephone service, and water and sewer-Income $15,000 $10,000 Free tax services. To find out what servicesage are deductible. However, any part attributa-
Tax $ 1,876 $ 1,126 are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toble to personal use is not deductible.
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxTelephone. The cost of basic local tele-2007 2007 publications and describes other free tax infor-phone service (including any taxes) for the firstWithout Deduction With Deduction mation services, including tax education andtelephone line you have in your home, evenTaxable assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-Income $49,950 $44,950 though you have an office in your home is not ics.deductible. However, charges for businessTax  $8,918  $ 7,668 Accessible versions of IRS published prod-long-distance phone calls on that line, as well as ucts are available on request in a variety ofYour tax under Method 1 is $7,668. Your tax the cost of a second line into your home used
alternative formats for people with disabilities.under Method 2 is $8,168, figured as follows: exclusively for business, are deductible busi-
ness expenses. Internet. You can access the IRS web-Tax previously determined for 2006 $ 1,876 site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7Less: Tax as refigured .......... − 1,126 days a week to:Decrease in 2006 tax $ 750
Regular tax liability for 2007 ....... $8,918 • E-file your return. Find out about commer-
Less: Decrease in 2006 tax ....... − 750 cial tax preparation and e-file services
Refigured tax for 2007 $ 8,168 available free to eligible taxpayers.
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you 12. • Check the status of your 2007 refund.
should take a deduction for the repayment in Click on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least
2007. 6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).Repayment does not apply. This discus- How To Get Tax Have your 2007 tax return available be-sion does not apply to the following.
cause you will need to know your social• Deductions for bad debts. Help security number, your filing status, and the
exact whole dollar amount of your refund.• Deductions from sales to customers, such
as returns and allowances, and similar You can get help with unresolved tax issues, • Download forms, instructions, and publica-items. order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- tions.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-• Deductions for legal and other expenses • Order IRS products online.eral ways. By selecting the method that is bestof contesting the repayment. for you, you will have quick and easy access to • Research your tax questions online.
tax help.Year of deduction (or credit). If you use • Search publications online by topic orthe cash method of accounting, you can take the Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The keyword.deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)year in which you actually make the repayment. pendent organization within the IRS whose em-
If you use any other accounting method, you can published in the last few years.ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing
deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only economic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- • Figure your withholding allowances usingfor the tax year in which it is a proper deduction ing tax problems that have not been resolved the withholding calculator online atunder your accounting method. For example, if through normal channels, or who believe that an www.irs.gov/individuals.you use the accrual method, you are entitled to IRS system or procedure is not working as it
the deduction or credit in the tax year in which • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed us-should.
the obligation for the repayment accrues. ing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS
Assistant.toll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or
Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional, TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- • Sign up to receive local and national taxtechnical, and trade journals that deal with your ble for assistance. You can also call or write to news by email.business field are deductible. your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone
• Get information on starting and operatingnumber and address are listed in your localSupplies and materials. Unless you have de- telephone directory and in Publication 1546, a small business.ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your Voice at thecan deduct the cost of materials and supplies IRS. You can file Form 911, Request for Tax-actually consumed and used during the tax year. payer Advocate Service Assistance (And Appli- Phone. Many services are available byIf you keep incidental materials and supplies cation for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an phone.on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. Fortal materials and supplies you bought during the more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate.tax year if all the following requirements are met. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-• You do not keep a record of when they are TAP listens to taxpayers, identifies taxpayer is- rent-year forms, instructions, andused. sues, and makes suggestions for improving IRS publications, and prior-year forms and in-• You do not take an inventory of the services and customer satisfaction. If you have structions. You should receive your orderamount on hand at the beginning and end suggestions for improvements, contact the TAP, within 10 days.of the tax year. toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withwww.improveirs.org.• This method does not distort your income. your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040 (forLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). individuals) or 1-800-829-4933 (for busi-You can also deduct the cost of books, profes- LITCs are independent organizations that pro- nesses).sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor- vide low income taxpayers with representation
• Solving problems. You can getmally use them within a year. However, if the in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free
face-to-face help solving tax problemsusefulness of these items extends substantially or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 45

Page 46 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax
sistance Centers. An employee can ex- able for research purposes. forms.
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to • Services. You can walk in to your local • Internal Revenue Bulletins.your account, or help you set up a pay- Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- • Toll-free and email technical support.ness day for personal, face-to-face taxtance Center for an appointment. To find help. An employee can explain IRS letters, • The CD which is released twice during thethe number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon- request adjustments to your tax account, year.tacts or look in the phone book under or help you set up a payment plan. If you – The first release will ship the beginningUnited States Government, Internal Reve- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- of January 2008.nue Service. tions about how the tax law applies to your – The final release will ship the beginning
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access individual tax return, or you’re more com- of March 2008.
to TTY/TDD equipment, call fortable talking with someone in person,
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Purchase the CD/DVD from National Techni-
order forms and publications. Center where you can spread out your cal Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/
records and talk with an IRS representa- cdorders for $35 (no handling fee) or call• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- 1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free toten to pre-recorded messages covering essary, but if you prefer, you can call yourvarious tax topics. buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handlinglocal Center and leave a message re- fee). Price is subject to change.• Refund information. To check the status of questing an appointment to resolve a tax
your 2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 account issue. A representative will call CD for small businesses. Publication
and press 1 for automated refund informa- you back within 2 business days to sched- 3207, The Small Business Resource
tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to ule an in-person appointment at your con- Guide CD for 2007, is a must for every
wait at least 6 weeks from the date you venience. To find the number, go to www. small business owner or any taxpayer about to
filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec- irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone start a business. This year’s CD includes:tronically). Have your 2007 tax return book under United States Government, In-
• Helpful information, such as how to pre-available because you will need to know ternal Revenue Service.
pare a business plan, find financing foryour social security number, your filing
your business, and much more.status, and the exact whole dollar amount Mail. You can send your order forof your refund. forms, instructions, and publications to • All the business tax forms, instructions,
the address below. You should receive and publications needed to successfullyEvaluating the quality of our telephone a response within 10 days after your request is manage a business.services. To ensure IRS representatives give received.accurate, courteous, and professional answers, • Tax law changes for 2007.
we use several methods to evaluate the quality National Distribution Center • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andof our telephone services. One method is for a P.O. Box 8903 finding aid.second IRS representative to listen in on or Bloomington, IL 61702-8903record random telephone calls. Another is to ask • Web links to various government agen-
some callers to complete a short survey at the cies, business associations, and IRS orga-CD/DVD for tax products. You can
end of the call. nizations.order Publication 1796, IRS Tax Prod-
ucts CD/DVD, and obtain: • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-Walk-in. Many products and services
nity to suggest changes for future editions.are available on a walk-in basis. • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. • A site map of the CD to help you navigate
• Products. You can walk in to many post • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- the pages of the CD with ease.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up tions. • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thatcertain forms, instructions, and publica- • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - gives practical tips for teens about startingtions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery Ships with the final release. their own business, creating a businessstores, copy centers, city and county gov- plan, and filing taxes.ernment offices, credit unions, and office • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
supply stores have a collection of products finding aid. An updated version of this CD is availableavailable to print from a CD or photocopy • Tax law frequently asked questions. each year in early April. You can get a free copyfrom reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-
gov/smallbiz.enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue sponse system.
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Cleanup costs, Forgone ................... 1 4AF
environmental ............. 2 3 Life insurance policies ...... 1 3Advertising .................. 4 2 Fees:
Not deductible ............. 1 3Club dues ................... 4 2 Commitment ............... 1 3Amortization:
Refunds of ................. 1 4Legal and professional ...... 4 3Comments on publication .... 1Anti-abuse rule ............. 2 9
When to deduct ............ 1 4Loan origination ............ 1 3Anti-churning rules ......... 2 8 Commitment fees ........... 1 3
Internet-relatedRegulatory ................. 4 3Atmospheric pollution control Computer software .......... 2 8 expenses ................. 4 3Tax return preparation ...... 4 3facilities ................. 3 1 Constant-yield method, Interview expenses .......... 4 3Fines ........................ 4 4Corporate organization OID ....................... 1 2
costs .................... 2 5 Forgone interest ............ 1 4Contested liability ............ 4
Dispositions of section 197 Form:Contributions: Kintangibles ............... 3 0 1098 ...................... 1 2Charitable ................. 4 2 Key person .................. 1 3Experimental costs ......... 3 1 3115 .................. 16, 29Political .................... 4 4 Kickbacks ................... 4 2Geological and geophysical 4562 ...................... 2 5Copyrights .................. 2 7costs .................... 3 1 5213 ....................... 5Cost depletion .............. 3 2How to deduct ............. 2 5 8826 ...................... 2 4 LCost of acquiring lease ...... 2 7Incorrect amount 8885 ...................... 1 8 Leases:Cost of getting lease ......... 9deducted ................ 2 9 T .......................... 3 7 Canceling ................... 8Cost of goods sold ........... 2Partnership organization Franchise ............... 28, 43 Cost of acquiring ........... 2 7Cost recovery ................ 3costs .................... 2 6 Franchise taxes ............. 1 7 Cost of getting .............. 9Covenant not toPollution control facilities .... 3 1 Free tax services ............ 4 5 Improvements by lessee .... 1 0compete .................. 2 8Reforestation costs ......... 3 0 Leveraged .................. 9Fringe benefits ............... 7Reforestation expenses ..... 2 3 Credit card convenience Mineral .................... 3 6Fuel taxes ................... 1 7Related person ............. 2 9 fees ....................... 4 2 Oil and gas ................ 3 6
Research costs ............ 3 1 Sales distinguished .......... 8
Section 197 intangibles G Taxes on ................... 9Ddefined .................. 2 7 Gas wells ................... 3 5 Legal and professionalDe minimis OID ............. 1 2Starting a business Geological and geophysical fees ....................... 4 3costs .................... 2 5 Debt-financed costs: Licenses ................ 27, 43Start-up costs .............. 2 5 distributions .............. 1 2 Development, oil and Life insurance coverage ...... 7Anticipated liabilities ........ 4 2 Definitions: g a s...................... 3 1 Limit on deductions .......... 5Business bad debt .......... 3 7 Exploration, oil and gas ..... 3 1Assessments, local ......... 1 6 Line of credit ................ 1 2Necessary expense ......... 2 Geothermal wells ........ 21, 35Assistance  (See Tax help) Loans:Ordinary expense ........... 2 Gifts, nominal value .......... 7At-risk limits ................. 4 Below-market interestSection 197 intangibles ..... 2 7 Going into business .......3 ,  2 5Attorney fees ................ 4 3 rate ..................... 1 4Demolition expenses ........ 4 2 Goodwill .................... 2 7Awards ....................... 6 Discounted ................ 1 4Depletion: Origination fees ............ 1 3Mineral property ............ 3 2 Loans or Advances ........... 7HOil and gas wells ........... 3 3B Lobbying expenses ......... 4 3Health insurance, deduction forPercentage table ........... 3 5Bad debts: Long-term careself-employed ............. 1 8Timber ..................... 3 6Defined .................... 3 7 insurance ................. 1 8Who can claim ............. 3 2 Heating equipment ........... 3How to treat ................ 3 8 Losses .....................4 ,  5Depreciation  (See Cost Help  (See Tax help)Recovery .................. 3 9 At-risk limits ................. 4recovery)Types of ................... 3 7 Net operating ............... 4Development costs,When worthless ............ 3 8 I Passive activities ............ 4miners .................... 2 2Bonuses: Impairment-relatedDisabled, improvementsEmployee ................... 7 expenses ................. 4 3for ........................ 2 4Royalties .................. 3 6 MImprovements ................ 3Drilling and developmentBribes ....................... 4 2 Machinery parts .............. 3By lessee .................. 1 0costs ...................... 2 1Brownfields  (See Environmental Meals ....................... 3 9For disabled and elderly .... 2 4Dues, membership .......... 4 2cleanup costs) Meals and entertainment .... 4 1Income taxes ................ 1 6
Business: Meals and lodging ............ 7Incorrect amount ofAssets ...................... 3 Medical expenses ........... 4 3amortization deducted .... 2 9EBooks and records ......... 2 7 Methods of accounting ....... 4Insurance:Economic interest ........... 3 2Meal expenses ............. 4 1 Capitalized premiums ....... 2 0 Mining:Economic performance ...... 4Use of car ...............4 ,  4 2 Deductible premiums ....... 1 7 Depletion .................. 3 5Education expenses .......7 ,  4 2Use of home ................ 3 Nondeductible Development costs ......... 2 2Elderly, improvements premiums ................ 1 9 Exploration costs ........... 2 2for ........................ 2 4 Self-employed More information  (See Tax help)C Employee benefit individuals ............... 1 8 Mortgage .................... 1 2Campaign contribution ...... 4 4 programs .................. 7 Intangible drilling costs ..... 2 1 Moving expenses,Capital expenses ............. 3 Employment taxes .......... 1 7 Intangibles, amortization .... 2 7 machinery ................ 4 4Capitalization of interest .... 1 3 Entertainment ............... 3 9 Interest:Car allowance ............... 4 0 Environmental cleanup Allocation of ................ 1 1
Car and truck expenses ..... 4 2 (remediation) costs ....... 2 3 NBelow-market .............. 1 4
Carrying charges ............ 2 0 Excise taxes ................ 1 7 Natural gas .................. 3 5Business expense for ....... 1 0
Charitable contributions ..... 4 2 Experimentation costs ..... 2 1 , NonqualifyingCapitalized ................. 1 3
31 intangibles ................ 2 8Circulation costs, newspapers Carrying charge ............ 2 0
and periodicals ........... 2 2 Exploration costs ........... 2 2 Deductible ................. 1 2 Not-for-profit activities ....... 5
Publication 535 (2007) Page 47

Page 48 of 48 of Publication 535 14:54 - 12-FEB-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Political contributions ....... 4 4 Rent expense, Income .................... 1 6O
capitalizing ................ 1 0 Leased property ............. 9Pollution controlOffice in home ............... 3
Personal property .......... 1 7facilities ................... 3 1 Repairs ..................... 4 4Oil and gas wells:
Real estate ................ 1 6Prepaid expense ............. 4 Repayments (claim ofDepletion .................. 3 3
Sales ...................... 1 7Extends useful life .......... 2 0 right) ...................... 4 4Drilling costs ............... 2 1
Unemployment fund ........ 1 7Interest .................... 1 4Partnerships ............... 3 5 Research costs ......... 21, 31
Taxpayer Advocate .......... 4 5Rent ........................ 8S corporations ............. 3 5
Telephone ................... 4 5Prepayment penalty ......... 1 2Optional write-off method: S Timber .................. 30, 36Circulation costs ........... 3 1 Presumption of profit ......... 5 Sales taxes .................. 1 7Experimental costs ......... 3 1 Tools ......................... 3Publications  (See Tax help) Section 179 expense deductionIntangible drilling and Trademark, trade name ..... 2 8 ,(See Cost recovery)development costs ....... 3 1 43R Self-employed health insuranceMining exploration and Travel ....................... 3 9Real estate taxes ............ 1 6 deduction ................. 1 8development costs ....... 3 1 TTY/TDD information ........ 4 5Recapture: Self-insurance, reserveResearch costs ............ 3 1
Exploration expenses ....... 2 2 for ........................ 1 9Organization costs:
Timber property ............ 3 0 USick pay ...................... 8Corporate .................. 2 5
Recovery of amount Unemployment fundStandard meal allowance .... 4 1Partnership ................ 2 6
deducted ................... 4 taxes ...................... 1 7Standard mileage rate ....... 4 0Organizational costs ........ 2 3
Refiners who cannot claim Unpaid expenses, relatedStandby charges ............ 1 3Original issue discount ...... 1 2
percentage depletion ...... 3 3 person .................... 1 4Start-up costs ........... 23, 25Outplacement services ...... 4 4
Reforestation costs ..... 23, 30 Utilities ...................... 4 5Subscriptions ........... 42, 45
Regulatory fees ............. 4 3 Suggestions forP Reimbursements ............ 3 9 publication ................. 1 VPassive activities ............. 4 Business expenses .......... 8 Supplies and materials ...... 4 5 Vacation pay ................. 8Payments in kind ............. 4 Mileage .................... 4 0
Penalties .................... 1 2 Nonaccountable plan ....... 4 1
T WDeductible ................. 4 4 Per diem ................... 4 0
Nondeductible ............. 4 4 Tax help ..................... 4 5 Wages:Related persons:
Prepayment ................ 1 2 Property .................... 7Tax preparation fees ........ 4 3Anti-churning rules ......... 2 9
Tests for deducting pay ...... 6Per diem and car Taxes ........................ 9Coal or iron ore ............ 3 6
allowances ................ 4 0 Welfare benefit funds ......... 7Carrying charge ............ 2 0Payments to .............4 ,  1 4
Percentage depletion ........ 3 3 Employment ............... 1 7Refiners ................... 3 3 ■Excise ..................... 1 7Rent expense ............... 8Personal property tax ....... 1 7
Franchise .................. 1 7Unreasonable rent ........... 8Points ....................... 1 3
Fuel ....................... 1 7Removal .................... 2 4
Page 48 Publication 535 (2007)