Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P550.SGM (20-Jan-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\bsyfb\documents\Epicfiles\2005publications and articles\P550 2005.SGM
Page 1 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What’s New ..................... 2Department
of the Reminders ...................... 2InvestmentTreasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Income and Chapter 1. Investment Income........ 3Service
General Information............. 3
Interest Income................ 5Expenses Discount on Debt Instruments...... 13
When To Report Interest Income.... 16
How To Report Interest Income..... 16
Dividends and Other Corporate(Including Capital
Distributions............... 19
How To Report DividendGains and Losses)
Income ................... 23
Stripped Preferred Stock.......... 24
REMICs, FASITs, and OtherFor use in preparing CDOs .................... 25
S Corporations................ 26
Investment Clubs............... 262005 Returns
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses...... 32
Limits on Deductions............ 32
Interest Expenses.............. 32
Bond Premium Amortization........ 34
Expenses of Producing Income..... 36
Nondeductible Expenses.......... 37
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 38
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property............ 39
What Is a Sale or Trade?.......... 39
Basis of Investment Property....... 42
How To Figure Gain or Loss....... 45
Nontaxable Trades.............. 46
Transfers Between Spouses....... 48
Related Party Transactions........ 48
Capital Gains and Losses......... 49
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss..................... 49
Holding Period............... 53
Nonbusiness Bad Debts......... 54
Short Sales................. 55
Wash Sales ................. 56
Options.................... 57
Straddles................... 58
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives......... 62
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities...... 62
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock............. 63
Rollover of Gain From Sale of 
Empowerment Zone Assets..... 64
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 64
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities................. 72
Get forms and other information
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help...... 73faster and easier by:
Glossary ....................... 75
Internet • www.irs.gov
Index.......................... 77

Page 2 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
est. For more information, see Publication 515, It explains what investment income is taxable
and what investment expenses are deductible. ItWithholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens andWhat’s New
explains when and how to show these items onForeign Entities.
your tax return. It also explains how to determineIncreased section 1202 exclusion for em- Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. and report gains and losses on the disposition ofpowerment zone business stock. Section citizen with investment income from sourcesinvestment property and provides information1202 allows you to exclude up to 50% of youroutside the United States (foreign income), youon property trades and tax shelters.gain on the sale or trade of qualified small busi-must report that income on your tax return un-ness stock. Beginning in 2005, you can exclude The glossary at the end of this publi-less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whetherup to 60% of your gain if you sell or trade stock in cation defines many of the termsyou reside inside or outside the United Statesa corporation that qualifies as an empowerment used.
TIP
and whether or not you receive a Form 1099zone business during substantially all of the timefrom the foreign payer.you held the stock and you meet certain other
Investment income. This generally includesconditions. Alien’s individual taxpayer identificationinterest, dividends, capital gains, and otherFor more information, see Section 1202 Ex- number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident ortypes of distributions.clusion in chapter 4. resident alien and do not have and are not eligi-
ble to get a social security number (SSN), youQualified dividends.Beginning in 2005, for- Investment expenses. These include interestmust apply for an ITIN. For details on how to doeign personal holding companies and foreign paid or incurred to acquire investment propertyso, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individualinvestment companies are no longer specifically and expenses to manage or collect income fromTaxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc-excluded from the definition of qualified foreign investment property.tions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher-corporation for purposes of the qualified divi-
ever an SSN is requested on your tax return.dend rules. This is because the rules applicable
to these companies have been repealed. Thus,An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitleComments and suggestions. We welcome
ordinary dividends from a foreign corporation your comments about this publication and youryou to social security benefits or change your
that would have otherwise been subject to those suggestions for future editions.employment or immigration status under U.S.
rules will be qualified dividends if the other re-law. You can write to us at the following address:quirements under Qualified Dividends in chapter
Sale of DC Zone assets.Investments in Dis-1 are met.
Internal Revenue Servicetrict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone)
Individual Forms and Publications BranchRepeal of special rules for FASITs.Begin- assets held more than 5 years will qualify for a
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ining January 1, 2005, the special rules forspecial tax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406FASITs (financial asset securitization invest-asset at a gain, you may be able to exclude the
Washington, DC 20224ment trusts) are repealed. However, the specialqualified capital gain from your gross income.
rules still apply to any FASIT in existence onThis exclusion applies to an interest in, or prop-October 22, 2004, to the extent that regularerty of, certain businesses operating in the Dis-interests issued by the FASIT before that date We respond to many letters by telephone.trict of Columbia. For more information about thecontinue to remain outstanding in accordance Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-exclusion, see the Schedule D instructions. Forwith the original terms of issuance. See FASITs clude your daytime phone number, including themore information about DC Zone assets, seeunder REMICs, FASITs, and other CDOs in area code, in your correspondence.Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Distressedchapter 1. You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (TheCommunities.
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Photographs of missing children.The Inter- Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
Reminders National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-ally to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments asdren. Photographs of missing children selected
we revise our tax products.U.S. property acquired from a foreign by the Center may appear in this publication on
person. If you acquire a U.S. real propertypages that would otherwise be blank. You canTax questions. If you have a tax question,interest from a foreign person or firm, you mayhelp bring these children home by looking at thevisit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. Wehave to withhold income tax on the amount youphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST cannot answer tax questions at either of thepay for the property (including cash, the fair(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.addresses listed above.market value of other property, and any as-
Ordering forms and publications. Visitsumed liability). Domestic or foreign corpora-
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andtions, partnerships, trusts, and estates may also
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thehave to withhold on certain distributions andIntroduction National Distribution Center at the addressother transactions involving U.S. real property
This publication provides information on the tax shown under How To Get Tax Help in the backinterests. If you fail to withhold, you may be held
of this publication.liable for the tax, penalties that apply, and inter- treatment of investment income and expenses.
Page 2

Page 3 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about gettingCustodian account for your child.If your
these publications and forms. child is the actual owner of an account that is
recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
1. give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
General Information dividends on stock owned by your child, even
though the dividends are paid to you as custo-
Investment A few items of general interest are covered here.dian.
Recordkeeping.You should keep a Penalty for failure to supply SSN.You willIncome list showing sources and amounts ofbe subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
investment income that you receiveRECORDS
to:
during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
ceive that show your investment income (Forms1. Include your SSN on any return, state-Topics
1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi-ment, or other document,This chapter discusses:
dends and Distributions, for example) as an im-2. Give your SSN to another person who hasportant part of your records.• Interest income, to include it on any return, statement, or
other document, or• Dividends and other corporate distribu-Tax on investment income of a child under
tions, age 14. Part of a child’s 2005 investment in-3. Include the SSN of another person on anycome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This• Real estate mortgage investment conduits return, statement, or other document.may happen if all of the following are true.(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-vestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat-1. The child was under age 14 at the end ofmum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.eralized debt obligations (CDOs), 2005. A child born on January 1, 1992, isYou will not be subject to this penalty if youconsidered to be age 14 at the end of• S corporations, and can show that your failure to provide the SSN2005. was due to a reasonable cause and not to willful• Investment clubs.
2. The child had more than $1,600 of invest-neglect.
ment income (such as taxable interest andIf you fail to supply an SSN, you may also beUseful Items dividends) and has to file a tax return.subject to backup withholding.
You may want to see: 3. Either parent was alive at the end of 2005.
Backup withholding. Your investment in-Publication If all of these statements are true, Form 8615come is generally not subject to regular with-must be completed and attached to the child’sholding. However, it may be subject to backup❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income tax return. If any of these statements is not true,withholding to ensure that income tax is col-Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income❏ 537 Installment Sales lected on the income. Under backup withhold-is taxed at his or her own tax rate. ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions However, the parent can choose to includeoriginal issue discount (OID), dividends, cashthe child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,return if certain requirements are met. Use Form(IRAs) as income tax, 28% of the amount you are paid.8814 for this purpose.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules Backup withholding applies if:For more information about the tax on invest-
ment income of children and the parents’ elec-❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for ChildrenInstruments tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.
ber or an employer identification number)Form (and Instructions) in the required manner,Beneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040)Interest and dividends, and other investment income you re-2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust isfies the payer that you gave an incorrectgenerally taxable income. You should receive aidentification number,❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)Interest and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s ShareOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040A 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you areof Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from theFilers subject to backup withholding on interestfiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its
❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms or dividends because you have underre-instructions will tell you where to report the in-
1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G ported interest or dividends on your in-come on your Form 1040.
come tax return, or❏ 3115 Application for Change in Social security number (SSN). You mustAccounting Method 4. You are required, but fail, to certify thatgive your name and SSN to any person requiredyou are not subject to backup withholdingby federal tax law to make a return, statement,❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax — for the reason described in (3).or other document that relates to you. This in-Individuals
cludes payers of interest and dividends.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Certification.For new accounts paying in-
SSN for joint account.If the funds in a jointterest or dividends, you must certify under pen-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Whoaccount belong to one person, list that person’salties of perjury that your social security numberHave Investment Income of More name first on the account and give that person’sis correct and that you are not subject to backupThan $1,600 SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownswithholding. Your payer will give you a Form
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num-
later.) If the joint account contains combinedInterest and Dividends ber and Certification, or similar form, to makefunds, give the SSN of the person whose namethis certification. If you fail to make this certifica-❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesis listed first on the account. tion, backup withholding may begin immediatelyEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds These rules apply both to joint ownership byon your new account or investment.Issued After 1989 a married couple and to joint ownership by other
Underreported interest and dividends.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record individuals. For example, if you open a joint
You will be considered to have underreportedRedemption of Series EE and I savings account with your child using funds be-
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
mined for a tax year that:1989 the account and give the child’s SSN.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to stop backup withholding due to
1. You failed to include any part of a reporta- 1. No underreporting occurred.underreporting.If you have been notified that
ble interest or dividend payment requiredyou underreported interest or dividends, you can2. You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSto be shown on your return, or request a determination from the IRS to preventabout whether underreporting occurred.
backup withholding from starting or to stop2. You were required to file a return and to 3. Backup withholding will cause or is caus-backup withholding once it has begun. You mustinclude a reportable interest or dividend ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelyshow that at least one of the following situationspayment on that return, but you failed to that you will underreport interest and divi-applies.file the return. dends in the future.
4. You have corrected the underreporting by
Table 1-1.Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income filing a return if you did not previously file
one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this
interest due for any underreported interestpublication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
or dividend payments.Income in chapter 1.)
If the IRS determines that backup withhold-
Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form ing should stop, it will provide you with a certifi-
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ... cation and will notify the payers who were sent
notices earlier.
Taxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
How to stop backup withholding due to antotals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
incorrect identification number.If you havewell.) well.)
been notified by a payer that you are subject to
backup withholding because you have providedTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use
totals more than Schedule B Schedule 1 an incorrect SSN or employer identification
$1,500 number, you can stop it by following the instruc-
tions the payer gives you.
Savings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use
Reporting backup withholding.If backupyou will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815
withholding is deducted from your interest orbecause of higher
education expenses dividend income or other reportable payment,
the bank or other business must give you an
Ordinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need information return for the year (for example, a
that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-
less well.) well.) held. The information return will show any
backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use held.”that total more than Schedule B Schedule 1
$1,500 Nonresident aliens.Generally, payments
made to nonresident aliens are not subject to
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the backup withholding. You can use Form
you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, toWorksheet Worksheet certify exempt status. However, this does not
exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form holding rate that may apply to your investmentyou have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A. income. For information on the 30% rate, seeSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.Worksheet or the You cannot use Form
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ Penalties.There are civil and criminal pen-Worksheet alties for giving false information to avoid
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.Capital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine ofdistributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, ornot have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
both.Schedule D) Worksheet Worksheet
Where to report investment income.Table
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13; also 1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-distributions (if you use the Qualified ules to use to report some common types ofhave to file Schedule Dividends and Capital investment income. But, see the rest of thisD) Gain Tax Worksheet or publication for detailed information about report-the Schedule D Tax
ing investment income.Worksheet
Joint accounts.If two or more persons holdGain or loss from Line 13; also use property (such as a savings account, bond, orsales of stocks or Schedule D and the stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, orbonds Qualified Dividends and You cannot use Form tenants in common, each person’s share of anyCapital Gain Tax 1040A interest or dividends from the property is deter-Worksheet or the
mined by local law.Schedule D Tax
Worksheet
Example. You and your husband have a
joint money market account. Under state law,Gain or loss from Line 13; also use
exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, half the income from the account belongs to you,
investment property and the Qualified and half belongs to your husband. If you file
Dividends and Capital separate returns, you each report half of theGain Tax Worksheet or income.the Schedule D Tax
Worksheet
Income from property given to a child.
Property you give as a parent to your child under
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the shares of interest from partnerships or sub- so-called “dividends” on deposits or on share
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law, chapter S corporations. This interest is reported accounts in:
becomes the child’s property. to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Sched-
• Cooperative banks,Income from the property is taxable to the ule K-1 (Form 1120S).
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal • Credit unions,Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesobligation to support the child is taxable to theinterest as a nominee for you, that person will• Domestic building and loan associations,parent or guardian having that legal obligation.give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest• Domestic savings and loan associations,Savings account with parent as trustee.received on your behalf.
Interest income from a savings account openedIf you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes• Federal savings and loan associations,
for a child who is a minor, but placed in the nameamounts belonging to another person, see theand
and subject to the order of the parents as trust-discussion on nominee distributions, later,• Mutual savings banks.ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of theunder How To Report Interest Income.
state in which the child resides, both of theIncorrect amount. If you receive a Formfollowing are true. Money market funds. Generally, amounts1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (oryou receive from money market funds should beother incorrect information), you should ask the1. The savings account legally belongs to the reported as dividends, not as interest.issuer for a corrected form. The new Formchild.
1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor-Certificates of deposit and other deferred2. The parents are not legally permitted torected.” interest accounts.If you open any of theseuse any of the funds to support the child. accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervalsForm 1099-OID. Reportable interest income
of 1 year or less during the term of the account.may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, OriginalAccuracy-related penalty.An accuracy-re- You generally must include this interest in yourIssue Discount. For more information aboutlated penalty of 20% can be charged for under- income when you actually receive it or are enti-amounts shown on this form, see Original Issuepayments of tax due to negligence or disregard tled to receive it without paying a substantialDiscount (OID), later in this chapter.of rules or regulations or substantial understate- penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-ment of tax. For information on the penalty andExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a singleany interest that applies, see Penalties in chap- dividends you receive from a regulated invest-payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forter 2. ment company (mutual fund) are not included inmore than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount
your taxable income. (However, see (OID), later.
Information-reporting requirement, next.) You
Interest subject to penalty for earlywill receive a notice from the mutual fund telling
withdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a de-Interest Income you the amount of the exempt-interest dividends
ferred interest account before maturity, you maythat you received. Exempt-interest dividends
Terms you may need to know have to pay a penalty. You must report the totalare not shown on Form 1099-DIV or Form
amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-(see Glossary): 1099-INT.
count during the year, without subtracting the
Information-reporting requirement.Al- penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Accrual method though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-ings under How To Report Interest Income,
able, you must show them on your tax return iflater, for more information on how to report theBelow-market loan
you have to file. This is an information-reportinginterest and deduct the penalty.Cash method requirement and does not change the Money borrowed to invest in certificate ofexempt-interest dividends into taxable income.Demand loan deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-See How To Report Interest Income, later. rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetForgone interest
the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofNote. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromGift loan deposit from the institution and the interest youspecified private activity bonds may be subject
earn on the certificate are two separate items.Interest to the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251
You must report the total interest you earn onand its instructions for more information aboutNominee the certificate in your income. If you itemizethis tax. (Private activity bonds are discussed
deductions, you can deduct the interest you payOriginal issue discount later under State or Local Government Obliga-
as investment interest, up to the amount of yourtions.)Private activity bond net investment income. See Interest Expenses
Interest on VA dividends.Interest on insur-in chapter 3.Term loan
ance dividends that you leave on deposit with
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notExample. You deposited $5,000 with a
taxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif- bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to
on converted United States Government Lifeferent types of interest income. make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required
Insurance policies and on National Service LifeIn general, any interest that you receive or to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-
Insurance policies.that is credited to your account and can be tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2005, but you
withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to received only $265, which represented the $575Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this you earned minus $310 interest charged on yourInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.rule are discussed later. $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You1099-INT for 2005 showing the $575 interestgenerally do not include it in your income untilForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generally you earned. The bank also gives you a state-you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar ment showing that you paid $310 interest forcation 590 for more information.statement, by banks, savings and loans, and 2005. You must include the $575 in your in-other payers of interest. This form shows you the come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-interest you received during the year. Keep thisTaxable Interest — General ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subjectform for your records. You do not have to attach to the net investment income limit.Taxable interest includes interest you receiveit to your tax return.
from bank accounts, loans you make to others,Report on your tax return the total amount of Gift for opening account.If you receive non-and other sources. The following are someinterest income that you receive for the tax year. cash gifts or services for making deposits or forsources of taxable interest. opening an account in a savings institution, youInterest not reported on Form 1099-INT.
may have to report the value as interest.Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, youDividends that are actually interest.Certain
must still report all of your taxable interest in- distributions commonly called dividends are ac- For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or
come. For example, you may receive distributivetually interest. You must report as interestservices valued at more than $10 must be re-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or Forgone interest.For any period, forgone in-
1. The net amount you withdrew from thesemore, gifts or services valued at more than $20 terest is:
deposits during the year, andmust be reported as interest. The value is deter-
1. The amount of interest that would be pay-mined by the cost to the financial institution.2. The amount you could have withdrawn as able for that period if interest accrued onof the end of the year (not reduced by anythe loan at the applicable federal rate andExample. You open a savings account at penalty for premature withdrawals of a was payable annually on December 31,your local bank and deposit $800. The accounttime deposit). minusearns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-
If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-culator. If no other interest is credited to your 2. Any interest actually payable on the loancome on deposits that were frozen at the end ofaccount during the year, the Form 1099-INT you for the period.2005, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-receive will show $35 interest for the year. You
port Interest Income for information about re-must report $35 interest income on your tax Applicable federal rate.Applicable federalporting this interest income exclusion on yourreturn. rates are published by the IRS each month in thetax return. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS officesInterest on insurance dividends.Interest on The interest you exclude is treated ashave these bulletins available for research. Seeinsurance dividends left on deposit with an in-credited to your account in the following year.chapter 5 for other ways to get this information.surance company that can be withdrawn annu-You must include it in income in the year you canally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to Rules for below-market loans.The rules thatwithdraw it.your account. However, if you can withdraw it apply to a below-market loan depend on
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, orExample. $100 of interest was credited on
other specified date), the interest is taxable in term loan.your frozen deposit during the year. You with-
the year that date occurs. drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofGift and demand loans.A gift loan is anythe end of the year. You must include $80 inPrepaid insurance premiums.Any increase below-market loan where the forgone interest isyour income and exclude $20 from your incomein the value of prepaid insurance premiums, in the nature of a gift.for the year. You must include the $20 in youradvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is A demand loan is a loan payable in full at anyincome for the year you can withdraw it.interest if it is applied to the payment of premi- time upon demand by the lender. A demand loan
ums due on insurance policies or made avail- is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedBonds traded flat.If you buy a bond at aable for you to withdraw. or if interest is charged at a rate below thediscount when interest has been defaulted orapplicable federal rate.U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,when the interest has accrued but has not beenA demand loan or gift loan that is asuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,paid, the transaction is described as trading abelow-market loan is generally treated as anissued by any agency or instrumentality of thebond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notarm’s-length transaction in which the lender isUnited States is taxable for federal income taxincome and is not taxable as interest if paid later.treated as having made:purposes. When you receive a payment of that interest, it is
a return of capital that reduces the remaining1. A loan to the borrower in exchange for aInterest on tax refunds.Interest you receivecost basis of your bond. Interest that accruesnote that requires the payment of intereston tax refunds is taxable income. after the date of purchase, however, is taxableat the applicable federal rate, and
interest income for the year received or accrued.Interest on condemnation award.If the con- 2. An additional payment to the borrower inSee Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later indemning authority pays you interest to compen- an amount equal to the forgone interest.this chapter.sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the
interest is taxable. The borrower is generally treated as transferring
the additional payment back to the lender asBelow-Market LoansInstallment sale payments.If a contract for interest. The lender must report that amount asthe sale or exchange of property provides forIf you make a below-market gift or demand loan,interest income.deferred payments, it also usually provides foryou must report as interest income any forgoneThe lender’s additional payment to the bor-interest payable with the deferred payments.interest (defined later) from that loan. Therower is treated as a gift, dividend, contributionThat interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifbelow-market loan rules and exceptions are de-to capital, pay for services, or other payment,little or no interest is provided for in a deferredscribed in this section. For more information,depending on the substance of the transaction.payment contract, part of each payment may besee section 7872 of the Internal Revenue CodeThe borrower may have to report this paymenttreated as interest. See Unstated Interest andand its regulations. as taxable income, depending on its classifica-Original Issue Discount in Publication 537. tion.If you receive a below-market loan, you may
These transfers are considered to occur an-Interest on annuity contract.Accumulated be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as
nually, generally on December 31.interest on an annuity contract you sell before itsany interest that you actually paid, but not if it is
maturity date is taxable. personal interest. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is
not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-Usurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-Loans subject to the rules.The rules for ket loan if the amount of the loan is more thanest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asbelow-market loans apply to: the present value of all payments due under theinterest unless state law automatically changes
loan.it to a payment on the principal. • Gift loans, A lender who makes a below-market term
Interest income on frozen deposits.Ex- • Pay-related loans, loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-
clude from your gross income interest on frozen ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to• Corporation-shareholder loans,deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-• Tax avoidance loans, and tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The
posit because: amount of this payment is the amount of the loan• Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesminus the present value, at the applicable fed-(made after October 11, 1985) under a1. The financial institution is bankrupt or in- eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. Ancontinuing care contract.solvent, or equal amount is treated as original issue dis-
count (OID). The lender must report the annual2. The state in which the institution is locatedA pay-related loan is any below-market loanpart of the OID as interest income. The borrowerhas placed limits on withdrawals becausebetween an employer and an employee or be-may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-other financial institutions in the state aretween an independent contractor and a personpense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.bankrupt or insolvent. for whom the contractor provides services.
The amount of interest you must exclude is A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketExceptions to the below-market loan rules.
the interest that was credited on the frozen de- loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one of Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
posits minus the sum of: the main purposes of the interest arrangement. discussed here.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for loans of $10,000 or less. • Any reasons other than taxes for structur- cash method taxpayer, you must report interest
The rules for below-market loans do not apply toing the transaction as a below-market on these bonds as income in the year you re-
any day on which the total outstanding amountloan. ceive it.
of loans between the borrower and lender is Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;
$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:If you structure a transaction to meet thisthey were last offered in August 2004. Before
exception, and one of the principal purposes of1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H1. Gift loans between individuals if the giftstructuring the transaction in that way is thebonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.loan is not directly used to buy or carryavoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid-If you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustincome-producing assets, and ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception willreport the interest when you receive it.
not apply.2. Pay-related loans or corporation-share- Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30
holder loans if the avoidance of federal tax years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of
is not a principal purpose of the interest$100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-
Series EE and series I bonds.Interest onarrangement. viduals, if the outstanding loans between the
these bonds is payable when you redeem thelender and borrower total $100,000 or less, theThis exception does not apply to a term loan bonds. The difference between the purchaseforgone interest to be included in income by thedescribed in (2) above that previously has been price and the redemption value is taxable inter-lender and deducted by the borrower is limited tosubject to the below-market loan rules. Those est.the amount of the borrower’s net investmentrules will continue to apply even if the outstand-income for the year. If the borrower’s net invest-ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were firstment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as
offered in July 1980. They have a maturity pe-Exception for loans to continuing care fa-zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the
riod of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Ecilities.Loans to qualified continuing care fa-avoidance of federal tax is one of the main
bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-cilities under continuing care contracts are notpurposes of the interest arrangement.
ity period of series E bonds has been extendedsubject to the rules for below-market loans for
Effective dates. These rules apply to termto 40 years for bonds issued before Decemberthe calendar year if the lender or the lender’s
loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-spouse is age 65 or older at the end of the year.
loans outstanding after that date. vember 1965. Paper series EE and series EFor 2005, this exception applies only to the part
bonds are issued at a discount. The face value isof the total outstanding loan balance that is
payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EE$158,100 or less. U.S. Savings Bonds
bonds are issued at their face value. The faceException for loans without significant taxThis section provides tax information on U.S.value plus accrued interest is payable to you ateffect. Loans are excluded from the savings bonds. It explains how to report thematurity.below-market loan rules if their interest arrange-interest income on these bonds and how to treat Beginning in 2005, owners of paper seriesments do not have a significant effect on thetransfers of these bonds. EE bonds are able to convert them to electronicfederal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-bonds. These converted bonds do not retain theThese loans include: viduals are the following. denomination listed on the paper certificate but
are posted at their purchase price (with accrued1. Loans made available by the lender to the• Series EE bonds
interest).general public on the same terms and con-• Series I bondsditions that are consistent with the lender’s
Series I bonds.Series I bonds were first of-customary business practice,
fered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed bondsFor other information on U.S. savings2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or issued at their face amount with a maturity pe-bonds, write to:municipal government that are made avail- riod of 30 years. The face value plus all accrued
able under a program of general applica- interest is payable to you at maturity.For Series HH/H:tion to the public, Bureau of the Public Debt Reporting options for cash method
3. Certain employee-relocation loans, Current Income Services Division taxpayers. If you use the cash method of re-
HH/H Assistance Branch porting income, you can report the interest on4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un-P.O. Box 2186 series EE, series E, and series I bonds in eitherless the interest income would be effec- Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186. of the following ways.tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
trade or business and would not be ex- 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestempt from U.S. tax under an income tax until the earlier of the year you cash ortreaty, dispose of the bonds or the year in whichFor Series EE and I:
5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- they mature. (However, see SavingsBureau of the Public Debt
tributions to which are deductible, if the bonds traded, later.)Accrual Services Division
total outstanding amount of loans between Note. Series E bonds issued in JanuaryP.O. Box 1328
the organization and lender is $250,000 or through November 1965 and all of 1975Parkersburg, WV 26106-1328.
less at all times during the tax year, and matured in 2005. If you have used methodOr, on the Internet, visit: 1, you generally must report the interest on6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- www.publicdebt.treas.gov/sav/ these bonds on your 2005 return.ment can be shown to have no significant sav.htm
effect on the federal tax liability of the 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase
Accrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-lender or the borrower. in redemption value as interest each year.
crual method of accounting, you must reportFor a loan described in (6) above, all the You must use the same method for all series EE,interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itfacts and circumstances are used to determine if series E, and series I bonds you own. If you doaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestthe interest arrangement has a significant effect not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseuntil you receive it or until the bonds mature.on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor- in redemption value as interest each year, you
rower. Some factors to be considered are:Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashmust use method 1.
method of accounting, as most individual tax- If you plan to cash your bonds in the• Whether items of income and deductionpayers do, you generally report the interest on same year that you will pay for highergenerated by the loan offset each other,U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But see educational expenses, you may want
TIP
Series EE and series I bonds, below.• The amount of these items, to use method 1 because you may be able to
• The cost to you of complying with theSeries HH bonds. These bonds were issued exclude the interest from your income. To learn
below-market loan rules, if they were to at face value. Interest is paid twice a year byhow, see Education Savings Bond Program,
apply, and direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a later.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
hold bonds as community property, one-half ofTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
the interest is considered received by each of
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... you. If you file separate returns, each of you
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-you buy a bond in your name and the name of you. est. For more information about communityanother person as co-owners, using only your property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-own funds erty.
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond.Table 1-2. These rules are also shown inwho is the sole owner of the bond Table 1-2.
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion
Child as only owner.Interest on U.S. savingsco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
bonds bought for and registered only in thepurchase price
name of your child is income to your child, even
you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separateif you paid for the bonds and are named asproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generallybeneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,property report one-half of the interest. or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is
income to your child in the earlier of the year the
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the
Change from method 1. If you want to By the date you file the original state- bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-
ment with your return, you must alsochange your method of reporting the interest port the interest income each year.
send a copy to the address below.from method 1 to method 2, you can do so
Choice to report interest each year.Thewithout permission from the IRS. In the year of
choice to report the accrued interest each yearchange you must report all interest accrued to can be made either by your child or by you fordate and not previously reported for all your your child. This choice is made by filing an in-bonds. Internal Revenue Service come tax return that shows all the interestAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic RulingsOnce you choose to report the interest each earned to date, and by stating on the return thatBranch)year, you must continue to do so for all series your child chooses to report the interest eachP.O. Box 7604EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for year. Either you or your child should keep a copyBenjamin Franklin Stationany you get later, unless you request permission of this return.Washington, DC 20044.to change, as explained next. Unless your child is otherwise required to file
a tax return for any year after making this choice,Change from method 2. To change from If you use a private delivery service, send theyour child does not have to file a return only tomethod 2 to method 1, you must request permis-copy to the address below. report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bondsion from the IRS. Permission for the change is
interest under this choice. However, see Tax onautomatically granted if you send the IRS a Internal Revenue Service investment income of a child under age 14,statement that meets all the following require-Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingsearlier, under General Information. Neither youments. Branch) nor your child can change the way you report the
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW interest unless you request permission from the1. You have typed or printed at the top, Washington, DC 20224. IRS, as discussed earlier under Change from“Change in Method of Accounting Under
method 2.Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-2002-9” (or later update). Ownership transferred.If you bought seriesquest permission to change from method 2 to
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your2. It includes your name and social securitymethod 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,
own funds and had them reissued in yournumber under the label in (1). follow the form instructions for an automatic
co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,change. No user fee is required. 3. It identifies the savings bonds for which you must include in your gross income for theyou are requesting this change. Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inyear of reissue all interest that you earned on
the names of co-owners, such as you and yourthese bonds and have not previously reported.4. It includes your agreement to:
child or you and your spouse, interest on theBut, if the bonds were reissued in your name
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-bond is generally taxable to the co-owner whoalone, you do not have to report the interest
quired during or after the year of bought the bond. accrued at that time.
change when the interest is realized This same rule applies when bonds (otherOne co-owner’s funds used. If you usedupon disposition, redemption, or final than bonds held as community property) areyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxmaturity, whichever is earliest, and transferred between spouses or incident to di-on the interest. This is true even if you let thevorce.b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all
quired before the year of change when the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sinceExample. You bought series EE bonds en-the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INTthe interest is realized upon disposition, tirely with your own funds. You did not choose toat the time of redemption, the other co-ownerredemption, or final maturity, whichever report the accrued interest each year. Later, youmust provide you with another Form 1099-INTis earliest, with the exception of the in- transfer the bonds to your former spouse undershowing the amount of interest from the bondterest reported in prior tax years. a divorce agreement. You must include the de-that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-ferred accrued interest, from the date of thedeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee5. It includes your signature. original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,distributions under How To Report Interest In-in your income in the year of transfer. YourYou must attach this statement to your tax re-come , later, for more information about how aformer spouse includes in income the interest onturn for the year of change, which you must fileperson who is a nominee reports interest in-the bonds from the date of transfer to the date ofby the due date (including extensions). come belonging to another person. redemption.You can have an automatic extension of 6
Both co-owners’ funds used. If you andmonths from the due date of your return for the Purchased jointly.If you and a co-ownerthe other co-owner each contribute part of theyear of change (excluding extensions) to file the each contributed funds to buy series E, seriesbond’s purchase price, the interest is generallystatement with an amended return. At the top of EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have thetaxable to each of you, in proportion to thethe statement, enter “Filed pursuant to section bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,amount each of you paid.301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you must you must include in your gross income for the
have filed your original return for the year of theCommunity property. If you and your year of reissue your share of all the interest
change by the due date (including extensions).spouse live in a community property state and earned on the bonds that you have not previ-
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Decedent who postponed reporting inter-ously reported. The former co-owner does not of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you
est. If the transferred bonds were owned by ahold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-have to include in gross income at the time of
decedent who had used the cash method andited from your uncle.reissue his or her share of the interest earned
had not chosen to report the interest each year,that was not reported before the transfer. This
Example 4. When your aunt died, sheand who had bought the bonds entirely with hisinterest, however, as well as all interest earned
owned series H bonds that she had acquired in aor her own funds, all interest earned beforeafter the reissue, is income to the former
trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-death must be reported in one of the followingco-owner.
ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cashways.This income-reporting rule also applies when
method and did not choose to report the interestthe bonds are reissued in the name of your
1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the
sentative (executor, administrator, etc.)Your aunt’s executor chose not to include anynew co-owner will report only his or her share of
who files the final income tax return of theinterest earned before your aunt’s death on herthe interest earned after the transfer.
decedent can choose to include on thatfinal return.If bonds that you and a co-owner bought return all of the interest earned on theThe income in respect of the decedent is thejointly are reissued to each of you separately inbonds before the decedent’s death. Thesum of the unreported interest on the series Ethe same proportion as your contribution to theperson who acquires the bonds then in-bonds and the interest, if any, payable on thepurchase price, neither you nor your co-ownercludes in income only interest earned afterseries H bonds but not received as of the date ofhas to report at that time the interest earnedthe date of death. your aunt’s death. You must report any interestbefore the bonds were reissued. received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interestreturn. The part of the interest that was payableExample 1. You and your spouse each earned up to the date of death is income inbut not received before your aunt’s death isspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesrespect of the decedent. It should not beincome in respect of the decedent and mayEE savings bond. The bond was issued to you included in the decedent’s final return. Allqualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-of the interest earned both before and aftertion on when to report the interest on the seriespone reporting interest on the bond. You laterthe decedent’s death (except any part re-E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded,have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, oneported by the estate on its income tax re-later.in your name and one in your spouse’s name. Atturn) is income to the person who acquires
that time neither you nor your spouse has to Savings bonds distributed from a retirementthe bonds. If that person uses the cash
report the interest earned to the date of reissue. or profit-sharing plan.If you acquire a U.S.method and does not choose to report the
savings bond in a taxable distribution from ainterest each year, he or she can postpone
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forreporting it until the year the bonds are
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The the year of distribution includes the bond’s re-cashed or disposed of or the year they
bond was issued to you and your spouse as demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-mature, whichever is earlier. In the year
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- crued before the distribution). When you redeemthat person reports the interest, he or she
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis- the bond (whether in the year of distribution orcan claim a deduction for any federal es-
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and later), your interest income includes only thetate tax that was paid on the part of the
one in your spouse’s name. You must report half interest accrued after the bond was distributed.interest included in the decedent’s estate.
the interest earned to the date of reissue. To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-For more information on income in respect of abution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, series deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators.EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a bonds distributed from a retirement or
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must profit-sharing plan under How To Report InterestExample 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-include in your income for that year the interest Income, later.payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EEearned to the date of transfer if you have notbond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-already reported it. However, if you are consid-not chosen to report the interest each year. Atporting the interest on your series EE or series Eered the owner of the trust and if the increase inthe date of death, interest of $200 had accruedbonds, you did not recognize taxable incomevalue both before and after the transfer contin-on the bond and its value of $700 was includedwhen you traded the bonds for series HH orues to be taxable to you, you can continue toin your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executorseries H bonds, unless you received cash in thedefer reporting the interest earned each year.chose not to include the $200 accrued interest intrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-You must include the total interest in your in-your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 isries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-come in the year you cash or dispose of theincome in respect of the decedent. not trade any other series of bonds for series HHbonds or the year the bonds finally mature, bonds.) Any cash you received is income up toYou are a cash method taxpayer and do notwhichever is earlier. the amount of the interest earned on the bondschoose to report the interest each year as it isThe same rules apply to previously unre- traded. When your series HH or series H bondsearned. If you cash the bond when it reachesported interest on series EE or series E bonds if mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or ity, you report as interest the difference betweenest income—the difference between maturityseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for the their redemption value and your cost. Your costvalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedFor that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-traded, later. series EE or series E bonds plus any amountous itemized deduction not subject to the
you had to pay at the time of the trade.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federalDecedents. The manner of reporting interestestate tax paid because the $200 interest wasincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, Example.  In 2004, you traded series EEincluded in your uncle’s estate.after the death of the owner, depends on the bonds (on which you postponed reporting theaccounting and income-reporting method previ- interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executorously used by the decedent. in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in-had chosen to include the $200 accrued interest
Decedent who reported interest each year. come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the timein your uncle’s final return, you would report only
If the bonds transferred because of death were of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued$300 as interest when you cashed the bond at
owned by a person who used an accrual interest of $523 and a redemption value ofmaturity. $300 is the interest earned after your
method, or who used the cash method and had $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-uncle’s death.
chosen to report the interest each year, the turity, when you receive $2,500. You must report
interest earned in the year of death up to theExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make or $300 as interest income in the year of maturity.
date of death must be reported on that person’shave made the choice to report the increase inThis is the difference between their redemption
final return. The person who acquires the bondsredemption value as interest each year, youvalue, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
includes in income only interest earned after theinclude in gross income for the year you acquireamount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is
date of death. the bond all of the unreported increase in valuealso the difference between the accrued interest
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223interest in box 3. Do not include this income onReduction for certain benefits.You must
cash received on the trade.) reduce your qualified higher educational ex-your state or local income tax return.
penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.Choice to report interest in year of trade.
You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-Education Savings Bond Programously unreported accrued interest on series EE ships.
or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds asYou may be able to exclude from income all or2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-income in the year of the trade. If you made thispart of the interest you receive on the redemp-tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.choice, it is treated as a change from method 1.tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theSee Change from method 1 under Series EE 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-and series I bonds, earlier. tion of distributions from a qualified tuitionpenses during the same year. This exclusion is
program.Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond known as the Education Savings Bond Program.
interest.When you cash a bond, the bank or You do not qualify for this exclusion if your4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orother payer that redeems it must give you a inheritances) received as educational as-filing status is married filing separately.Form 1099-INT if the interest part of the pay- sistance, such as:ment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of yourForm 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-Form 1099-INT should show the interest as the a. Veterans’ educational assistance bene-terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bondsdifference between the amount you received fits,Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-and the amount paid for the bond. However, b. Qualified tuition reductions, ortach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.your Form 1099-INT may show more interest
than you have to include on your income tax c. Employer-provided educational assis-Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualifiedreturn. For example, this may happen if any of tance.
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedthe following are true.
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be5. Any expense used in figuring the Hope1. You chose to report the increase in theissued either in your name (sole owner) or inand lifetime learning credits.redemption value of the bond each year.your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).For information about these benefits, see Pub-The interest shown on your Form You must be at least 24 years old before thelication 970.1099-INT will not be reduced by amountsbond’s issue date. For example, a bond bought
previously included in income. Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-by a parent and issued in the name of his or her
terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-2. You received the bond from a decedent.
ings bonds you redeem during the year are notsion by the parent or child.The interest shown on your Form
more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- The issue date of a bond may be tional expenses for the year, you may be able toest reported by the decedent before death, earlier than the date the bond is pur-exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds areor on the decedent’s final return, or by the chased because the issue date as-CAUTION
!
more than the expenses, you may be able toestate on the estate’s income tax return.signed to a bond is the first day of the month inexclude only part of the interest.
3. Ownership of the bond was transferred.which it is purchased. To determine the excludable amount, multi-
The interest shown on your Form ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.Beneficiary.You can designate any individ-1099-INT will not be reduced by interest The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theual (including a child) as a beneficiary of thethat accrued before the transfer. qualified higher educational expenses you paidbond.
during the year. The denominator (bottom part)4. You were named as a co-owner and the Verification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedother co-owner contributed funds to buysion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-during the year.the bond. The interest shown on your
tion information from the Department ofForm 1099-INT will not be reduced by the
Treasury. Example. In February 2005, Mark andamount you received as nominee for the
Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in
ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in AprilQualified expenses.Qualified higher educa-this section, for more information about the
1996. They received proceeds of $7,068, repre-tional expenses are tuition and fees required forreporting requirements.)
senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofyou, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom5. You received the bond in a taxable distri- $2,068. In 2005, they paid $4,000 of theiryou claim an exemption) to attend an eligiblebution from a retirement or profit-sharing daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingeducational institution.plan. The interest shown on your Form an education credit for that amount, and theirQualified expenses include any contribution1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- daughter does not have any tax-free educationalyou make to a qualified tuition program or to aest portion of the amount taxable as a dis- assistance. They can exclude $1,170 ($2,068 ×Coverdell education savings account. For infor-tribution from the plan and not taxable as ($4,000 ÷ $7,068)) of interest in 2005. Theymation about these programs, see Publicationinterest. (This amount is generally shown must pay tax on the remaining $898 ($2,068 −970, Tax Benefits for Education.on Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen- $1,170) interest.
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-Qualified expenses do not include expenses
Figuring the interest part of the proceedsing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,for room and board or for courses involving(Form 8815, line 6).To figure the amount offor the year of distribution.) sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of ainterest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use thedegree or certificate granting program.For more information on including the correct Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.
amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- Eligible educational institutions.These
ings bond interest previously reported or Nomi- institutions include most public, private, and
nee distributions under How To Report Interestnonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational
Income, later. schools that are accredited and are eligible to
participate in student aid programs run by theInterest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
Department of Education. See chapter 10 ofempt from state and local taxes. The
Publication 970 for information on foreignForm 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP
schools that are eligible.cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you previously reported any interest deduction for interest expenses until you haveTreasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes
from savings bonds cashed during figured this exclusion of savings bond interest.have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-
2005, use the Alternate Line 6 Work- Therefore, if you had interest expenses that areing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury
sheet below instead. due to royalties and deductible on Schedule E bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of these
(Form 1040), you must make a special computa-Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi-
Alternate Line 6 Worksheet tion of your deductible interest to figure the netnations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes and
royalty income included in your modified AGI.bonds generally pay interest every 6 months.1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, You must figure deductible interest without re-Generally, you report this interest for the yearline 5....................
gard to this exclusion of bond interest. paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you can2. Enter the face value of all post-1989
paper series EE bonds cashed in redeem these securities for face value.You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-
2005 ..................... ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make theTreasury notes and bonds are usually sold
3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) special computation. On this form, include inby auction with competitive bidding. If, after
4. Enter the face value of all electronicyour net investment income your total interestcompiling the competitive bids, a determinationseries EE bonds (including income for the year from series EE and I U.S.is made that the purchase price is less than thepost-1989 series EE bonds savings bonds. Use the deductible interestface value, you will receive a refund for theconverted from paper to electronic amount from this form only to figure the netdifference between the purchase price and theformat) and all series I bonds royalty income included in your modified AGI.face value. This amount is considered originalcashed in 2005.............. Do not attach this form to your tax return.issue discount. However, the original issue dis-5. Add lines 3 and 4............
count rules (discussed later) do not apply if theAfter you figure this interest exclusion, use a6. Subtract line 5 from line 1.......
discount is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) ofseparate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-7. Enter the amount of interest
the face amount, multiplied by the number of fullreported as income in previous tion for investment interest expenses, and at-
years .................... years from the date of original issue to maturity.tach that form to your return.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the See De minimis OID under Original Issue Dis-Recordkeeping. If you claim the in-result here and on Form 8815, line 6 count (OID), later. If the purchase price is deter-terest exclusion, you must keep amined to be more than the face amount, thewritten record of the qualified U.S.RECORDS
Modified adjusted gross income limit. difference is a premium. (See Bond Premiumsavings bonds you redeem. Your record mustThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified Amortization in chapter 3.)include the serial number, issue date, faceadjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
value, and total redemption proceeds (principal For other information on these notes
and interest) of each bond. You can use Form• $61,200 to $76,200 for taxpayers filing sin- or bonds, write to:
8818, Optional Form To Record Redemption ofgle or head of household, and
Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued Treasury Direct• $91,850 to $121,850 for married taxpayersAfter 1989, to record this information. You Attn: Customer Informationfiling jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)should also keep bills, receipts, canceled P.O. Box 9150with dependent child. checks, or other documentation that shows youMinneapolis, MN 55480-9150.
paid qualified higher educational expenses dur-You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if Or, on the Internet, visit:ing the year.your modified AGI is equal to or more than the www.publicdebt.treas.gov/.upper limit for your filing status.
U.S. Treasury Bills,Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes
of this exclusion, is adjusted gross incomeNotes, and Bonds Treasury inflation-protected securities(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37) (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice aTreasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debtsfigured before the interest exclusion, and modi- year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount(obligations) of the U.S. Government.fied by adding back any: that is adjusted to take into account inflation and
deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-Taxation of interest.Interest income from1. Foreign earned income exclusion, ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt InstrumentsTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.federal income tax, but is exempt from all state
and local income taxes. You should receive3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents Retirement, sale, or redemption.For infor-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interestof American Samoa, mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year.4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-Payments of principal and interest generallydinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-5. Exclusion for adoption benefits receivedwill be credited to your designated checking ortaxable Trades in chapter 4 for informationunder an employer’s adoption assistancesavings account by direct deposit through theabout trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-program, TREASURY DIRECT system. tain other designated issues.
6. Deduction for tuition and fees,
Treasury bills.These bills generally have a
7. Deduction for student loan interest, and Bonds Sold Between Interest4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period.
They are issued at a discount in the amount ofDates8. Deduction for domestic production activi-
$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The differenceties. If you sell a bond between interest paymentbetween the discounted price you pay for the
Use the worksheet in the instructions for line dates, part of the sales price represents interestbills and the face value you receive at maturity is
9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatinterest income. Generally, you report this inter-
claim any of the exclusion or deduction itemsest income when the bill is paid at maturity. See part of the sales price as interest income for the
listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add theDiscount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis- year of sale.
amount of the exclusion or deduction (exceptcount on Debt Instruments, later. If you buy a bond between interest paymentany deduction for tuition and fees, student loan dates, part of the purchase price representsIf you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-interest, or domestic production activities) to the interest accrued before the date of purchase.ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you willamount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as areceive payment for the difference between thetotal on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. return of your capital investment, rather thanproceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less
interest income, by reducing your basis in theRoyalties included in modified AGI.Be- any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the
bond. See Accrued interest on bonds undercause the deduction for interest expenses due new Treasury security. However, you must re-
How To Report Interest Income, later in thisto royalties and other investments is limited to port the full amount of the interest income on
chapter, for information on reporting the pay-your net investment income (see Investment each of your Treasury bills at the time it reaches
ment.Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the maturity.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Registration requirement.A bond issued af- ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is aInsurance
ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis- bond any portion of the proceeds of which is
tered form for the interest to be tax exempt. expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundsLife insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
used to buy) higher yielding investments. Aciary of the insured person are usually not tax-Indian tribal government.Bonds issued afterbond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuerable. But if you receive the proceeds in 1982 by an Indian tribal government are treatedintentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theinstallments, you must usually report part ofas issued by a state. Interest on these bonds isissue in this manner.each installment payment as interest income.generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of anFor more information about insurance pro-issue of which substantially all of the proceedsPrivate activity bonds.Interest on a privateceeds received in installments, see Publicationare to be used in the exercise of any essentialactivity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined525. government function. However, interest on pri-below) is taxable. Generally, a private activity
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds forbond is part of a state or local government bondInterest option on insurance.If you leave life
tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.issue that meets both of the following require-insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-
ments.ance company under an agreement to pay inter-Original issue discount.Original issue dis-
est only, the interest paid to you is taxable.count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.sue is to be used for a private businessAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-For information on the treatment of OID use.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seeceive are taxed as pension and annuity income 2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-Tax-exempt state and local government bondsfrom a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. cipal or interest is:under Discounted Debt Instruments in chapterSee Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions4. a. Secured by an interest in property to beand Annuities, for information on taxation of
Stripped bonds or coupons. For special used for a private business use (or pay-pension and annuity income from nonqualified
rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-ments for this property), orplans.
tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons under b. Derived from payments for property (orOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later.State or Local borrowed money) used for a private
Information reporting requirement.If you business use.Government Obligations
must file a tax return, you are required to show
Interest you receive on an obligation issued by aany tax-exempt interest you received on yourAlso, a bond is generally considered a private
state or local government is generally not tax-return. This is an information-reporting require-activity bond if the amount of the proceeds to
able. The issuer should be able to tell youment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-be used to make or finance loans to persons
whether the interest is taxable. The issuerest to taxable interest. See Reporting other than government units is more than 5%
should also give you a periodic (or year-end)tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter-of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever is
statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-est Income, later in this chapter. That discussionless).
gation. If you invested in the obligation through aalso explains what to do if you receive a FormQualified bond.Interest on a private activ-trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-1099-INT for tax-exempt interest. ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. Azation should give you this information. qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-
Even if interest on the obligation is not ing an enterprise zone facility bond or New YorkTaxable Interestsubject to income tax, you may have Liberty bond), qualified student loan bond, quali-
to report capital gain or loss when you fied small issue bond (including a tribal manu-CAUTION
!
Interest on some state or local obligations is
sell it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax facturing facility bond), qualified redevelopmenttaxable.
may apply to other dispositions of the obligation. bond, qualified mortgage bond, qualified veter-Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on ans’ mortgage bond, or qualified 501(c)(3) bondfederally guaranteed state or local obligations(a bond issued for the benefit of certain tax-ex-issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This ruleTax-Exempt Interest empt organizations).does not apply to interest on obligations guaran-Interest that you receive on these tax-ex-Interest on a bond used to finance governmentteed by the following U.S. Government agen-empt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3) bondsoperations generally is not taxable if the bond iscies. and New York Liberty bonds), if issued afterissued by a state, the District of Columbia, a August 7, 1986, generally is a “tax preference• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi- item” and may be subject to the alternative mini-tee was under the Northwest Power Act assions. Political subdivisions include: mum tax. See Form 6251 and its instructions forin effect on July 18, 1984).
more information.• Port authorities, • Department of Veterans Affairs.
Enterprise zone facility bonds.Interest on• Toll road commissions, • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora- certain private activity bonds issued by a state or• Utility services authorities, tion. local government to finance a facility used in an
empowerment zone or enterprise community is• Community redevelopment agencies, and • Federal Housing Administration.
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for• Federal National Mortgage Association.Publication 954.certain obligations issued after 1980).• Government National Mortgage Corpora- New York Liberty bonds.New York LibertyThere are other requirements for tax-exempt tion. bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, tobonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern- finance the construction and rehabilitation of• Resolution Funding Corporation.ment agency or see sections 103 and 141 real property in a newly designated “Libertythrough 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and• Student Loan Marketing Association. Zone” of New York City. Interest on these bondsthe related regulations. is tax exempt.
Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds ofObligations that are not bonds. In- Market discount. Market discount on athese bonds are used to finance mortgage loansterest on a state or local government tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youfor homebuyers. Generally, interest on state orobligation may be tax exempt even if bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you can
TIP
local government home mortgage bonds issuedthe obligation is not a bond. For example, inter- choose to accrue the market discount over theafter April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondsest on a debt evidenced only by an ordinary period you own the bond and include it in yourare qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-written agreement of purchase and sale may be income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-ans’ mortgage bonds.tax exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on ket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debt
default by the state or political subdivision mayArbitrage bonds.Interest on arbitrage bondsInstruments, later. If you do not make that
be tax exempt. issued by state or local governments after Octo- choice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1993, any gain from market discount is taxable turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file your
when you dispose of the bond. See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later. copy with your return. Keep it for your records.
For information about the sale of a debt in-For more information on the treatment of In most cases, you must report the entire
strument with OID, see chapter 4.market discount when you dispose of a tax-ex- amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as
empt bond, see Discounted Debt Instruments interest income. But see Refiguring OID shownDe minimis OID. You can treat the discountunder Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chap- on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, andas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)ter 4. also Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentof the stated redemption price at maturity multi-under How To Report Interest Income, later inplied by the number of full years from the date ofthis chapter, for more information.original issue to maturity. This small discount is
known as “de minimis” OID. Form 1099-OID not received.If you had OIDDiscount on for the year but did not receive a FormExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond with1099-OID, see Publication 1212, which lists totalDebt Instruments a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,OID on certain debt instruments and has infor-issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofmation that will help you figure OID. If your debtTerms you may need to know 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10instrument is not listed in Publication 1212, con-(see Glossary): (the number of full years from the date of originalsult the issuer for further information about theissue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20accrued OID for the year.discount is less than $25, the OID is treated asMarket discount
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willNominee. If someone else is the holder ofMarket discount bond recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
Original issue discount (OID) ment that belongs to you and receives a Form
Example 2. The facts are the same as in1099-OID on your behalf, that person must givePremium Example 1, except that the bond was issued atyou a Form 1099-OID.
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountIf you receive a Form 1099-OID that includesis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youIn general, a debt instrument, such as a bond, amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-must include the OID in income as it accruesnote, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- inee distributions under How To Report Interestover the term of the bond.ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at a Income, later.
Debt instrument bought after original is-lower than current market rate will usually be
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.sue. If you buy a debt instrument with deissued at less than its face amount. This dis-
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxminimis OID at a premium, the discount is notcount is, in effect, additional interest income.
6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentThe following are some of the types of dis-
apply. with de minimis OID at a discount, the discountcounted debt instruments.
is reported under the market discount rules. See
• U.S. Treasury bonds. 1. You bought the debt instrument after itsMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter.
original issue and paid a premium or an• Corporate bonds. Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules acquisition premium.
• Municipal bonds. discussed here do not apply to the following debt2. The debt instrument is a stripped bond or ainstruments. • Certificates of deposit. stripped coupon (including certain zero
coupon instruments). See Figuring OID1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see• Notes between individuals. under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, laterStripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)• Stripped bonds and coupons. in this chapter.
2. U.S. savings bonds.• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aunder How To Report Interest Income, later inThe discount on these instruments (except mu-fixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearthis chapter, for information about reporting thenicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. Thefrom the date of issue). correct amount of OID.discount on municipal bonds generally is not
4. Obligations issued by an individual beforetaxable (but see State or Local Government Premium. You bought a debt instrument at
March 2, 1984.Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after
REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs, later, for purchase was greater than the total of all5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-information about applying the rules discussed amounts payable on the instrument after theing are true.in this section to the regular interest holder of a purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-a. The lender is not in the business ofest.
nancial asset securitization investment trust, orlending money. If you bought an OID debt instrument at aother CDO. premium, you generally do not have to reportb. The amount of the loan, plus the
any OID as ordinary income.amount of any outstanding prior loans
Original Issue between the same individuals, is Qualified stated interest.In general, this is
Discount (OID) $10,000 or less. stated interest that is unconditionally payable in
cash or property (other than debt instruments ofc. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofOID is a form of interest. You generally include the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.the principal purposes of the loan.OID in your income as it accrues over the term of
the debt instrument, whether or not you receive Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
any payments from the issuer. instrument at an acquisition premium if both of
the following are true.A debt instrument generally has OID whenForm 1099-OIDthe instrument is issued for a price that is less
1. You did not pay a premium.than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDThe issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro-
is the difference between the stated redemptionker, if you held the instrument through a broker) 2. The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-
price at maturity and the issue price. should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issue ately after purchase (including purchase at
All debt instruments that pay no interestDiscount, or a similar statement, if the total OID original issue) was greater than its ad-
before maturity are presumed to be issued at afor the calendar year is $10 or more. Form justed issue price. This is the issue price
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID plus the OID previously accrued, minus
of these instruments. for the part of the year that you held the bond. It any payment previously made on the in-
The OID accrual rules generally do not apply also will show, in box 2, the stated interest that strument other than qualified stated inter-
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- you must include in your income. A copy of Form est.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID• Deferred income certificates, Stripped Bonds and Coupons
includible in your income. For information about• Bonus savings certificates, and If you strip one or more coupons from a bondfiguring the correct amount of OID to include in
and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and• Growth savings certificates.your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term
coupons are treated as separate debt instru-Debt Instruments in Publication 1212.
ments issued with OID.Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyRefiguring periodic interest shown on Form The holder of a stripped bond has the right tomust be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument receive the principal (redemption price) pay-that are not in registered form. They are notor acquired it from another holder during the ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has theissued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, right to receive interest on the bond.able from one individual to another.earlier, for information about the treatment of Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-Banks must provide the IRS and the personperiodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of clude:redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.Form 1099-OID for that instrument.
1. Zero coupon instruments available throughTime deposit open account arrangement. the Department of the Treasury’s SeparateThis is an arrangement with a fixed maturity dateTrading of Registered Interest and Princi-Applying the OID Rules in which you make deposits on a schedule ar-pal of Securities (STRIPS) program andranged between you and your bank. But there isThe rules for reporting OID depend on the date government-sponsored enterprises suchno actual or constructive receipt of interest untilthe long-term debt instrument was issued. as the Resolution Funding Corporation andthe fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,the Financing Corporation, andyou and your bank enter into an arrangementDebt instruments issued after 1954 and
2. Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-under which you agree to deposit $100 eachbefore May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a
curities that represent ownership interestsmonth for a period of 5 years. Interest will begovernment instrument). For these instru-
in those securities, such as obligationscompounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablements, you do not report the OID until the year
backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that areonly at the end of the 5-year period. You mustyou sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If
offered primarily by brokerage firms.include a part of the interest in your income asa gain results and the instrument is a capital
OID each year. Each year the bank must giveasset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is
Seller.If you strip coupons from a bond andyou a Form 1099-OID to show you the amountordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is
sell the bond or coupons, include in income theyou must include in your income for the year.capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the
interest that accrued while you held the bondinstrument, the entire loss is a capital loss andRedemption before maturity.If, before thebefore the date of sale to the extent you did notno reporting of OID is required. maturity date, you redeem a deferred interestpreviously include this interest in your income.In general, the amount of gain that is ordinaryaccount for less than its stated redemption priceFor an obligation acquired after October 22,interest income equals the following amount:at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID1986, you must also include the market discount
that you previously included in income but didthat accrued before the date of sale of the
not receive. stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didNumber of full
months you held Original not previously include this discount in your in-Renewable certificates.If you renew a CD atthe instrument × Issue come.maturity, it is treated as a redemption and aNumber of full Discount Add the interest and market discount thatpurchase of a new certificate. This is true re-months from date you include in income to the basis of the bondgardless of the terms of renewal.of original issue and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-
to date of maturity tween the items you keep and the items you sell,
based on the fair market value of the items. TheFace-Amount Certificates difference between the sale price of the bond (orDebt instruments issued after May 27, 1969
(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orThese certificates are subject to the OID rules.
ment), and before 1985.If you hold these coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.They are a form of endowment contracts issued
debt instruments as capital assets, you must Treat any item you keep as an OID bondby insurance or investment companies for either
include a part of the discount in your gross originally issued and bought by you on the salea lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with
income each year that you own the instruments. date of the other items. If you keep the bond,the face amount becoming payable on the ma-
treat the amount of the redemption price of theturity date of the certificate.Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru- bond that is more than the basis of the bond asIn general, the difference between the facement is increased by the amount of OID that you the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat theamount and the amount you paid for the contractinclude in your gross income. amount payable on the coupons that is moreis OID. You must include a part of the OID in
than the basis of the coupons as the OID.your income over the term of the certificate.Debt instruments issued after 1984.For
The issuer must give you a statement onthese debt instruments, you report the total OID Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you mustthat applies each year regardless of whether coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on
include in your income each year.you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset. the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,
treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
tion price at maturity over your purchase price. Ifment is increased by the amount of OID that youInflation-Indexed you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID anyinclude in your gross income. Debt Instruments excess of the amount payable on the due date of
the coupon over your purchase price.If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument
Certificates of Deposit (CDs) (other than a series I U.S. savings bond), youFiguring OID. The rules for figuring OID on
must report as OID any increase in the stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend onIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1inflation-adjusted principal amount of the instru- the date the debt instruments were purchased,year, you must include in income each year ament that occurs while you held the instrument not the date issued.part of the total interest due and report it in theduring the year. In general, an inflation-indexed You must refigure the OID shown on thesame manner as other OID. debt instrument is a debt instrument on which Form 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bondThis also applies to similar deposit arrange-the payments are adjusted for inflation and de- or coupon. For information about figuring thements with banks, building and loan associa-flation (such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Se- correct amount of OID on these instruments totions, etc., including: curities). You should receive Form 1099-OID include in your income, see Figuring OID on
from the payer showing the amount you mustStripped Bonds and Coupons in Publication• Time deposits,
report as OID and any qualified stated interest 1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and• Bonus plans, paid to you during the year. For more informa- coupons should not rely on the OID shown in
• Savings certificates, tion, see Publication 1212. Section II of Publication 1212, because the
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amounts listed in Section II for stripped bonds ormarket discount as zero if it is less than
1. State that you have included market dis-coupons are figured without reference to the one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-
count in your gross income for the yeardate or price at which you acquired them. tion price of the bond multiplied by the number of
under section 1278(b) of the Internal Reve-full years to maturity (after you acquire theStripped inflation-indexed debt nue Code, andbond).instruments. OID on stripped inflation-in- If a market discount bond also has OID, the2. Describe the method you used to figuredexed debt instruments is figured under the dis-market discount is the sum of the bond’s issuethe accrued market discount for the year.count bond method. This method is described inprice and the total OID includible in the grossRegulations section 1.1275-7(e). Once you make this choice, it will apply to allincome of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, the
market discount bonds that you acquire duringtotal OID that accrued) before you acquired theStripped tax-exempt obligations.You do the tax year and in later tax years. You cannotbond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-not have to pay tax on OID on any stripped revoke your choice without the consent of theately after you acquired it.tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought IRS. For information on how to revoke yourbefore June 11, 1987. However, if you acquiredBonds acquired at original issue.Generally, choice, see section 12A of the Appendix to Rev-it after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OIDa bond that you acquired at original issue is not aenue Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenueon it to determine its basis when you dispose ofmarket discount bond. If your adjusted basis in aBulletin 2002-3. You can find this Internal Reve-it. See Original issue discount (OID) on debtbond is determined by reference to the adjustednue Bulletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/instruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapterbasis of another person who acquired the bondirb02-03.pdf.4. at original issue, you are also considered toAlso see Election To Report All Interest asYou may have to pay tax on part of the OIDhave acquired it at original issue. OID, later. If you make that election, you muston stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that use the constant yield method.Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-you bought after June 10, 1987. For information
nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherEffect on basis.You increase the basis ofon figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt
of the following is true. your bonds by the amount of market discountBonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on
you include in your income.Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publication 1. Your cost basis in the bond is less than the1212. Partial principal payments.If you receive abond’s issue price.
partial payment of principal on a market discount2. The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-Market Discount Bonds bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,ket discount bond under a plan of reorgani-and you did not choose to include the discount inA market discount bond is any bond having zation. (This does not apply if the bond isincome currently, you must treat the payment asmarket discount except: issued in exchange for a market discountordinary interest income up to the amount of thebond issued before July 19, 1984, and thebond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the1. Short-term obligations (those with fixedterms and interest rates of both bonds areamount of accrued market discount reportablematurity dates of up to 1 year from the the same.) as interest at disposition by that amount.date of issue),
There are 3 methods you can use to figure
Accrued market discount.The accrued mar-2. Tax-exempt obligations that you bought accrued market discount for this purpose. You
ket discount is figured in one of two ways.before May 1, 1993, can choose to figure accrued market discount:
Ratable accrual method.Treat the market3. U.S. savings bonds, and 1. On the basis of the constant yield method,discount as accruing in equal daily installmentsdescribed earlier,4. Certain installment obligations. during the period you hold the bond. Figure the
daily installments by dividing the market dis-2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for anyMarket discount arises when the value of a
count by the number of days after the date youaccrual period, if the debt instrument hasdebt obligation decreases after its issue date,
acquired the bond, up to and including its matur-OID, orgenerally because of an increase in interest
ity date. Multiply the daily installments by therates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-number of days you held the bond to figure yourket, it may have market discount. est paid in the accrual period, if the debtaccrued market discount.When you buy a market discount bond, you instrument has no OID.can choose to accrue the market discount overConstant yield method. Instead of using Under method (2) above, figure accruedthe period you own the bond and include it inthe ratable accrual method, you can choose tomarket discount for a period by multiplying theyour income currently as interest income. If youfigure the accrued discount using a constanttotal remaining market discount by a fraction.do not make this choice, the following rulesinterest rate (the constant yield method). MakeThe numerator (top part) of the fraction is thegenerally apply. this choice by attaching to your timely filed returnOID for the period, and the denominator (bottoma statement identifying the bond and stating that1. You must treat any gain when you dispose part) is the total remaining OID at the beginningyou are making a constant interest rate election.of the bond as ordinary interest income, up of the period.The choice takes effect on the date you acquiredto the amount of the accrued market dis- Under method (3) above, figure accruedthe bond. If you choose to use this method forcount. See Discounted Debt Instruments market discount for a period by multiplying theany bond, you cannot change your choice forunder Capital Gains and Losses in chapter total remaining market discount by a fraction.that bond.4. The numerator is the stated interest paid in theFor information about using the constantaccrual period, and the denominator is the total2. You must treat any partial payment of prin-yield method, see Figuring OID using the con-stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-stant yield method under Debt Instruments Is-ning of the accrual period.come, up to the amount of the accruedsued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use this
market discount. See Partial principal pay-method to figure market discount (instead of
Discount onments, later in this discussion. OID), treat the bond as having been issued on
the date you acquired it. Treat the amount ofShort-Term Obligations3. If you borrow money to buy or carry the
your basis (immediately after you acquired thebond, your deduction for interest paid on When you buy a short-term obligation (one withbond) as the issue price. Then apply the formulathe debt is limited. See Limit on interest a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from theshown in Publication 1212.deduction for market discount bonds under date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-When To Deduct Investment Interest in Choosing to include market discount in in-tion, you can generally choose to include anychapter 3. come currently. You can make this choice ifdiscount and interest payable on the obligation
you have not revoked a prior choice to includein income currently. If you do not make this
Market discount. Market discount is the market discount in income currently within thechoice, the following rules generally apply.
amount of the stated redemption price of a bond last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-
at maturity that is more than your basis in the taching to your timely filed return a statement in 1. You must treat any gain when you sell,
bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat which you: exchange, or redeem the obligation as or-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dinary income, up to the amount of the You must make your choice by the due date the discount on certain debt instruments. See
ratable share of the discount. See Dis- of your return, including extensions, for the firstU.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-
counted Debt Instruments under Capital year for which you are making the choice. Attachstruments, earlier.
Gains and Losses in chapter 4. a statement to your return or amended return
Example. On September 1, 2003, youindicating:2. If you borrow money to buy or carry the loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-obligation, your deduction for interest paid1. Your name, address, and social securitypounded annually. You are not in the businesson the debt is limited. See Limit on interest number, of lending money. The note stated that principaldeduction for short-term obligations under and interest would be due on August 31, 2005.2. The choice you are making and that it isWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in In 2005, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-being made under section 1283(c)(2) ofchapter 3. pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashthe Internal Revenue Code,
method, you must include in income on your
3. The period for which the choice is beingShort-term obligations for which no choice 2005 return the $508.80 interest you received in
made and the obligation to which it ap-is available.You must include any discount or that year.
plies, andinterest in current income as it accrues for any
Constructive receipt.You constructivelyshort-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt4. Any other information necessary to showreceive income when it is credited to your ac-obligation) that is: you are entitled to make this choice.count or made available to you. You do not need
to have physical possession of it. For example,1. Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer,
Choosing to include accrued discount and you are considered to receive interest, divi-2. Held primarily for sale to customers in theother interest in current income.If you ac- dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-ordinary course of your trade or business,quire short-term discount obligations that are notcount in a bank, savings and loan, or similar
subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-financial institution, or interest on life insurance3. Held by a bank, regulated investment com-
come of the accrued discount or other interest,policy dividends left to accumulate, when theypany, or common trust fund,
you can choose to have those rules apply. Thisare credited to your account and subject to your4. Held by certain pass-through entities,choice applies to all short-term obligations youwithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet
acquire during the year and in all later years.entered in your passbook.5. Identified as part of a hedging transaction,
You cannot change this choice without the con-You constructively receive income on theor
sent of the IRS. deposit or account even if you must: 6. A stripped bond or stripped coupon held byThe procedures to use in making this choicethe person who stripped the bond or cou- 1. Make withdrawals in multiples of evenare the same as those described for choosing topon (or by any other person whose basis amounts,include acquisition discount instead of OID onin the obligation is determined by refer-nongovernment obligations in current income.2. Give a notice to withdraw before makingence to the basis in the hands of that per-However, you should indicate that you are mak-the withdrawal,son). ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the
3. Withdraw all or part of the account to with-Internal Revenue Code.
draw the earnings, orEffect on basis.Increase the basis of your Also see the following discussion. If you
obligation by the amount of discount you includemake the election to report all interest currently4. Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessin income currently. as OID, you must use the constant yield method.the interest you are to receive on an early
withdrawal or redemption is substantiallyFiguring the accrued discount.Figure the Election To Report less than the interest payable at maturity.accrued discount by using either the ratable
All Interest as OIDaccrual method or the constant yield method
Accrual method. If you use an accrualdiscussed previously in Accrued market dis- Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on amethod, you report your interest income whencount under Market Discount Bonds, earlier. debt instrument acquired during the tax year asyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.
OID and include it in income currently. For pur-Interest is earned over the term of the debtGovernment obligations. For an obligation
poses of this election, interest includes statedinstrument.described above that is a short-term govern-
interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimisment obligation, the amount you include in your
OID, market discount, de minimis market dis- Example. If, in the previous example, youincome for the current year is the accrued acqui-
count, and unstated interest as adjusted by anyuse an accrual method, you must include thesition discount, if any, plus any other accrued
amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldinterest payable on the obligation. The acquisi-
mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3. report the interest as follows: 2003, $80; 2004,tion discount is the stated redemption price at
$249.60; and 2005, $179.20.maturity minus your basis. 
If you choose to use the constant yield Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds ismethod to figure accrued acquisition discount, taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andWhen To Reporttreat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the payable. It does not matter when you mail theissue price. If you choose to use this method, coupon for payment.Interest Incomeyou cannot change your choice.
Terms you may need to knowNongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
(see Glossary):tion listed above that is not a government obliga-
How To Reporttion, the amount you include in your income for
the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plusAccrual method Interest Incomeany other accrued interest payable. If you
Cash methodchoose the constant yield method to figure ac- Terms you may need to knowcrued OID, apply it by using the obligation’s (see Glossary):issue price.
When to report your interest income depends onChoosing to include accrued acquisitionwhether you use the cash method or an accrualNomineediscount instead of OID.You can choose to method to report income.report accrued acquisition discount (defined Original issue discount (OID)
earlier under Government obligations) rather Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga- the cash method. If you use this method, you
tions. Your choice will apply to the year for which generally report your interest income in the year Generally, you report all of your taxable interest
it is made and to all later years and cannot be in which you actually or constructively receive it. income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line
changed without the consent of the IRS. However, there are special rules for reporting 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
2005
Investment expenses5
$
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest 3. You had a financial account in a foreign 9. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must on a bond that you bought between inter-country, unless the combined value of all
use Form 1040A or Form 1040. est payment dates.foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-
In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ ifing all of 2005 or the accounts were with10. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list isyou must use Form 1040, as described later, orcertain U.S. military banking facilities,true.if any of the statements listed under Schedule B,
4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987On Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and thelater, are true.
and choose to reduce interest income fromamount received from each. If you received a
Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A and kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bondany of the following are true. Premium Amortization), Reporting tax-exempt interest.Report the
1. Your taxable interest income is more than total of your tax-exempt interest (such as inter-5. You are reporting OID in an amount more
$1,500. est or accrued OID on certain state and munici-or less than the amount shown on Form
pal bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a1099-OID, or2. You are claiming the interest exclusion mutual fund on line 8b of Form 1040A or Formunder the Education Savings Bond Pro- 6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” andgram (discussed earlier). vate activity bonds issued after August 7,the amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do
1986.3. You received interest from a seller-fi- not add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 1040EZ, line 2.
Schedule B. You must complete Scheduleproperty as a home. You should not have received a Form
B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and1099-INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you did,4. You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex-any of the following apply. you must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) orempt interest. Schedule B (Form 1040). See the Schedule 1 or
5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. Schedule B instructions for how to report this. Be1. Your taxable interest income is more than
savings bond interest that includes sure to also show this tax-exempt interest on line$1,500.
amounts you reported before 2005. 8b.2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
6. You received, as a nominee, interest that Do not report interest from an individ-under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
actually belongs to someone else. ual retirement arrangement (IRA) asgram (discussed earlier).
tax-exempt interest.CAUTION
!
7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest3. You had a foreign account or you receivedon frozen deposits. Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,a distribution from, or were a granter of, or
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andtransferor to, a foreign trust.List each payer’s name and the amount of inter-
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formest income received from each payer on line 1. If4. You received interest from a seller-fi-1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxableyou received a Form 1099-INT or Form nanced mortgage, and the buyer used theinterest income you received. You must report1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-property as a home. all of your taxable interest income even if you doage firm as the payer.
not receive a Form 1099-INT.You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use5. You received a Form 1099-INT for tax-ex-
If you forfeited interest income because ofForm 1040, as described next. empt interest.
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead ductible amount will be shown on Form
of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: savings bond interest that includes 1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
amounts you reported before 2005. drawal of savings, later.1. You forfeited interest income because of Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount7. You received, as a nominee, interest thatthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, of interest income you received from U.S. sav-actually belongs to someone else.2. You received or paid accrued interest on ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestsecurities transferred between interest Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3
payment dates, on frozen deposits. to any other taxable interest income you re-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wasExample 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav- Use the worksheet below to figure the
previously included in your interest income. If ings bonds for you when you were a child. The amount you subtract from the interest
part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ- bonds were issued in your name, and the inter- shown on Form 1099-INT.
ously included in your interest income, see U.S. est on the bonds was reported each year as it
savings bond interest previously reported, later. accrued. (See Choice to report interest eachA. Enter the amount of cash receivedIf you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you boughtyear under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.) upon redemption of the bond....after 1989 and you paid qualified educational In March 2005, you redeemed one of the
expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bondB. Enter the value of the bond at thecation Savings Bond Program, later. was originally issued in March 1986. When you time of distribution by the plan....redeemed the bond, you received $1,492.00 forBox 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form
it.1099-INT will contain an amount if you were C. Subtract the amount on line B from
The Form 1099-INT you received shows in-subject to backup withholding. Report the the amount on line A. This is the
terest income of $992.00. However, since theamount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, on amount of interest accrued on the
interest on your savings bonds was reportedForm 1040A, line 39, or on Form 1040, line 64. bond since it was distributed by the
yearly, you need only include the $29.20 interestplan .....................Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment
that accrued from January 2005 to March 2005.expenses you may be able to deduct as an
You received no other taxable interest for D. Enter the amount of interest shownitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
on your Form 1099-INT........2005. You file Form 1040A.ment expenses.
On Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form E. Subtract the amount on line C fromenter your interest income as shown on Form1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be the amount on line D. This is the1099-INT — $992.00. (If you had other taxableable to take a credit for the amount shown in box amount you include in “U.S. Savingsinterest income, you would enter it next and then6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this Bond Interest Previously Reported”enter a subtotal, as described earlier, beforeamount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “Other
going to the next step.) Several lines above linetaxes.” To take the credit, you may have to file Your employer should tell you the value of
2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest PreviouslyForm 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor- each bond on the date it was distributed.
Reported” and enter $962.80 ($992.00 −mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit
$29.20). Subtract $962.80 from $992.00 and Example. You received a distribution of se-for Individuals.
enter $29.20 on line 2. Enter $29.20 on Sched-ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2002
ule 1, line 4, and on Form 1040A, line 8a.Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis- from your company’s profit-sharing plan.
counted obligation for the part of the year you In March 2005, you redeemed a $100 series
Example 2. Your uncle died and left you aowned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID. EE bond that was part of the distribution you
$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bondInclude this amount in your total taxable interest received in 2002. You received $103.68 for the
when it reaches maturity.income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form bond the company bought in May 1992. The
Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $5001099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID), value of the bond at the time of distribution in
of the amount you receive upon redemption isearlier. 2002 was $93.04. (This is the amount you in-
interest income. Your uncle’s executor includedcluded on your 2002 return.) The bank gave youYou must report all taxable OID even if you
in your uncle’s final return $200 of the interesta Form 1099-INT that shows $53.68 interestdo not receive a Form 1099-OID.
that had accrued at the time of your uncle’s(the total interest from the date the bond wasBox 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable
death. You have to include only $300 in yourpurchased to the date of redemption). Since ainterest on the obligation other than OID. Add
income. part of the interest was included in your incomethis amount to the OID shown in box 1 and
The bank where you redeem the bond givesin 2002, you need to include in your 2005 in-include the result in your total taxable income.
you a Form 1099-INT showing interest incomecome only the interest that accrued after theIf you forfeited interest or principal on the
of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INTbond was distributed to you.obligation because of an early withdrawal, the
showing taxable interest income of $300 fromOn Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, includedeductible amount will be shown in box 3. See
your savings account. all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT asPenalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.
You file Form 1040 and you complete well as any other taxable interest income youBox 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain anSchedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list thereceived. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-amount if you were subject to backup withhold-$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on yourtotal of all interest listed on line 1. Below thising. Report the amount from box 4 on FormForms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you putsubtotal enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Pre-1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 39, or ona subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enterviously Reported” and enter the amount figuredForm 1040, line 64. “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-on the worksheet below.Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investmentported” and enter the $200 interest included inexpenses you may be able to deduct as an your uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromitemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest- A. Enter the amount of cash receivedthe subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You thenment expenses. upon redemption of the bond . . . $103.68complete the rest of the form. B. Enter the value of the bond at the
U.S. savings bond interest previously re- time of distribution by the plan . . . 93.04Worksheet for savings bonds distributed
ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for C. Subtract the amount on line B fromfrom a retirement or profit-sharing plan.If
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show the amount on line A. This is theyou cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable
interest you do not have to report. See Form amount of interest accrued on thedistribution from a retirement or profit-sharing
bond since it was distributed by1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest under plan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds,
the plan.................. $10.64U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier. earlier), your interest income does not include
D. Enter the amount of interest shownOn Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, orthe interest accrued before the distribution andon your Form 1099-INT....... $53.68on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,taxed as a distribution from the plan. E. Subtract the amount on line C fromreport all the interest shown on your Form the amount on line D. This is the1099-INT. Then follow these steps. amount you include in “U.S.
Savings Bond Interest Previously1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal
Reported”................ $43.04of all interest listed on line 1.
Subtract $43.04 from the subtotal and enter the2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savings
result on Schedule B, line 2. You then completeBond Interest Previously Reported” and
the rest of the form.enter amounts previously reported or inter-
est accrued before you received the bond. Interest excluded under the Education Sav-
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure
and enter the result on line 2. your interest exclusion when you redeem quali-
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofPenalty on early withdrawal of savings.If
cational expenses during the same year. U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit
For more information on the exclusion andnue Service Center by February 28, 2006 or other deferred interest account before matur-
qualified higher educational expenses, see the (March 31, 2006 if you file Form 1099-INT elec- ity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form
earlier discussion under Education Savings tronically). Give the actual owner of the interest 1099-INT or similar statement given to you by
Bond Program. Copy B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31, the financial institution will show the total
You must show your total interest from quali- 2006. On Form 1099-INT, you should be listed amount of interest in box 1 and will show the
fied savings bonds that you cashed during 2005 as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099-INT for penalty separately in box 2. You must include in
on Form 8815, line 6, and on line 1 of either each other owner and show that person as the income all the interest shown in box 1. You can
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form “Recipient.” However, you do not have to file deduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De-
1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the Form 1099-INT to show payments for your duct the entire penalty even if it is more than
result from line 14 (Form 8815) on Schedule 1 spouse. For more information about the report- your interest income.
(Form 1040A), line 3, or Schedule B (Form ing requirements and the penalties for failure to
1040), line 3. file (or furnish) certain information returns, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,Interest on seller-financed mortgage.If an 5498, and W2-G. Dividends andindividual buys his or her home from you in aSimilar rules apply to OID reported to you assale that you finance, you must report the Other Corporatea nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file abuyer’s name, address, and social security num-Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show theber on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), line 1, or Distributionsproper distributions of the OID.Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1. If you do not,
you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer Dividends are distributions of money, stock, orExample. You and your sister have a jointmay have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does other property paid to you by a corporation. Yousavings account that paid $1,500 interest fornot give you this information. also may receive dividends through a partner-2005. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds inYou must also give your name, address, and ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that isthis account, and you and she have agreed tosocial security number (or employer identifica- taxed as a corporation. However, someshare the yearly interest income in proportion totion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you may amounts you receive that are called dividendsthe amount that each of you has invested. Be-have to pay a $50 penalty. are actually interest income. (See Dividends thatcause your social security number was given to
are actually interest under Taxable Interest —the bank, you received a Form 1099-INT forFrozen deposits.Even if you receive a Form General, earlier.)2005 that includes the interest income earned1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could The most common kinds of distributions are:belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, ornot withdraw at the end of 2005, you must ex-
30% of the total interest of $1,500.clude these amounts from your gross income. • Ordinary dividends,You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT(See Interest income on frozen deposits under • Capital gain distributions, andby January 31, 2006, showing $450 of interestInterest Income, earlier.) Do not include this
income that she earned for 2005. You must alsoincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040. • Nondividend distributions.
send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT,In Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, or Schedule Most distributions are paid in cash (check).along with Form 1096, to the Internal RevenueB (Form 1040), Part I, include the full amount of However, distributions can consist of moreService Center by February 28, 2006 (March 31,interest shown on your Form 1099-INT on line 1. stock, stock rights, other property, or services.2006, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically).Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal of all
Show your own name, address, and social se-interest income. Below this subtotal, enter “Fro- Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Formcurity number as that of the “Payer” on the Formzen Deposits” and show the amount of interest 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show1099-INT. Show your sister’s name, address,that you are excluding. Subtract this amount you the distributions you received from themand social security number in the blocks pro-from the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. during the year. Keep this form with your rec-vided for identification of the “Recipient.”
ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxAccrued interest on bonds.If you received a When you prepare your own federal income
return.Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interesttax return, report the total amount of interest
paid on a bond you bought between interestincome, $1,500, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.payment dates, include the full amount shownPart I, line 1, or Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I,Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youas interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule Bline 1, and identify the name of the bank thatmust still report all of your taxable dividend in-(Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a sub-paid this interest. Show the amount belonging tocome. For example, you may receive distributivetotal of all interest income listed, enter “Accruedyour sister, $450, as a subtraction from a sub-shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-Interest” and the amount of accrued interest thattotal of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Schedulechapter S corporations. These dividends areyou paid to the seller. That amount is taxable toB) and identify this subtraction as a “Nomineereported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)the seller, not you. Subtract that amount fromDistribution.” (Your sister will report the $450 ofand Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).the interest income subtotal. Enter the result oninterest income on her own tax return, if she hasNominees. If someone receives distribu-line 2 and also on Form 1040, line 8a. to file a return, and identify you as the payer oftions as a nominee for you, that person will giveFor more information, see Bonds Sold Be- that amount.) you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-tween Interest Dates, earlier.
tions received on your behalf.Original issue discount (OID) adjustment.IfNominee distributions. If you received a If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includesyou are reporting OID in an amount greater orForm 1099-INT that includes an amount you amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OIDreceived as a nominee for the real owner, report inees under How To Report Dividend Income,or other written statement (such as for a REMICthe full amount shown as interest on the Form later, for more information.regular interest), include the full amount of OID1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule 1 (Formshown on your Form 1099-OID or other state-Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be-ment on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1.ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestlow a subtotal of all interest income listed, enterIf the OID to be reported is less than the amountthat are received by a broker on your behalf“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac-shown on Form 1099-OID, show the OID you domust be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,tually belongs to someone else. Subtract thatnot have to report below a subtotal of the interestMiscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.amount from the interest income subtotal. Enterand OID listed. Identify the amount as “OIDSee also Reporting Substitute Payments underthe result on line 2 and also on line 8a of FormAdjustment” and subtract it from the subtotal. IfShort Sales in chapter 4.1040A or 1040. the OID to be reported is greater than the
File Form 1099-INT with the IRS.If you amount shown on Form 1099-OID, show the Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.If
received interest as a nominee in 2005, you additional OID below the subtotal. Identify the you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest with amount as “OID Adjustment” and add it to the amount (or other incorrect information), you
the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with a subtotal. should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor- if the dividends are due to periods totaling more 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits
rected.” than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are dueof a comprehensive income tax treaty with
to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-the United States that the Treasury De-Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,ing period in the preceding paragraph applies.partment determines is satisfactory for thisexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a purpose and that includes an exchange ofdividend is declared, but before it is paid, theExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares of information program. For a list of thoseowner of record (usually the payee shown on theXYZ Corp. common stock on June 30, 2005. treaties, see Table 1-3.dividend check) must include the dividend inXYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents perincome. 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)share. The ex-dividend date was July 8, 2005.
above, but the stock for which the dividendYour Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsDividends received in January.If a regu-
is paid is readily tradable on an estab-$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxlated investment company (mutual fund) or real
lished securities market in the Unitedestate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi- 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.dend (including any exempt-interest dividend or5,000 shares on August 3, 2005. You held your
capital gain distribution) in October, November,shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the
Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedor December payable to shareholders of record121-day period (from July 1, 2005, through Au-
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-on a date in one of those months but actuallygust 3, 2005). The 121-day period began on
vestment company during its tax year in whichpays the dividend during January of the nextMay 9, 2005 (60 days before the ex-dividend
the dividends are paid or during its previous taxcalendar year, you are considered to have re-date), and ended on September 6, 2005. You
ceived the dividend on December 31. You report year.have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-
the dividend in the year it was declared.cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).days. Dividends paid out of a CFC’s earnings and
Ordinary Dividends profits that were not previously taxed are quali-Example 2. Assume the same facts as infied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualifiedExample 1 except that you bought the stock onOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- foreign corporation and the other requirementsJuly 7, 2005 (the day before the ex-dividendmon type of distribution from a corporation. They in this discussion are met. Certain dividendsare paid out of the earnings and profits of a date), and you sold the stock on September 8,paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-corporation and are ordinary income to you. This2005. You held the stock for 63 days (from July
sive foreign investment company but for sectionmeans they are not capital gains. You can as-8, 2005, through September 8, 2005). The $500
1297(e) of the Internal Revenue Code may besume that any dividend you receive on commonof qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your
treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlessForm 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be-
mation, see Notice 2004-70, which is on pagethe paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-cause you held the stock for 61 days of the
724 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-44 atnary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the121-day period (from July 8, 2005, through Sep-
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-44.pdf.Form 1099-DIV you receive. tember 6, 2005).
Readily tradable stock.Any stock (such asExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofcommon, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anQualified Dividends ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 30, American depositary receipt in respect of that2005. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofstock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) ifQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date wasit is listed on one of the following securitiesthat are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi-July 8, 2005. The ABC Mutual Fund advises youmarkets: the New York Stock Exchange, themum tax rate that applies to net capital gain.that the portion of the dividend eligible to beNASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-They should be shown in box 1b of the Formtreated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents perchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-1099-DIV you receive. share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutualnati Stock Exchange, the Chicago StockQualified dividends are subject to the 15%Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000rate if the regular tax rate that would apply is Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orand qualified dividends of $200. However, you25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would the Pacific Exchange, Inc.sold the 10,000 shares on August 3, 2005. Youapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends arehave no qualified dividends from ABC Mutualsubject to the 5% rate. Table 1-3. Income Tax TreatiesFund because you held the ABC Mutual FundTo qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate,stock for less than 61 days. Income tax treaties that the United Statesall of the following requirements must be met.
Holding period reduced where risk of losshas with the following countries satisfy
1. The dividends must have been paid by ais diminished. When determining whether requirement (2) under Qualified foreign
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- corporation.you met the minimum holding period discussed
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-earlier, you cannot count any day during which
tion later.) you meet any of the following conditions. Australia Ireland Romania
2. The dividends are not of the type listed Austria Israel Russian1. You had an option to sell, were under alater under Dividends that are not qualified Belgium Italy Federationcontractual obligation to sell, or had madedividends. Canada Jamaica Slovak(and not closed) a short sale of substan-
China Japan Republic3. You meet the holding period (discussed tially identical stock or securities.
Cyprus Kazakhstan Slovenianext). 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option toCzech Korea South Africabuy substantially identical stock or securi-Republic Latvia SpainHolding period.You must have held the stock ties. Denmark Lithuania Swedenfor more than 60 days during the 121-day period
Egypt Luxembourg Switzerland3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingthat begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.
Estonia Mexico Thailandone or more other positions in substantiallyThe ex-dividend date is the first date following
similar or related property.the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer Finland Morocco Trinidad and
of a stock will not receive the next dividend France Netherlands TobagoFor information about how to apply conditionpayment. When counting the number of days Germany New Zealand Tunisia(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.you held the stock, include the day you disposed Greece Norway Turkey
of the stock, but not the day you acquired it. See Hungary Pakistan UkraineQualified foreign corporation.A foreign cor-the examples, later. Iceland Philippines Unitedporation is a qualified foreign corporation if itIndia Poland KingdomException for preferred stock.In the case meets any of the following conditions. Indonesia Portugal Venezuelaof preferred stock, you must have held the stock
1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.more than 90 days during the 181-day period
possession.that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dividends that are not qualified dividends. will be shown in box 3. If you do not receive suchMoney Market Funds
a statement, you report the distribution as anThe following dividends are not qualified divi-
Report amounts you receive from money marketordinary dividend.dends. They are not qualified dividends even if
funds as dividend income. Money market fundsthey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.are a type of mutual fund and should not beBasis adjustment.A nondividend distribution
confused with bank money market accounts thatreduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed• Capital gain distributions.
pay interest. until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual This nontaxable portion is also called a return of
savings banks, cooperative banks, credit capital; it is a return of your investment in theCapital Gain Distributionsunions, U.S. building and loan associa- stock of the company. If you buy stock in a
tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,Capital gain distributions (also called capitalcorporation in different lots at different times,
federal savings and loan associations, andgain dividends) are paid to you or credited toand you cannot definitely identify the shares
your account by regulated investment compa-subject to the nondividend distribution, reducesimilar financial institutions. (Report these
nies (commonly called mutual funds) and realthe basis of your earliest purchases first.amounts as interest income.)
estate investment trusts (REITs). They will beWhen the basis of your stock has been re-• Dividends from a corporation that is ashown in box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you duced to zero, report any additional nondividendtax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop-receive from the mutual fund or REIT. distribution that you receive as a capital gain.
erative during the corporation’s tax year inReport capital gain distributions as long-termWhether you report it as a long-term or
which the dividends were paid or duringcapital gains, regardless of how long you ownedshort-term capital gain depends on how long
the corporation’s previous tax year. your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. Seeyou have held the stock. See Holding Period in
Capital gain distributions under How To Report chapter 4.• Dividends paid by a corporation on em-Dividend Income, later in this chapter.ployer securities which are held on the Example. You bought stock in 1993 fordate of record by an employee stock own-Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds$100. In 1996, you received a nondividend dis-ership plan (ESOP) maintained by thatand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs tribution of $80. You did not include this amount
corporation. keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax onin your income, but you reduced the basis of
them. You must treat your share of these gainsyour stock to $20. You received a nondividend• Dividends on any share of stock to theas distributions, even though you did not actu-distribution of $30 in 2005. The first $20 of thisextent that you are obligated (whetherally receive them. However, they are not in-amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportunder a short sale or otherwise) to makecluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they arethe other $10 as a long-term capital gain forrelated payments for positions in substan-reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-2005. You must report as a long-term capitaltially similar or related property. holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capitalgain any nondividend distribution you receive on
Gains. this stock in later years.• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if
Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,you know or have reason to know that the
of the undistributed capital gains is:payments are not qualified dividends. Liquidating Distributions
• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent• Gain from qualified small business stockdating dividends, are distributions you receive
you know or have reason to know the pay- (section 1202 gain, box 1c), or during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
ments are not qualified dividends. poration. These distributions are, at least in part,• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d). one form of a return of capital. They may be paid
For information about these terms, see Capital in one or more installments. You will receiveDividends Used To Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingBuy More Stock you the amount of the liquidating distribution inReport undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofbox 8 or 9.The corporation in which you own stock mayForm 2439) as long-term capital gains on Any liquidating distribution you receive is nothave a dividend reinvestment plan. This planSchedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f).taxable to you until you have recovered theEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Sectionlets you choose to use your dividends to buy basis of your stock. After the basis of your stock1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-(through an agent) more shares of stock in the has been reduced to zero, you must report thetions the part reported to you as unrecapturedcorporation instead of receiving the dividends in liquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whethersection 1250 gain. For any gain on qualifiedcash. If you are a member of this type of plan you report the gain as a long-term or short-termsmall business stock, follow the reporting in-and you use your dividends to buy more stock at capital gain depends on how long you have heldstructions under Section 1202 Exclusion ina price equal to its fair market value, you still the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.chapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 1 ofmust report the dividends as income. the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule Stock acquired at different times.If youIf you are a member of a dividend reinvest-D instructions. acquired stock in the same corporation in more
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceThe tax paid on these gains by the mutualthan one transaction, you own more than one
less than its fair market value, you must reportfund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.block of stock in the corporation. If you receive
as dividend income the fair market value of theYou take credit for this tax by including it ondistributions from the corporation in complete
Form 1040, line 70, and checking box a on thatadditional stock on the dividend payment date. liquidation, you must divide the distribution
line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,among the blocks of stock you own in the follow-You also must report as dividend income anyand keep Copy C for your records. ing proportion: the number of shares in thatservice charge subtracted from your cash divi- block over the total number of shares you own.Basis adjustment. Increase your basis indends before the dividends are used to buy the Divide distributions in partial liquidation amongyour mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byadditional stock. But you may be able to deduct that part of the stock that is redeemed in thethe difference between the gain you report andthe service charge. See Expenses of Producing partial liquidation. After the basis of a block ofthe credit you claim for the tax paid.Income in chapter 3. stock is reduced to zero, you must report the
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you part of any later distribution for that block as a
Nondividend Distributions capital gain.can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a
price less than fair market value. If you chooseA nondividend distribution is a distribution that isDistributions less than basis.If the total
to do this, you must report as dividend incomenot paid out of the earnings and profits of aliquidating distributions you receive are less
the difference between the cash you invest andcorporation. You should receive a Form than the basis of your stock, you may have a
the fair market value of the stock you buy. When1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-capital loss. You can report a capital loss only
figuring this amount, use the fair market value oftion showing you the nondividend distribution.after you have received the final distribution in
the stock on the dividend payment date. On Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distributionliquidation that results in the redemption or can-
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cellation of the stock. Whether you report the after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp- which fractional shares are not issued, but in-
loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss tion premium on the basis of its economic ac- stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given
depends on how long you held the stock. See crual over the period during which the stock to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for
Holding Period in chapter 4. cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issue fractional shares under such a plan is treated as
discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-an amount realized on the sale of the fractional
sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. shares. You must determine your gain or lossDistributions of Stock
The redemption premium is not a construc- and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-and Stock Rights tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, in ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the
the following situations. difference between the cash you receive and theDistributions by a corporation of its own stock basis of the fractional shares sold.are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock1. The stock was issued before October 10,rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re- Example. You own one share of commonbutions by a corporation of rights to acquire thedeemable solely at the option of the is-stock that you bought on January 3, 1997, forcorporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividendssuer), and the redemption premium is $100. The corporation declared a common stockand stock rights are not taxable to you, and you“reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc-dividend of 5% on June 30, 2005. The fair mar-do not report them on your return. tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-ket value of the stock at the time the stock
demption premium that is not “reasonable”Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. dividend was declared was $200. You were paid
is a constructive distribution.) The redemp-Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under
tion premium is reasonable if it is not moreare taxable to you if any of the following apply. a plan described in the above paragraph. You
than 10% of the issue price on stock notfigure your gain or loss as follows:1. You or any other shareholder has the redeemable for 5 years from the issue date
choice to receive cash or other property or is in the nature of a penalty for making aFair market value of old stock.... $200.00
instead of stock or stock rights. premature redemption. Fair market value of stock dividend
(cash received).............. +  10.002. The distribution gives cash or other prop-2. The stock was issued after October 9,Fair market value of old stock anderty to some shareholders and an increase1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-stock dividend............... $210.00in the percentage interest in the able solely at the option of the issuer), andBasis (cost) of old stockcorporation’s assets or earnings and prof-the redemption premium is “de minimis.” after the stock dividendits to other shareholders. The redemption premium is de minimis if it(($200 ÷ $210) × $100)......... $95.24
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of theBasis (cost) of stock dividend3. The distribution is in convertible preferredredemption price multiplied by the number(($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.76stock and has the same result as in (2). of full years from the date of issue to theTotal..................... $100.00
4. The distribution gives preferred stock todate redeemable. Cash received...............  $10.00some common stock shareholders and 3. The stock was issued after October 9,Basis (cost) of stock dividend..... − 4.76common stock to other common stock 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-shareholders. Gain  $5.24fied time or is redeemable at your option,
5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thebut the redemption is unlikely because it isBecause you had held the share of stock fordistribution, however, is not taxable if it issubject to a contingency outside your con-more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendan increase in the conversion ratio of con-trol (not including the possibility of default,was declared, your gain on the stock dividend isvertible preferred stock made solely to takeinsolvency, etc.). a long-term capital gain.into account a stock dividend, stock split,4. The stock was issued after December 19,or similar event that would otherwise result Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-in reducing the conversion right.) clares a stock dividend may issue you a scription of the issuer, but the redemption pre-certificate that entitles you to a fractional share.The term “stock” includes rights to acquiremium is in the nature of a penalty forThe certificate is generally nontaxable when youstock, and the term “shareholder” includes apremature redemption or redemption is notreceive it. If you choose to have the corporationholder of rights or convertible securities. more likely than not to occur. The redemp-sell the certificate for you and give you the pro-If you receive taxable stock dividends ortion will be treated under a “safe harbor” asceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be-stock rights, include their fair market value at thenot more likely than not to occur if all of thetween the proceeds and the part of your basis intime of the distribution in your income. following are true. the corporation’s stock that is allocated to the
Constructive distributions.You must treat certificate.a. You and the issuer are not relatedcertain transactions that increase your propor- However, if you receive a scrip certificateunder the rules discussed in chapter 4tionate interest in the earnings and profits or that you can choose to redeem for cash insteadunder Losses on Sales or Trades ofassets of a corporation as if they were distribu- of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-Property, substituting “20%” for “50%.”tions of stock or stock rights. These constructive ceive it. You must include its fair market value in
b. There are no plans, arrangements, ordistributions are taxable if they have the same income on the date you receive it.
agreements that effectively require orresult as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),
are intended to compel the issuer toor (5) of the above discussion. Other Distributionsredeem the stock.This treatment applies to a change in your
stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, a You may receive any of the following distribu-c. The redemption would not reduce thedifference between your stock’s redemption tions during the year.stock’s yield.price and issue price, a redemption that is not
Exempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interesttreated as a sale or exchange of your stock, and
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-dividends you receive from a regulated invest-any other transaction having a similar effect on
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketment company (mutual fund) are not included inyour interest in the corporation.
value when distributed. If you receive stock oryour taxable income. You will receive a noticePreferred stock redeemable at a premium.stock rights that are not taxable to you, seefrom the mutual fund telling you the amount ofIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptionStocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentthe exempt-interest dividends you received.price higher than its issue price, the differenceProperty in chapter 4 for information on how toExempt-interest dividends are not shown on(the redemption premium) generally is taxablefigure their basis. Form 1099-DIV or Form 1099-INT.as a constructive distribution of additional stock
on the preferred stock. Fractional shares.You may not own enough Information reporting requirement.Al-
For stock issued before October 10, 1990, stock in a corporation to receive a full share of though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
you include the redemption premium in your stock if the corporation declares a stock divi- able, you must show them on your tax return if
income ratably over the period during which the dend. However, with the approval of the share- you have to file a return. This is an information
stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued holders, the corporation may set up a plan in reporting requirement and does not change the
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S Federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nondividend distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2005
exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Do not include in your income patronage line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report
See Reporting tax-exempt interest under How dividends you receive on: qualified dividends on line 9b.
To Report Interest Income, earlier. If you receive capital gain distributions, you
may be able to use Form 1040A or you may1. Property bought for your personal use, orAlternative minimum tax treatment. have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-Exempt-interest dividends paid from specified2. Capital assets or depreciable propertybutions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-private activity bonds may be subject to thebought for use in your business. But youbutions required to be reported as capital gains,alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and itsmust reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsyou must use Form 1040. You cannot use Forminstructions for more information. bought. If the dividend is more than the1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-Dividends on insurance policies.Insurance port the excess as income. Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses
you received $10 or more in dividends and otherto pay your premiums are not taxable. However,These rules are the same whether the coop-
distributions, you should receive a Formyou must report as taxable interest income theerative paying the dividend is a taxable or
1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Forminterest that is paid or credited on dividends lefttax-exempt cooperative.
1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxablewith the insurance company.
dividend income. If dividends on an insurance contract (otherAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not See Form 1099-DIV for more information onthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-how to report dividend income.uted to you, they are a partial return of theport these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Formpremiums you paid. Do not include them in your Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 11040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3.gross income until they are more than the total of (Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Formall net premiums you paid for the contract. (For 1040A, if:information on the treatment of a distribution
from a modified endowment contract, see Distri- 1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
bution Before Annuity Starting Date From aHow To Report box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
Nonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-
2. You received, as a nominee, dividendsDividend Incomeodic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and
that actually belong to someone else.Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-
tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, lineTerms you may need to know List on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount
16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. (see Glossary): of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-
ceived a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage firm,Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi-
list the brokerage firm as the payer.dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-Nominee Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedcies are not taxable. In addition, interest on
Restricted stock on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as adividends left with the Department of Veterans
nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter thisAffairs is not taxable.
total on Form 1040A, line 9a.
Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
dividends you receive in money from a coopera- Form 1040A to report your dividend income.Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Part
tive organization are included in your income. Report the total of your ordinary dividends on II, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Do not include any been reduced to zero, you must show this
1. Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,of the following on line 9b. amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you held
box 1a) are more than $1,500, or the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D,• Qualified dividends you received as aPart II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than2. You received, as a nominee, dividends nominee. See Nominees later. 1 year. Enter “Nondividend Distribution Exceed-that actually belong to someone else.
• Dividends on stock for which you did noting Basis” in column (a) of Schedule D and theIf your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,meet the holding period. See Holding pe- name of the company. Report your gain in col-you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.riod, earlier under Qualified Dividends. umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu-
List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each tion that is more than your basis in the stock.• Dividends on any share of stock to thepayer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-extent that you are obligated (whetherdends you received. If your securities are held Nominees. If you received ordinary dividendsunder a short sale or otherwise) to makeby a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list the as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in yourrelated payments for positions in substan-name of the brokerage firm that is shown on name but actually belong to someone else),tially similar or related property.Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (Formheld by a nominee who is the owner of record,• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Severaland the nominee credited or paid you dividendsyou know or have reason to know that thelines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividendon the stock, show the name of the nominee andpayments are not qualified dividends.income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, enterthe dividends you received or for which you were “Nominee Distribution” and show the amount• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxcredited. received as a nominee. Subtract the total of your1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentEnter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enteryou know or have reason to know the pay-on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a ments are not qualified dividends. the result on line 6.nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS.If youtotal on Form 1040, line 9a. If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-received dividends as a nominee in 2005, youure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-Dividends received on restricted stock.Re- must file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividendsdends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in thestricted stock is stock that you get from your with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with aForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-employer for services you perform and that is Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-tions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedof forfeiture. You do not have to include the nue Service Center by February 28, 2006. Givedividends on line 2 of the worksheet.value of the stock in your income when you the actual owner of the dividends Copy B of the
Investment interest deducted.If you claimreceive it. However, if you get dividends on re- Form 1099-DIV by January 31, 2006. On Form
a deduction for investment interest, you maystricted stock, you must include them in your 1099-DIV, you should be listed as the “Payer.”
have to reduce the amount of your qualifiedincome as wages, not dividends. See Restricted The other owner should be listed as the “Recipi-
dividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% taxProperty in Publication 525 for information on ent.” You do not, however, have to file a Form
rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-restricted stock dividends. 1099-DIV to show payments for your spouse.
dends you choose to include in investment in-Your employer should include these divi- For more information about the reporting re-
come when figuring the limit on your investmentdends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If quirements and the penalties for failure to file (or
interest deduction. This is done on the Qualifiedyou also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi- furnish) certain information returns, see theDividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet ordends, list them on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-line 5, or Schedule B (Form 1040), line 5, with 5498, and W-2G.mation about the limit on investment interest,the other dividends you received. Enter a sub-
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.total of all your dividend income several lines Liquidating distributions.If you receive a
above line 6. Below the subtotal, enter “Divi- liquidating distribution on stock, the corporationCapital gain distributions.How to reportdends on restricted stock reported as wages on will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing thecapital gain distributions depends on whetherForm 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,” and enter amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8you have any other capital gains or losses. If youthe amount of the dividends included in your and 9.do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2awages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040),Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enterPart II, line 13. If you do not have any otherthe result on line 6. capital gains or losses, you may be able to
report your capital gain distributions directly onElection. You can choose to include the Stripped
Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. Invalue of restricted stock in gross income as pay
either case, see Reporting Capital Gains andfor services. If you make this choice, report the Preferred Stock
Losses in chapter 4 for more information.dividends on the stock like any other dividends.
The mutual fund or real estate investmentList them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule 1 or  If the dividend rights are stripped from certain
trust (REIT) making the distribution should tellSchedule B, along with your other dividends (if preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-
you how much of it is:the amount of ordinary dividends received from ferred stock may have to include amounts in
all sources is more than $1,500). If you receive income equal to the amounts that would have• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing been included if the stock were a bond withorthese dividends, do not include the dividends in original issue discount (OID).
• Section 1202 gain (box 2c).your wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or
Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your Form Stripped preferred stock defined.StrippedFor information about these terms, see Capital1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amount preferred stock is any stock that meets both ofGain Tax Rates in chapter 4.shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form the following tests.Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section1040A is different from the amount shown on
1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-your Form W-2. 1. There has been a separation in ownership
tions the part reported to you as unrecapturedbetween the stock and any dividend on theIndependent contractor.If you received section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualifiedstock that has not become payable.restricted stock for services as an independentsmall business stock (section 1202 gain), followcontractor, the rules in the previous discussion 2. The stock:the reporting instructions under Section 1202apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youExclusion in chapter 4. a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends,receive on the stock as income from self-em-
Nondividend distributions.Report nondivi-ployment. b. Does not participate in corporate growthdend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) to any significant extent, andQualified dividends.Report qualified divi- only after your basis in the stock has been re-
c. Has a fixed redemption price.dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of duced to zero. After the basis of your stock has
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Treatment of buyer.If you buy stripped pre- ceive a specified principal amount (or other simi- 1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on the
ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in- lar amount). additional written statement.
clude certain amounts in your gross income A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt You may be able to take a deduction for
while you hold the stock. These amounts are instrument for income tax purposes. Accord- these expenses subject to a 2% limit that also
ordinary income. They are equal to the amounts ingly, the OID, market discount, and income applies to certain other miscellaneous itemized
you would have included in gross income if the reporting rules that apply to bonds and other deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.
stock were a bond that: debt instruments as described earlier in this Redemption of regular interests at maturity.publication under Discount on Debt InstrumentsRedemption of debt instruments at their maturity1. Was issued on the purchase date of theapply, with certain modifications discussed be-is treated as a sale or exchange. You muststock, and low. report redemptions on your tax return whether orGenerally, you report your income from a2. Has OID equal to: not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.regular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For moreYour basis is your adjusted issue price, whicha. The redemption price for the stock, mi-information on how to report interest and OID,includes any OID you previously reported innus see How To Report Interest Income, earlier. income.
b. The price at which you bought the Any amount that you receive on the retire-Holders must use accrual method.Holdersstock. ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameof regular interests must use an accrual method
way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-of accounting to report OID and interest income.Report these amounts as other income on ment. A debt instrument is retired when it isBecause income under an accrual method is notForm 1040, line 21. For information about OID, reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-determined by the receipt of cash, you may havesee Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. celed.to include OID or interest income in your taxableThis treatment also applies to you if youincome even if you have not received any cashSale or exchange of a regular interest.acquire the stock in such a way (for example, bypayments. Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of agift) that your basis in the stock is determined by REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.using a buyer’s basis. Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should The ordinary income part, if any, is:receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or FormTreatment of person stripping stock.If you
• The amount that would have been in-1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receivestrip the rights to one or more dividends from cluded in your income if the yield to matur-a written statement by March 15, 2006 (if youstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- ity on the regular interest had been 110%are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesing purchased the stock. You are treated as of the applicable federal rate at the begin-additional information. The statement shouldmaking the purchase on the date you disposed ning of your holding period, minuscontain enough information to enable you toof the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in thefigure your accrual of market discount or amor-• The amount you included in your income.stripped preferred stock is treated as yourtizable bond premium.purchase price. The rules described in Treat- Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interestment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. Residual Interestincome that accrued to you for the period you
held the regular interest. A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC thatForm 1099-OID shows the amount of OID is not a regular interest. It is designated as aand interest, if any, that accrued to you for theresidual interest by the REMIC.REMICs, FASITs, period you held the regular interest. You will notIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,need to make any adjustments to the amountsyou must take into account, on a quarterly basis,and Other CDOs reported even if you held the regular interest foryour daily portion of the taxable income or netonly a part of the calendar year. However, if youHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in- loss of the REMIC for each day during the taxbought the regular interest at a premium or ac-vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset year that you hold the residual interest. Youquisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and must report these amounts as ordinary incomeForm 1099-OID under Original Issue Discountother collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) or loss.(OID), earlier.must follow special rules for reporting income Basis in the residual interest.Your basis inand any expenses from these investment prod-You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora- the residual interest is increased by the amountucts. tions and other persons specified in Regulationsof taxable income you take into account. Your
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.basis is decreased (but not below zero) by theREMICs These persons and fiscal year taxpayers mayamount of cash or the fair market value of any
obtain tax information by contacting the REMICproperty distributed to you, and by the amount ofA real estate mortgage investment conduitor the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-any net loss you have taken into account. If you(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-est directly from the REMIC or issuer of thesell your residual interest, you must adjust yourpose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se-CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgagebasis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s tax-cured by interests in real property. A REMICInvestment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-able income or net loss immediately before theissues regular and residual interests to inves-mation, explains how to request this information.sale. See Wash Sales, in chapter 4, for moretors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally information about selling a residual interest.Publication 938 is available only ontreated as a partnership with the residual inter-
the Internet at www.irs.gov.est holders treated as the partners. The regular Treatment of distributions.You must in-
interests are treated as debt instruments. clude in your gross income the part of any distri-
If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughREMIC income or loss is not income or loss bution that is more than your adjusted basis.
a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-from a passive activity. Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or
quest the information from the nominee.For more information about the qualifications exchange of your residual interest.
and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and
Allocated investment expenses.Regular in- Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residualthe interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-
terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Formtions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve-
deduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, but 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestnue Code, and the regulations under those
only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Losssections.
single-class REMIC is one that generally would Allocation, and instructions from the REMIC
be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your
not elected REMIC status. share of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable income
Regular Interest
The single-class REMIC will report your (or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your
A REMIC can have several classes (also known share of its investment expenses in box 5 of tax return. Keep it for your records.
as “tranches”) of regular interests. A regular Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. It Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to
interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- will also include this amount in box 1 of Form report your total share of the REMIC’s taxable
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income (or loss) for each quarter included in1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID), Limit on losses and deductions.The de-
your tax year. earlier. duction for your share of losses and deductions
For more information about reporting your shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limitedIf you did not receive a Form 1099, see You
income (or loss) from a residual interest in a to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debtmay not get a Form 1099 under REMICs , earlier.
REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions. not allowed because of this limit is carried overFASITs and treated as a loss or deduction in the next tax
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- year.A financial asset securitization investment trustgross-income limit, you may be able to claim a(FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-Passive activity losses.Rules apply thatmiscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-tions such as credit card receivables, home eq-limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofdinary and necessary expenses that you paid oruity loans, and automobile loans. Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain theincurred in connection with your investment in aA regular interest in a FASIT is treated as alimits and tell you where on your return to reportREMIC. These expenses may include certaindebt instrument. The rules described under Col- your share of S corporation items from passiveexpense items incurred by the REMIC and lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-activities.passed through to you. The REMIC will reportply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that athese expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. Form 8582. If you have a passive activityholder of a regular interest in a FASIT must useSee chapter 3 for information on how to report loss from an S corporation, you must completean accrual method of accounting to report OIDthese expenses. Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, toand interest income.
figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterFor more information about FASITs, seeCollateralized Debt on your return. See Publication 925 for moresections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
information.Obligations (CDOs) enue Code.
Beginning January 1, 2005, the spe-A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt
cial rules for FASITs are repealed.instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest,
However, the special rules still applythat is secured by a pool of mortgages or otherCAUTION
!
Investment Clubsto any FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004,evidence of debt and that has principal pay-
to the extent that regular interests issued by thements that are subject to acceleration. (Note: An investment club is formed when a group ofFASIT before that date continue to remain out-While REMIC regular interests are collateralized friends, neighbors, business associates, orstanding in accordance with the original terms ofdebt obligations, they have unique rules that do others pool their money to invest in stock orissuance.not apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, other securities. The club may or may not have aalso known as “pay-through bonds,” are com- written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.monly divided into different classes (also called Usually the group operates informally with“tranches”).
members pledging to pay a regular amount intoCDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-S Corporations the club monthly. Some clubs have a committeegages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or
that gathers information on securities, selectscredit card receivables. In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxthe most promising securities, and recommendsFor more information about the qualificationson its income. Instead, its income and expensesthat the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateand the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of aare passed through to the shareholders, whothese responsibilities among all their members.CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalthen report these items on their own income taxMost clubs require all members to vote for orRevenue Code and the regulations under thatreturns. against all investments, sales, trades, and othersection. If you are an S corporation shareholder, yourtransactions.The OID, market discount, and income-re-share of the corporation’s current year incomeporting rules that apply to bonds and other debtor loss and other tax items are taxed to youIdentifying number.Each club must have aninstruments, as described earlier in this chapterwhether or not you receive any amount. Gener-employer identification number (EIN) to useunder Discount on Debt Instruments, also applyally, those items increase or decrease the basisto a CDO. when filing its return. The club’s EIN also mayof your S corporation stock as appropriate. ForYou must include interest income from your have to be given to the payer of dividends ormore information on basis adjustments for SCDO in your gross income under your regular other income from investments recorded in thecorporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds undermethod of accounting. Also include any OID club’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get FormBasis of Investment Property in chapter 4.accrued on your CDO during the tax year. SS-4, Application for Employer IdentificationGenerally, S corporation distributions, ex-Generally, you report your income from a Number, from the Internal Revenue Service orcept dividend distributions, are considered a re-CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa- your nearest Social Security Administration of-turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stocktion about reporting these amounts on your re- fice. See chapter 5 of this publication for moreof the corporation. The part of any distributionturn, see How To Report Interest Income, information about how to get this form.that is more than your basis is treated as a gainearlier. Investments in name of member. Whenfrom the sale or exchange of property. The
an investment is recorded in the name of onecorporation’s distributions may be in the form ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should
club member, this member must give his or hercash or property.receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form
social security number (SSN) to the payer ofS corporation distributions are not treated as1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-
investment income. (When an investment isdividends except in certain cases in which thement by March 15, 2006, that provides addi-
held in the names of two or more club members,corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-tional information. The statement should contain
the SSN of only one member must be given toits from years before it became an S corporation.enough information about the CDO to enable
the payer.) This member is considered as theyou to figure your accrual of market discount or
Reporting S corporation income, deduc- record owner for the actual owner, the invest-amortizable bond premium.
tions, and credits.The S corporation shouldment club. This member is a “nominee” andForm 1099-INT shows the amount of interest
send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)must file an information return with the IRS. Forincome paid to you for the period you held the
showing your share of the S corporation’s in-example, the nominee member must file FormCDO.
come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the clubForm 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
You must report your distributive share of the Sas the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN,accrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to
corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, orand the EIN of the club.you for the period you held the CDO. You should
credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofnot need to make any adjustments to the
your Form 1040.amounts reported even if you held the CDO for Tax Treatment of the Club
only a part of the calendar year. However, if you For more information about your treatment of
Generally, an investment club is treated as abought the CDO at a premium or acquisition S corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-
partnership for federal tax purposes unless itpremium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
chooses otherwise. In some situations, how- K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part- 1120-A). In that case, you do not report any of its
ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. nerships. income or expenses on your individual return.
All ordinary income and expenses and capitalClubs formed before 1997.Before 1997, the Passive activity losses.Rules apply that
gains and losses must be reported on the Formrules for determining how an investment club islimit losses from passive activities. Your copy of
1120 (or Form 1120-A). Any distribution the clubtreated were different from those explained inSchedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions
makes that qualifies as a dividend must be re-the following discussions. An investment clubwill tell you where on your return to report your
that existed before 1997 is treated for later yearsshare of partnership items from passive activi-ported on Form 1099-DIV if total distributions to
the same way it was treated before 1997, unlessties. If you have a passive activity loss from athe shareholder are $10 or more for the year.
it chooses to be treated a different way under thepartnership, you must complete Form 8582 toYou must report any distributions that younew rules. To make that choice, the club mustfigure the amount of the allowable loss to enterreceive from the club on your individual return.file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.on your tax return. You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIV
from the club showing the distributions you re-No social security coverage for investment
ceived.club earnings. If an investment clubClub as a Partnership
partnership’s activities are limited to investing inSome corporations can choose not to beIf your club is not taxed as a corporation or asavings certificates, stock, or securities, and col-taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-trust, it will be treated as a partnership.lecting interest or dividends for its members’ers. See S Corporations, earlier.accounts, a member’s share of income is notFiling requirement.If your investment club is For more information about corporations,earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065. see Publication 542, Corporations.untarily pay the self-employment tax to increaseHowever, as a partner in the club, you must
your social security coverage and ultimate bene-report on your individual return your share of the
fits.club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, and Club as a Trustcredits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year gener-
ally must be the same tax year as that of the In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as aClub as a Corporationpartners owning a majority interest.) You must trust. In general, a trust is an arrangement
report these items whether or not you actually through which trustees take title to property forAn investment club formed after 1996 is taxedreceive any distribution from the partnership.as a corporation if: the purpose of protecting or conserving it for the
Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy of beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied in
1. It is formed under a federal or state lawSchedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share of chancery or probate courts. An arrangement isthat refers to it as incorporated or as aIncome, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purposecorporation, body corporate, or body poli-nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1 is to vest in trustees responsibility for protectingtic,are your share of the partnership’s income, de- and conserving property for beneficiaries whoductions, and credits. Report each amount on2. It is formed under a state law that refers tocannot share in that responsibility and so are notthe appropriate lines and schedules of your in-it as a joint-stock company or joint-stockassociates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofcome tax return. association, or business for profit. If you need more informationThe club’s expenses for producing or collect- about trusts, see Regulations section3. It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.ing income, for managing investment property,
301.7701-4.or for determining any tax are listed separately
on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner whoChoosing to be taxed as a corporation.To
itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)choose to be taxed as a corporation, the clubFiling requirement.If your club is taxed as a
can deduct his or her share of those expenses.cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) ortrust, it must file Form 1041. You should receiveThe expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 22,otherwise subject to special treatment under thea copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from thealong with other miscellaneous deductions sub-tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to maketrust. Report the amounts shown on Scheduleject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for morethe choice. K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofinformation on the 2% limit. your income tax return.For more information about reporting yourFiling requirement.If your club is taxed as a
income from a partnership, see the Schedule corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or Form
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters
2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-
realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses1. Passive activity loss and credit limits.Tax Shelters and in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- The passive activity loss and credit rules
matching of income and deductions, financinglimit the amount of losses and credits that
Other techniques that do not conform to standard com-can be claimed from passive activities and
limit the amount that can offset nonpassivemercial business practices, or the mischaracter-
income, such as certain portfolio incomeization of the substance of the transaction.Reportable from investments. For more detailed infor-Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax-
mation about determining and reporting in-payer generally risks little.
come, losses, and credits from passiveTransactions Abusive tax shelters commonly involve activities, see Publication 925.
package deals that are designed from the start
2. Registration requirements for tax shel-to generate losses, deductions, or credits that
ters. Generally, before October 23, 2004,will be far more than present or future invest-Introduction the organizers of certain tax shelters werement. Or, they may promise investors from therequired to register the shelter with theInvestments that yield tax benefits are some-start that future inflated appraisals will enableIRS. The IRS then assigned the tax sheltertimes called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con-them, for example, to reap charitable contribu-a registration number. If you are an inves-gress has concluded that the loss of revenue istion deductions based on those appraisals. (Buttor in a tax shelter that was required to bean acceptable side effect of special tax provi-see the appraisal requirements discussed underregistered, the seller (or the transferor)sions designed to encourage taxpayers to makeRules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters, later.) must provide you with the tax shelter regis-certain types of investments. In many cases,They are commonly marketed in terms of the tration number at the time of sale (or trans-however, losses from tax shelters produce little fer) or within 20 days after the seller orratio of tax deductions allegedly available toor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are transferor receives the number if that dateeach dollar invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) isexaggerated beyond those intended. Those is later. See Investor Reporting, later, forfrequently said to be several times greater thancases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in- more information about reporting this num-one-to-one.vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- ber when filing your tax return.Because there are many abusive tax shel-ject to restrictions, including the requirement
3. Disclosure of reportable transactions.ters, it is not possible to list all the factors youthat it be registered, as discussed later, unless it
You must disclose information for each re-should consider in determining whether an offer-is a “projected income investment” (defined portable transaction in which you partici-ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, youlater). pate. See Reportable Transactionshould ask the following questions, which mightDisclosure Statement, later.Topics provide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.Material advisors with respect to any re-
This chapter discusses: portable transaction must disclose informa-• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-tion about the transaction on Form 8264nomic benefits?• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, according to the interim guidance provided
• Is this a transaction you would seriouslyin Notice 2004-80, which is on page 963 of• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 and No-consider, apart from the tax benefits, if youshelters, tice 2005-22, which is on page 756 of Inter-hoped to make a profit?
• Investors’ reporting requirements, and nal Revenue Bulletin 2005-12. These• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,notices are available at www.irs.gov/pub/• Penalties that may apply. are they insured for less than their irs-irbs/irb04-50.pdf and at www.irs.gov/
purchase price? pub/irs-irbs/irb05-12.pdf, respectively. This
Useful Items requirement applies to material advisors• Is there a nontax justification for the way
who provide material aid, assistance, or ad-You may want to see: profits and losses are allocated to part-vice on any reportable transaction after Oc-ners? tober 22, 2004.Publication • Do the facts and supporting documents 4. Requirement to maintain list. Materialmake economic sense? In that connec-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods advisors must maintain a list of persons totion, are there sales and resales of the taxwhom they provide material aid, assis-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal shelter property at ever increasing prices?tance, or advice on any reportable transac-Rights, and Claims for Refund
tion after October 22, 2004. Before• Does the investment plan involve a gim-❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersmick, device, or sham to hide the eco-Property who acted as material advisors with re-nomic reality of the transaction?
spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-(including a reportable transaction, dis-
ments after the close of the year? Are youcussed later) were required to maintain aForm (and Instructions)
instructed to backdate checks covering list of persons involved in the tax shelter.
❏ 8271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter The list must be available for inspection byyour investment?
Registration Number the IRS, and the information required to be• Is your debt a real debt or are you assuredincluded on the list generally must be kept❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement by the promoter that you will never have tofor 7 years. See Regulations sectionpay it?❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement 301.6112-1 for more information.
• Does this transaction involve laundering❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure 5. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-
United States source income through for-Statement ality privilege between you and a federally
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-authorized tax practitioner does not apply
ven and owned by United StatesSee chapter 5 for information about getting to written communications made after Oc-
shareholders?these publications and forms. tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your direct or indirect participation in any affected by your participation in the transaction.
1. Master sound recordings, In addition, for the first year Form 8886 is at-tax shelter.
tached to your return, you must send a copy to:2. Motion picture or television films,6. Appraisal requirement for donated prop-
erty. Generally, if you donate property val-3. Videotapes, Internal Revenue Serviceued at more than $5,000 ($10,000 in the LM:PFTG:OTSA4. Lithograph plates,case of privately traded stock), you must get Large & Mid-Size Business Divisiona written qualified appraisal of the property’s5. Copyrights, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NWfair market value and attach an appraisal Washington, DC 202246. Literary, musical, or artistic compositions,summary to your income tax return. The orappraisal must be done by a qualified ap- If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or failpraiser who is not the taxpayer, a party to a7. Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs,to include any required information on the form,transaction in which the taxpayer acquiredantiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins, oryou may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty forthe property, the donee, or an employee oralcoholic beverages). failure to disclose a reportable transaction laterrelated party of any of the preceding per- under Penalties.Tax shelters that qualify as projected incomesons. (Related parties are defined under The following discussion briefly describes re-investments are not subject to the registrationRelated Party Transactions in chapter 4.) portable transactions. For more details, see therequirement for tax shelters, described earlier.For more information about appraisals, see instructions for Form 8886.However, the requirement to maintain a list thatPublication 561. is in effect for tax shelters also applies to anyReportable transaction.Note. The following rule changes apply toprojected income investment. See Requirement A reportable transaction is any of the follow-property donated after June 3, 2004. to maintain list, earlier. ing.A tax shelter that previously qualified as aa. The rule in (6) above does not apply to • A listed transaction.projected income investment may later be dis-donations of inventory, publicly tradedqualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it reducessecurities, or intellectual property. • A confidential transaction.the cumulative tax liability of any investor. In that
b. If the value of the property you donated • A transaction with contractual protection.case, the tax shelter becomes subject to the
(other than inventory, publicly tradedregistration rules for tax shelters, described ear-• Loss transactions.securities, or intellectual property) islier.
• Transactions with a significant book-taxmore than $500,000, you must attach
difference.the qualified appraisal to your tax re-
Authority for Disallowance of Taxturn. • Transactions with a brief asset holding pe-Benefits riod. This category includes transactions7. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed that result in your claiming a tax creditThe IRS has published guidance concluding thatan accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty (including a foreign tax credit) of morethe claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter- than $250,000 if the asset giving rise toshelters should be disallowed. The guidance isest will be imposed on the amount of the the credit was held by you for 45 days orthe conclusion of the IRS on how the law ispenalty from the due date of the return less.applied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is(including any extensions) to the date you
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin forpay the penalty. Listed transaction.A listed transaction is ataxpayers’ information and also for use by IRStransaction that is the same as or substantially8. Accounting method restriction. Tax officials. So, if your return is examined and ansimilar to one of the types of transactions thatshelters generally cannot use the cashabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged,the IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidancemethod of accounting. published guidance dealing with that type oftransaction. These transactions have been iden-shelter, which disallows certain claimed tax9. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform tified in notices, regulations, and other publishedshelter benefits, could serve as the basis for thecapitalization rules generally apply to pro- guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingexamining official’s challenge of the tax benefitsducing property or acquiring it for resale. guidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.that you claimed. In such a case, the examinerUnder those rules, the direct cost and part
will not compromise even if you or your repre-Confidential transaction.A confidentialof the indirect cost of the property must be
sentative believes that you have authority for thetransaction is one that is offered to you undercapitalized or included in inventory. Forpositions taken on your tax return. conditions of confidentiality and for which youmore information, see Publication 538.
have paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-The courts have generally been un-10. Denial of deduction for interest on an tion is offered under conditions of confidentialitysympathetic to taxpayers involved inunderpayment due to a reportable if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onabusive tax shelter schemes andCAUTION
!
transaction. You cannot deduct any inter- the disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc-have ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority ofest you paid or accrued on any part of an ture on you and the limit protects the advisor’sthe cases in which these shelters have beenunderpayment of tax due to an understate- tax strategies. The transaction is treated as con-challenged.ment arising from a reportable transaction fidential even if the conditions of confidentiality
(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect- are not legally binding on you.Investor Reportinging the tax treatment of the item are not
Transaction with contractual protection.adequately disclosed. This rule applies to
You may be required to provide the followingGenerally, a transaction with contractual protec-reportable transactions entered into in tax
information. tion is a transaction in which you or a relatedyears beginning after October 22, 2004.
party has the right to a full or partial refund of
1. Reportable transaction disclosure state-fees if all or part of the intended tax conse-
ment. quences of the transaction are not sustained, or
Projected Income Investment a transaction for which the fees are contingent2. Tax shelter registration number.
on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-Special rules apply to a projected income invest- action.ment. To qualify as a projected income invest-
ment, a tax shelter must not be expected to Loss transactions.For individuals, a lossReportable Transaction Disclosure
reduce the cumulative tax liability of any investor transaction is any transaction that results in aStatement
during any year of the first 5 years ending after deductible loss if the gross amount of the loss is
the date the investment was offered for sale. InUse Form 8886 to disclose information for each at least $2 million in a single tax year or $4
addition, the assets of a projected income in-reportable transaction in which you participated. million in any combination of tax years. A loss
vestment must not include or relate to more thanGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to your from a foreign currency transaction under Inter-
an incidental interest in: return for each year that your tax liability is nal Revenue Code section 988 is a loss transac-
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable TransactionsPage 29

Page 30 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion if the gross amount of the loss is at least mined, you will be faced with payment of more For other than tax shelters, you can file Form
$50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not the tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items that
loss flows through from an S corporation or 20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75% could cause a substantial understatement of in-
partnership. civil fraud penalty. You may also be subject to come tax. In that way, you can avoid the sub-
Certain losses (such as losses from casual- the penalty for failure to pay tax. These penalties stantial understatement penalty if you have a
ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted are explained in the following paragraphs. reasonable basis for your position on the tax
from this category and do not have to be re- issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax
Accuracy-related penalties.An accuracy-ported on Form 8886. For information on other return does not reduce the amount of the under-
related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2003-24 in statement.
derpayments of tax due to:Internal Revenue Bulletin 2003-11. This Internal Also, the understatement penalty will not be
Revenue Bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/ imposed if you can show that there was reason-
1. Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-pub/irs-irbs/irb03-11.pdf. able cause for the underpayment caused by the
tions, understatement and that you acted in good faith.Transactions with a significant book-tax An important factor in establishing reasonable2. Substantial understatement of tax, ordifference.This category includes transac- cause and good faith will be the extent of yourtions that result in book-tax differences of more3. Substantial valuation misstatement. effort to determine your proper tax liability underthan $10 million in any tax year. The book-tax the law.This penalty will not be imposed if you can showdifference is the amount by which the amount of
that you had reasonable cause for any under-any income, gain, expense, or loss item from the Valuation misstatement.In general, you
statement of tax and that you acted in good faith.transaction for federal income tax purposes dif- are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantial
Your failure to disclose a reportable transactionfers on a gross basis from the amount of the item valuation misstatement if all of the following are
is a strong indication that you failed to act infor book purposes for any tax year. true.
good faith.
1. The value or adjusted basis of any prop-If you are charged an accuracy-related pen-
erty claimed on the return is 200% or moreTax Shelter Registration Number alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of
of the correct amount.the penalty from the due date of the return (in-If you include on your tax return any deduction,cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen-2. You underpaid your tax by more thanloss, credit or other tax benefit, or any incomealty. $5,000 because of the misstatement.from an interest in a tax shelter required to be
Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-registered, you must report the registration num- 3. You cannot establish that you had reason-
tions. The penalty for negligence or disregardber that the tax shelter provided to you. (See able cause for the underpayment and that
of rules or regulations is imposed only on theRegistration requirements for tax shelters, ear- you acted in good faith.
part of the underpayment that is due to negli-lier.) Complete and attach Form 8271 to your The 20% penalty does not apply to any un-gence or disregard of rules or regulations. Thereturn to report the number and to provide other derstatement that is subject to the accuracy-re-penalty will not be charged if you can show thatinformation about the tax shelter and its bene- lated penalty for a reportable transactionyou had reasonable cause for understating yourfits. You must also attach Form 8271 to any understatement (discussed later).tax and that you acted in good faith.application for tentative refund (Form 1045) and You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a Negligence includes any failure to make ato any amended return (Form 1040X) on which gross valuation misstatement. If you misstatereasonable attempt to comply with the provi-these benefits are claimed or income is re- the value or the adjusted basis of property bysions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in-ported. 400% or more of the amount determined to becludes any failure to keep adequate books andTransfer of interests in a tax shelter.If you correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%,records. A return position that has a reasonablehold an investment interest in a tax shelter and instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaidbasis is not negligence.later transfer that interest to another person, you because of the gross valuation misstatement.Disregard includes any careless, reckless, ormust provide the tax shelter’s registration num- The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’sintentional disregard of rules or regulations.ber to each person to whom you transferred your correct value or adjusted basis is zero.
The penalty for disregard of rules and regula-interest. (However, this does not apply if your
Penalty for failure to disclose a reportabletions can be avoided if all of the following areinterest is in a projected income investment,
transaction.If you fail to include any requiredtrue.described earlier.) You must also provide a
information regarding a reportable transactionstatement substantially in the following form:• You keep adequate books and records. (discussed earlier) on a return or statement, you
You have acquired an interest in [name and may have to pay a penalty. The amount of the• You have a reasonable basis for your po-address of tax shelter] whose taxpayer penalty is $10,000 if you are an individual, orsition on the tax issue.identification number is [if any]. The Internal
$50,000 if you are not. In the case of a listedRevenue Service has issued [name of tax shelter]• You make an adequate disclosure of yourtransaction, the amount of the penalty isthe following tax shelter registration number: position. $100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000 if[number]. You must report this registration
number to the Internal Revenue Service, if you you are not. This penalty applies whether or not Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and
claim any deduction, loss, credit, or other tax there is an understatement of tax and is in addi-attach it to your tax return. To disclose a positionbenefit or report any income by reason of your tion to any other penalty that may be imposed.contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Alsoinvestment in [name of tax shelter]. You must The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty foruse Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac-report the registration number (as well as the failing to disclose a reportable transaction undertion (discussed earlier).name and taxpayer identification number of [name certain limited circumstances, but cannot re-of tax shelter]) on Form 8271. Form 8271 must beSubstantial understatement of tax.An scind the penalty for failing to disclose a listedattached to the return on which you claim theunderstatement is considered to be substantial iftransaction.deduction, loss, credit, or other tax benefit or
it is more than the greater of:report any income. Issuance of a registration
Accuracy-related penalty for a reportablenumber does not indicate that this investment or
1. 10% of the tax required to be shown on thetransaction understatement.If you have athe claimed tax benefits have been reviewed,
return, or reportable transaction understatement, you mayexamined, or approved by the Internal Revenue
Service. have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of the2. $5,000. amount of that understatement. This applies to
An “understatement” is the amount of tax re-any item due to a listed transaction or otherPenalties
quired to be shown on your return for a tax yearreportable transaction with a significant purpose
minus the amount of tax shown on the return,Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an of avoiding or evading federal income tax. The
reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-expensive proposition when you consider all of penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of
erally means a decrease in the tax shown onthe consequences. First, the promoter generally any reportable transaction understatement if the
your original return as the result of your filing ancharges a substantial fee. If your return is ex- transaction was not properly disclosed. You may
amended return or claim for refund.amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter- not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet the
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
strengthened reasonable cause and good faithJoint return.The fraud penalty on a jointWhether To Invest
exception. return applies to a spouse only if some part of
This penalty does not apply to the part of an In light of the adverse tax consequences and thethe underpayment is due to the fraud of that
understatement on which the fraud penalty or substantial amount of penalties and interest thatspouse.
gross valuation misstatement penalty is im- will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-
posed. lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-Failure to pay tax.If a deficiency is assessed
ments carefully and seek competent legal andand is not paid within 10 days of the demand forCivil fraud penalty.If there is any underpay- financial advice.payment, an investor can be penalized with upment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penalty
to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to payof 75% of the underpayment will be added to
your tax. continues.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable TransactionsPage 31

Page 32 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
tion of your passive activity income or loss:of Producing Income.
1. Expenses (other than interest) that are3. At-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply to clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-most income-producing activities. These ruleslio income, orlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to the
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,2. Interest expense properly allocable to port-Investment this is the amount of cash and the adjusted basisfolio income.
of property you contribute to the activity. It alsoHowever, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityExpenses be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or ifplained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeAdditional information.For more informa-Terms you may need to know
Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income(see Glossary):
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-
tion 925.Passive activity losses and credits.TheAt-risk rules amount of losses and tax credits you can claim
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youPassive activity
are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesPortfolio income only up to the amount of your passive activityInterest Expenses
income. Also, you can use credits from passive
This section discusses interest expenses youactivities only against tax on the income from
Topics may be able to deduct as an investor.passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
For information on business interest, seetain activities, such as rental real estate activi-This chapter discusses:
chapter 5 of Publication 535.ties.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-• Limits on deductions, Passive activity.A passive activity gener-penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Interest expenses, ally is any activity involving the conduct of any terest, as explained in Publication 936, Hometrade or business in which you do not materiallyMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on• Bond premium amortization, participate and any rental activity. However, ifcertain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Expenses of producing income, you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.ity is not a passive activity if both of the following• Nondeductible expenses, and are true. Investment Interest• How to report investment expenses.
1. More than one-half of the personal serv-If you borrow money to buy property you hold forices you perform during the year in allinvestment, the interest you pay is investmentUseful Items trades or businesses are performed in realinterest. You can deduct investment interestYou may want to see: property trades or businesses in which yousubject to the limit discussed later. However,materially participate. you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-Publication
2. You perform more than 750 hours of serv- duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-
❏ 535 Business Expenses come  under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norices during the year in real property trades
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,or businesses in which you materially par-❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.ticipate.
❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and Investment interest does not include anyThe term “trade or business” generally meansDependents qualified home mortgage interest or any interestany activity that involves the conduct of a tradetaken into account in computing income or lossor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Form (and Instructions) from a passive activity.ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-
Investment property.Property held for in-search or experimental expenditures. However,❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
vestment includes property that produces inter-it does not include rental activities or certainDeductions
est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derivedactivities treated as incidental to holding prop-❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Iterty for investment.Deduction also includes property that produces gain or lossYou are considered to materially participate
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade orin an activity if you are involved on a regular,See chapter 5 for information about getting business) from the sale or trade of propertycontinuous, and substantial basis in the opera-these publications and forms. producing these types of income or held fortions of the activity.
investment (other than an interest in a passive
Other income (nonpassive income).Gen- activity). Investment property also includes an
erally, you can use losses from passive activitiesinterest in a trade or business activity in which
only to offset income from passive activities.you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions
You generally cannot use passive activity lossespassive activity).
to offset your other income, such as your wagesYour deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combinecludes gross income from interest, dividends,your share of investment interest from a partner-• The at-risk rules, annuities, or royalties that is not derived in theship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-
• The limit on investment interest, or nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expensepassive activity) producing portfolio income oritemized deductions.
held for investment. This includes capital gainIf you borrow money for business or personal
distributions from mutual funds and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you must
investment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. Only
You cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt used
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment interest. The allocation is not affected by corporation, then the interest on those fundsInterest not deducted due to limit.In the
the use of property that secures the debt. must be allocated based on the assets of theyear you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
entity. If you contribute to the capital of thethe amount of any interest expense you were not
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using anyallowed to deduct in earlier years because of the
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 toreasonable method. limit.
buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt Choosing to deduct disallowed interestAdditional allocation rules.For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- expense before the year of disposition.Youmation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-chapter 5 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible pense in any year before the year you dispose ofpersonal interest. the bond, up to your net interest income from the
bond during the year. The rest of the disallowedWhen To DeductDebt proceeds received in cash.If you re-
interest expense remains deductible in the yearceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds areInvestment Interest
you dispose of the bond.generally not treated as investment property.
If you use the cash method of accounting, youNet interest income.This is the interestDebt proceeds deposited in account.If you must pay the interest before you can deduct it.income (including OID) from the bond that youdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de-If you use an accrual method of accounting,include in income for the year, minus the interestposit is treated as investment property, regard-you can deduct interest over the period it ac-expense paid or accrued during the year toless of whether the account bears interest. But, ifcrues, regardless of when you pay it. For anpurchase or carry the bond.you withdraw the funds and use them for an-exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt tolated party under When To Report Investment
Limit on interest deduction for short-termdetermine the amount considered to be for in-Expenses, later in this chapter.
obligations.If the current income inclusionvestment purposes.
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 3, 2005, payable in 90 days at 12%
amount you can deduct for interest expense youborrowed the money on March 1 and immedi-interest. On December 2, 2005, you paid this
paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry aately bought the stock for $8,000. You did notwith a new note for $1,030, due on March 2,
short-term obligation is limited.buy the household items until June 1. You had2006. If you use the cash method of accounting,
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no The interest is deductible only to the extent ityou cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest
other transactions on the bank account untilon your return for 2005 because you did not is more than:
June. You did not sell the stock and you madeactually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you
1. The amount of acquisition discount or OIDno principal payments on the debt. You paidmay be able to deduct a portion of the interest on
interest from another account. The $8,000 is on the obligation for the tax year, plusthe loans through December 31, 2005, on your
treated as being used for an investment pur-return for 2005. 2. The amount of any interest payable on thepose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an obligation for the year that is not includedInterest paid in advance.Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. in income because of your accountingpay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this method (other than interest taken into ac-beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you count in determining the amount of acqui-the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must sition discount or OID).under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter-
can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to The method of determining acquisition discount
year.personal purposes. and OID for short-term obligations is discussed
in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-Interest on margin accounts.If you are aAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re- gations.cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat Interest not deducted due to limit.In the
investment interest in the year you paid it. Youany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) year you dispose of the obligation, or if you
are considered to have paid interest on thesemade from any account you own, or from cash, choose, in another year in which you have net
accounts only when you actually pay the brokeras made from those proceeds. This applies to interest income from the obligation, you can
or when payment becomes available to the bro-any payment made within 30 days before or deduct the amount of any interest expense you
ker through your account. Payment may be-after the proceeds are received in cash or de- were not allowed to deduct for an earlier year
come available to the broker through yourposited in your account. because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-
account when the broker collects dividends orIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, vided in the earlier discussion under Limit on
interest for your account, or sells securities heldyou can treat the payment as made on the date interest deduction for market discount bonds,
for you or received from you.you received the cash instead of the date you earlier.
You cannot deduct any interest on moneyactually made the payment.
borrowed for personal reasons. Limit on DeductionPayments on debt may require new alloca-
Limit on interest deduction for market dis-tion. As you repay a debt used for more than Generally, your deduction for investment inter-count bonds. The amount you can deduct forone purpose, you must reallocate the balance. est expense is limited to the amount of your netinterest expense you paid or accrued during theYou must first reduce the amount allocated to investment income.year to buy or carry a market discount bond maypersonal purposes by the repayment. You then
You can carry over the amount of investmentbe limited. This limit does not apply if you accruereallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is
interest that you could not deduct because ofthe market discount and include it in your in-for investment purposes.
this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedcome currently.
over is treated as investment interest paid orUnder this limit, the interest is deductibleExample 3. If, in Example 2, you repay
accrued in that next year.only to the extent it is more than:$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is
You can carry over disallowed investmentapplied against the amount allocated to per-
1. The total interest and OID includible ininterest to the next tax year even if it is more thansonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
gross income for the bond for the year,your taxable income in the year the interest wascated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and
plus paid or accrued.$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next
reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ 2. The market discount for the number of
$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense isdays you held the bond during the year.
Net Investment Incomeallocated to investment.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
Determine the amount of your net investmentPass-through entities.If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1
income by subtracting your investment ex-funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.Total investment income........ $10,000penses (other than interest expense) from your
Minus: Investment expenses (otherIf part of the amount you report is your child’sinvestment income.
than interest)................ 3,200Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part
Net investment income......... $6,800does not count as investment income. To figureInvestment income. This generally includes
the amount of your child’s income that you canyour gross income from property held for invest- Deductible investment interestconsider your investment income, start with thement (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and expense for the year........... $6,800amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply thatroyalties). Investment income does not include
amount by a percentage that is equal to theAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does The $2,000 of income from the passive activ-
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided bynot include qualified dividends or net capital gain ity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-
the total amount of interest and dividend incomeunless you choose to include them. ment income. His investment interest deduction
on Form 8814, lines 1a and 2. Subtract the resultfor the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofChoosing to include qualified dividends.from the amount on Form 8814, line 6. his net investment income.Investment income generally does not include
qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1.Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-However, you can choose to include all or part ofable interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-Form 4952your qualified dividends in investment income.manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose
You make this choice by completing Form Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expenseto report this on your return. You enter $4,000 on
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2, and $6,000
ment interest.If you choose to include any amount of youron line 4. You then enter $4,400 on Form 8814,
qualified dividends in investment income, youline 6, and Form 1040, line 21. You figure the
Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2005must reduce your qualified dividends that areamount of your child’s income that you can con-
income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thaneligible for the lower capital gains tax rates bysider your investment income as follows:
qualified dividends) and a net capital gain ofthe same amount.
$4,400 − ($4,400 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) $9,000 from the sale of investment property.Choosing to include net capital gain.In- She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of aYou include this $2,933 on Form 4952, line 4a.vestment income generally does not include net painting given to her by an artist friend. Thecapital gain from disposing of investment prop-Child’s capital gain distributions.If part painting is not a capital asset because Jane’serty (including capital gain distributions from mu-of the amount you report is your child’s capitalbasis in the painting is determined by referencetual funds). However, you can choose to includegain distributions, that part (which is reported onto her friend’s basis in the painting. She incurredall or part of your net capital gain in investmentSchedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)$12,500 of investment interest expense. Herincome. generally does not count as investment income.other investment expenses directly connected
You make this choice by completing FormHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofwith the production of investment income total
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.it in investment income, as explained in Choos- $980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-
If you choose to include any amount of youring to include net capital gain, earlier. ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form
net capital gain in investment income, you mustYour investment income also includes the1040).
reduce your net capital gain that is eligible foramount on Form 8814, line 6 (or, if applicable,For 2005, Jane chooses to include all of her
the lower capital gains tax rates by the samethe reduced amount figured under Child’s net capital gain in investment income. Her total
amount. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-
dends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 fromFor more information about the capital gains
Investment expenses. Investment expenses the sale of the painting). Her net investmentrates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
include all income-producing expenses (otherincome is $12,020 ($13,000 total investmentBefore making either choice, considerthan interest expense) relating to investmentincome − $980 other investment expenses).the overall effect on your tax liability.property that are allowable deductions after ap-Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated, later. HerCompare your tax if you make one or
TIP
plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneousinvestment interest expense deduction is limitedboth of these choices with your tax if you do not.itemized deductions. Use the smaller of: to $12,020, the amount of her net investment
income. The $480 disallowed investment inter-1. The investment expenses included onInvestment income of child reported on est expense is carried forward to 2006.Schedule A (Form 1040), line 22, orparent’s return.Investment income includes
the part of your child’s interest and dividend Exception to use of Form 4952.You do not2. The amount on Schedule A, line 26.income that you choose to report on your return. have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your
See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aIf the child does not have qualified dividends, return if you meet all of the following tests.
discussion of the 2% limit.Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, or capital • Your investment interest expense is notgain distributions, this is the amount on line 6 of more than your investment income fromLosses from passive activities.Income orForm 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s interest and ordinary dividends minus anyexpenses that you used in computing income orInterest and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of qualified dividends.loss from a passive activity are not included inForm 4952. determining your investment income or invest-• You do not have any other deductible in-ment expenses (including investment interestExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest vestment expenses.expense). See Publication 925 for informationincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on • You have no carryover of investment inter-about passive activities.your own return. You enter $2,000 on Form est expense from 2004.8814, lines 1a and 4, and $400 on line 6. AlsoExample. Ted is a partner in a partnershipenter $400 on Form 1040, line 21. Your invest- If you meet all of these tests, you can deductthat operates a business. However, he does notment income includes this $400. all of your investment interest.materially participate in the partnership’s busi-
Child’s qualified dividends.If part of theness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-
amount you report is your child’s qualified divi-ered a passive activity.
dends, that part (which is reported on FormTed’s investment income from interest and
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-dividends (other than qualified dividends) is
vestment income. However, you can choose to$10,000. His investment expenses (other thanBond Premium
include all or part of it in investment income, asinterest) are $3,200 after taking into account the
explained under Choosing to include qualified2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions.Amortization
dividends, earlier. His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted
Your investment income also includes thealso has income from the partnership of $2,000. If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
amount on Form 8814, line 6 (or, if applicable,Ted figures his net investment income and mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
the reduced amount figured next under Child’s the limit on his investment interest expense de- bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends). duction in the following way: amortize the premium. This generally means
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
3,000
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2005 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2004 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2006. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
(99)
2005
that each year, over the life of the bond, you use who would properly include bonds in inventory length over the term of the bond, but each ac-
a part of the premium to reduce the amount of at the close of the tax year) cannot claim acrual period can be no longer than 1 year and
interest includible in your income. If you make deduction for amortizable bond premium.each scheduled payment of principal or interest
this choice, you must reduce your basis in the must occur either on the first or the final day ofSee section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code
bond by the amortization for the year. for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in an accrual period. The computation is simplest if
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, youtax-exempt bonds. accrual periods are the same as the intervals
must amortize the premium. This amortized between interest payment dates.
amount is not deductible in determining taxableHow To Figure Step 3: determine the bond premium forincome. However, each year you must reduceAmortization the accrual period.To do this, multiply youryour basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theotherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) byFor bonds issued after September 27, 1985, youaccrual period by your yield. Then subtract thethe amortization for the year. must amortize bond premium using a constantresult from the qualified stated interest for the
yield method on the basis of the bond’s yield toperiod.Bond premium. Bond premium is the amountmaturity, determined by using the bond’s basisby which your basis in the bond right after you Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-and compounding at the close of each accrualget it is more than the total of all amounts pay- ning of the first accrual period is the same asperiod.able on the bond after you get it (other than your basis. After that, it is your basis decreased
payments of qualified stated interest). For exam- by the amount of bond premium amortized forConstant yield method.Figure the bond pre-ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 earlier periods and the amount of any paymentmium amortization for each accrual period asgenerally would have a $50 premium if you buy it previously made on the bond other than a pay-follows.for $1,050. ment of qualified stated interest.
Step 1: determine your yield.Your yield isBasis. In general, your basis for figuringthe discount rate that, when used in figuring theExample. On February 3, 2004, you boughtbond premium amortization is the same as yourpresent value of all remaining payments to bea taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has abasis for figuring any loss on the sale of themade on the bond (including payments of quali-stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atbond. However, you may need to use a differentfied stated interest), produces an amount equalmaturity on February 3, 2011, making your pre-basis for: to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as ofmium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The
the date you got the bond. It must be constant• Convertible bonds, bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000over the term of the bond and must be figured toon February 3 of each year. Your yield is• Bonds you got in a trade, and at least two decimal places when expressed as8.07439% compounded annually. You choosea percentage.• Bonds whose basis has to be determined to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-
using the basis of the person who trans- If you do not know the yield, consult yourary 3 of each year. To find your bond premium
ferred the bond to you. broker or tax advisor. Databases available to amortization for the accrual period ending on
them are likely to show the yield at the date ofFebruary 3, 2005, you multiply the adjusted ac-See Regulations section 1.171-1(e). purchase. quisition price at the beginning of the period
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract theDealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyoneStep 2: determine the accrual periods.
result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-who holds them mainly for sale to customers in You can choose the accrual periods to use.
est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourthe ordinary course of a trade or business or They may be of any length and may vary in
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bond premium amortization for the period is qualified stated interest for the period, you can A corporation in which you own stock also
$1,118.17. deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This
ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line plan lets you choose to use your dividends toSpecial rules.For special rules that apply27. buy more shares of stock in the corporationto variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, But your deduction is limited to the amount instead of receiving the dividends in cash.and bonds that provide for alternative paymentby which your total interest inclusions on the You can deduct the monthly service chargeschedules or remote or incidental contingen-bond in prior accrual periods is more than your you pay to a bank to participate in an automaticcies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. total bond premium deductions on the bond in investment service. If you participate in a divi-
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any
because of this limit can be carried forward to service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
Bonds Issued Before the next accrual period. dends before the dividends are used to buySeptember 28, 1985 more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in thePre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.year you pay them.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond
mium using any reasonable method. Reasona-premium before 1998, the above treatment ofClerical help and office rent.You can deductble methods include: the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,
quired before 1988. that you pay in connection with your investments1. The straight-line method, and and collecting the taxable income on them.Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.2. The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. The amortization of the premium on these bondsCost of replacing missing securities.To re-
is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-place your taxable securities that are mislaid,Straight-line method.Under this method, theject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postamount of your bond premium amortization is an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumBonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butthe same each month. Divide the number of you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thebefore 1988.The amortization of the premiummonths you held the bond during the year by the related incidental expenses.on these bonds is investment interest expensenumber of months from the beginning of the tax You may, however, get a refund of part of thesubject to the investment interest limit, unlessyear (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the bond premium if the missing securities are re-you choose to treat it as an offset to interestdate of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply covered within a specified time. Under certainincome on the bond.the result by the bond premium (reduced by any types of insurance policies, you can recoverbond premium amortization claimed in earlier some of the expenses.years). This gives you your bond premium amor- If you receive the refund in the tax year youtization for the year. pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Expenses ofRevenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this ence between the expenses paid and the
method, the amount of your bond premium amount refunded. If the refund is made in a laterProducing Income
amortization increases each month over the life tax year, you must include the refund in income
of the bond. This method is explained in Reve- in the year you received it, but only to the extentYou deduct investment expenses (other than
nue Ruling 82-10. that the expenses decreased your tax in the yearinterest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized
you deducted them.deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be
deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryChoosing To Amortize Fees to collect income.You can deduct feesand necessary expenses paid or incurred: you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similarYou choose to amortize the premium on taxable agent to collect investment income, such as1. To produce or collect income, orbonds by reporting the amortization for the year your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or youron your income tax return for the first tax year for2. To manage property held for producing in-dividends on shares of stock.which you want the choice to apply. You shouldcome.attach a statement to your return that you are Fees to buy or sell.You cannot deduct a
The expenses must be directly related to themaking this choice under section 171. See How fee you pay to a broker to acquire investment
income or income-producing property, and theTo Report Amortization, next. property, such as stocks or bonds. You must
income must be taxable to you.This choice is binding for the year you make add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis
The deduction for most income-producingit and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable of Investment Property in chapter 4.
expenses is subject to a 2% limit that also ap-bonds you own in the year you make the choice You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-
plies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedand also to those you acquire in later years. missions, or option premiums you pay (or that
deductions. The amount deductible is limited toYou can change your decision to amortize were netted out) in connection with the sale of
the total of these miscellaneous deductions thatbond premium only with the written approval of investment property. They can be used only to
is more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115, figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting
For information on how to report expenses ofApplication for Change in Accounting Method. Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more
producing income, see How To Report Invest-For more information on requesting approval, information about the treatment of these sale
ment Expenses, later.see section 1C of the Appendix to Revenue expenses.
Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenue BulletinAttorney or accounting fees.You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You can2002-3. You can find this Internal Revenue Bul-duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-deduct fees you pay for counsel and adviceletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-03.pdf. sary to produce or collect taxable income.about investments that produce taxable income.
However, in some cases, attorney or accountingThis includes amounts you pay for investmentHow To Report fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis advisory services.
of Investment Property in chapter 4.Amortization
Safe deposit box rent.You can deduct rentAutomatic investment service and dividendyou pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxSubtract the bond premium amortization fromreinvestment plans. A bank may offer its to store taxable income-producing stocks,your interest income from these bonds. checking account customers an automatic in-bonds, or other investment-related papers andReport the bond’s interest on Schedule Bvestment service so that, for a charge, eachdocuments. If you also use the box to store(Form 1040), line 1. Several lines above line 2,customer can choose to invest a part of thetax-exempt securities or personal items, you canput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.checking account each month in common stock.deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exemptBelow this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” andOr, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent forincome under Nondeductible Expenses, later, tothe amortization amount. Subtract this amounta number of publicly-owned corporations mayfigure what part you can deduct.from the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2.set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv-
Bond premium amortization more than inter-ice. Through that service, cash dividends areState and local transfer taxes.You cannot
est. If the amount of your bond premium amor- reinvested in more shares of stock, after the deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay
tization for an accrual period is more than the bank deducts a service charge. when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transfer taxes when you buy securities, you Include the amount from box 1a of Form each deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-
must treat them as part of the cost of the prop- 1099-DIV in your income. empt income.
erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you One accepted method for dividing expenses
sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- is to do it in the same proportion that each type
tion in the amount realized. of income is to the total income. If the expenses
relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeNondeductibleTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust. the gains, but not the losses, in figuring thisIf you set up a revocable trust and have its proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatExpensesincome distributed to you, you can deduct the is for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-commission you pay the trustee for managing empt income by the total income and multiplySome expenses that you incur as an investorthe trust to the extent it is to produce or collect your expenses by the result.are not deductible.taxable income or to manage property. How-
ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-Stockholders’ meetings.You cannot deduct Example. You received $6,000 interest;sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.tax-exempt income or for managing propertyto attend stockholders’ meetings of companiesIn earning this income, you had $500 of ex-that produces tax-exempt income. in which you have no interest other than owningpenses. You cannot specifically identify theIf you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay thestock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-amount of each expense item that is for eachcommissions for several years in advance, youing is to get information that would be useful inincome item, so you must divide your expenses.must deduct a part of the commission each year.making further investments. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided byYou cannot deduct the entire amount in the year $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for theInvestment-related seminar.You cannot de-you pay it. tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-
(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deductInvestment expenses from pass-through nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because theyentities.If you hold an interest in a partner-Single-premium life insurance, endowment,are for the taxable interest.ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage invest-and annuity contracts.You cannot deductment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered State income taxes.If you itemize your de-interest on money you borrow to buy or carry aregulated investment company (mutual fund), ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-single-premium life insurance, endowment, oryou can deduct your share of that entity’s invest- come taxes on interest income that is exemptannuity contract.ment expenses. A partnership or S corporation from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,will show your share of these expenses on yourUsed as collateral.If you use a single pre-as either taxes or investment expenses, stateSchedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fundmium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orincome taxes on other exempt income.will indicate your share of these expenses in boxcontinue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct
Interest expense and carrying charges on5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state-any interest on the loan that is collateralized by
straddles. You cannot deduct interest andment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis-the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
carrying charges that are allocable to personalcussed later. est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the
ductible interest and carrying charges are addedpenses relating to your residual interest invest-lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used
to the basis of the straddle property. However,ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066),as collateral or the amount of the loan.
this treatment does not apply if:line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regularBorrowing on insurance. Generally, youinterest investment will appear in box 5 of Formcannot deduct interest on money you borrow to1. All the offsetting positions making up the1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, orstraddle either consist of one or more qual-Report your share of these investment ex-annuity contract if you plan to systematicallyified covered call options and the optionedpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject toborrow part or all of the increases in the cashstock or consist of section 1256 contractsthe 2% limit, in the same manner as your othervalue of the contract. This rule applies to the(and the straddle is not part of a largerinvestment expenses. interest on the total amount borrowed to buy orstraddle), or
Including mutual fund or REMIC expensescarry the contract, not just the interest on the2. The straddle is a hedging transaction.in income. Your share of the investment ex-borrowed increases in the cash value.
penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered For information about straddles, including defini-Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-mutual fund, as described above, are consid- tions of the terms used in this discussion, seepenses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-ered to be indirect deductions through that chapter 4.come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneypass-through entity. You must include in your Interest includes any amount you pay or in-you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orgross income an amount equal to the amount of cur in connection with personal property used inshares in a regulated investment company (mu-the expenses allocated to you, whether or not a short sale. However, you must first apply thetual fund) that distributes only exempt-interestyou are able to claim a deduction for those rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsdividends.expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub- under Short Sales in chapter 4.
licly offered mutual fund, you must include on To determine the interest on market discountShort-sale expenses.The rule disallowing
your return the full amount of ordinary dividends bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofa deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
or other distributions of stock, as shown in box a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state- cussed under Limit on interest deduction fornection with personal property used in a short
ment. If you are a residual interest holder in a market discount bonds and Limit on interestsale or amounts paid by others for the use of any
REMIC, you must report as ordinary income on deduction for short-term obligations (both undercollateral in connection with the short sale. How-
Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts Interest Expenses, earlier).ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b andif you deposit cash as collateral for the propertyNondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder,used in the short sale and the cash does notductible amount of interest and carrying chargesyou must include the amount of any expenseearn a material return during the period of theon straddle property as follows.allocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a.sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4.
1. Add:Publicly-offered mutual funds.Publicly-of- Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable
fered mutual funds, generally, are funds that areincome. You may have expenses that are for a. Interest on indebtedness incurred ortraded on an established securities exchange. both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can-continued to buy or carry the personalThese funds do not pass investment expenses not specifically identify what part of the ex-property, andthrough to you. Instead, the dividend income penses is for each type of income, you can
they report to you in box 1a of Form 1099-DIV is divide the expenses, using reasonable propor- b. All other amounts (including charges to
already reduced by your share of investment tions based on facts and circumstances. You insure, store, or transport the personal
expenses. Therefore, you cannot deduct the ex- must attach a statement to your return showing property) paid or incurred to carry the
penses on your return. how you divided the expenses and stating that personal property.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Subtract from the amount in (1): ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales Unpaid expenses owed to related party.If
you use an accrual method, you cannot deductin chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)
a. Interest (including OID) includible in interest and other expenses owed to a relatedAlso attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedgross income for the year on the per- cash-basis person until payment is made andthat form to figure your investment interest ex-sonal property, the amount is includible in the gross income ofpense.
that person. The relationship, for purposes ofb. Any income from the personal propertyEnter the total amount of your other invest-this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxtreated as ordinary income on the dis-ment expenses (other than interest expenses)year for which the interest or expense wouldposition of short-term government obli-on Schedule A, line 22. List the type and amountotherwise be deductible. If a deduction is deniedgations or as ordinary income under theof each expense on the dotted lines next to lineunder this rule, this rule will continue to applymarket discount and short-term bond22. (If necessary, you can show the requiredeven if your relationship with the person ceasesprovisions — see Discount on Debt In-information on an attached statement.) Includeto exist before the amount is includible in thestruments in chapter 1, the total on line 23 with your other miscellaneousgross income of that person.deductions that are subject to the 2% limit.c. The dividends includible in gross in- This rule generally applies to those relation-
come for the year from the personal For information on how to report amortizableships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
property, and bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
tion, earlier in this chapter. nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,d. Any payment on a loan of the personal
shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-property for use in a short sale that is
tions to shareholders.includible in gross income.
The postponement of deductions for unpaid
expenses and interest under the related partyWhen To ReportBasis adjustment. Add the nondeductible rule does not apply to original issue discount
amount to the basis of your straddle property. (OID), regardless of when payment is made.Investment Expenses
This rule also does not apply to loans with
below-market interest rates or to certain pay-If you use the cash method to report income and
ments for the use of property and services whenexpenses, you generally deduct your expenses,
How To Report the lender or recipient has to include paymentsexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the year
periodically in income, even if a payment has notyou pay them.Investment Expenses been made.If you use an accrual method, you generally
deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilityTo deduct your investment expenses, you must
for them, rather than when you pay them.itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
pense on Schedule A, line 13. Include any de-est, earlier in this chapter.
Page 38 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 39 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of stock.A redemption of stockTopics
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theThis chapter discusses:
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
4. demption is a dividend or other distribution on• What a sale or trade is,
stock.• Basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a• Adjusted basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Sales and or other distribution depends on the circum-• Figuring gain or loss,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Nontaxable trades, ownership of stock will be considered. The re-Trades of
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: • Capital gains and losses, and
• How to report your gain or loss.Investment 1. The redemption is not essentially
equivalent to a dividend — see Dividends
and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-Useful ItemsProperty ter 1,You may want to see:
2. There is a substantially disproportionate
Publication redemption of stock,Introduction
3. There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of AssetsThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales stock of the corporation owned by the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsand trades of investment property. shareholder, or
4. The redemption is a distribution in partialForm (and Instructions)Investment property.This is property that
liquidation of a corporation.produces investment income. Examples include❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gainsstocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Property used in a trade or business is not in-
❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirvestment property.
1256 Contracts and Straddles maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.
See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationscounted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a
❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges nary Gain or Loss, later.broker during the year, you should receive, for
In addition, a significant modification of aeach sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro-See chapter 5 for information about gettingbond is treated as a trade of the original bond forker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or anthese publications and forms. a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-equivalent statement from the broker. You
tion 1.1001-3.should receive the statement by January 31 of
the next year. It will show the gross proceeds Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by afrom the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of dominant shareholder who retains control of theWhat Is aForm 1099-B from the broker. corporation is treated as a contribution to capitalUse Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state-Sale or Trade? rather than as an immediate loss deductiblement received from your broker) to complete from taxable income. The surrendering share-Schedule D of Form 1040. For more information,Terms you may need to know holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
see Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting (see Glossary): surrendered shares to the shares he or she
Capital Gains and Losses, later. retains.
Nominees. If someone receives gross pro-Equity option Trade of investment property for an annuity.ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give The transfer of investment property to a corpora-Futures contractyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-ceeds received on your behalf. Marked to market tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract thatIf you receive Form 1099-B that includes will make guaranteed annual payments to youNonequity optiongross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealersee Nominees later under Reporting Capital the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Gains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearRegulated futures contract
of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contractOther property transactions.Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercial
fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi- insurance companies issuing annuities.Short sale
cations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance.The transfer of• Sale of your main home, discussed in This section explains what is a sale or trade. Itproperty of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, also explains certain transactions and eventsistrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publication
gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.A sale is generally a transfer of property for537, Installment Sales,
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-pay money.
business property, discussed in Publica- tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for other
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in the
Assets, than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be• Transfers of property at death, covered in a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as aSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyAdministrators, and or loss.for cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac-replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- This rule does not apply to the retirement of a
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas-rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges debt instrument. See Redemption or retirement
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. under Nontaxable Trades, later. of bonds, earlier.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 39

Page 40 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
principal contract, or a futures or forward 3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-Worthless Securities
scribed in (2).contract).
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other thanYou are also treated as having made a con-Certain trust instruments treated as stock.those held for sale by a securities dealer) thatstructive sale of an appreciated financial posi-For the constructive sale rules, an interest in anbecame worthless during the tax year are tion if a person related to you enters into aactively traded trust is treated as stock unlesstreated as though they were sold on the last daytransaction described above with a view towardsubstantially all of the value of the property heldof the tax year. This affects whether your capitalavoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forby the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-loss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe- this purpose, a related person is any relatedtion to the definition of an appreciated financialriod, later. party described under Related Party Transac-position (explained in (2) above).If you are a cash basis taxpayer and maketions, later in this chapter.payments on a negotiable promissory note that
you issued for stock that became worthless, you Sale of appreciated financial position.AException for nonmarketable securities.
can deduct these payments as losses in the transaction treated as a constructive sale of anA contract for sale of any stock, debt instrument,
years you actually make the payments. Do not appreciated financial position is not treated as aor partnership interest that is not a marketable
deduct them in the year the stock became worth- constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-security is not a constructive sale if it settles
less. cial position, as long as you continue to hold thewithin 1 year of the date you enter into it.
original position. However, if you hold anotherException for certain closed transactions.How to report loss.Report worthless securi- appreciated financial position and dispose of the
Do not treat a transaction as a constructive saleties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, original position before closing the transaction
whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enterif all of the following are true. that resulted in the constructive sale, you are
“Worthless.” Enter the amount of your loss in treated as if, at the same time, you construc-1. You closed the transaction before the endparentheses in column (f). tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-of the 30th day after the end of your taxtion.Filing a claim for refund.If you do not claim a year.
loss for a worthless security on your original
2. You held the appreciated financial positionSection 1256 Contractsreturn for the year it becomes worthless, you can
throughout the 60-day period beginning onfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. Marked to Market
the date you closed the transaction.You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end ofvidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at anythe tax year, you generally must treat it as soldfor the year the security became worthless. Youtime during that 60-day period by holdingat its fair market value on the last business daymust file it within 7 years from the date yourcertain other positions. of the tax year.original return for that year had to be filed, or 2
If a closed transaction is reestablished in ayears from the date you paid the tax, whichever
substantially similar position during the 60-dayis later. (Claims not due to worthless securities
Section 1256 Contractperiod beginning on the date the first transactionor bad debts generally must be filed within 3
was closed, this exception still applies if theyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years A section 1256 contract is any:from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) reestablished position is closed before the 30th
For more information about filing a claim, seeday after the end of your tax year in which the1. Regulated futures contract,Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap-first transaction was closed and, after that clos-
peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. 2. Foreign currency contract,ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
This exception also applies to successive3. Nonequity option,
Constructive Sales short sales of an entire appreciated financial
4. Dealer equity option, orposition. For more information, see Revenueof Appreciated
Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue Bulletin5. Dealer securities futures contract.Financial Positions 2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/
pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf.You are treated as having made a constructive Regulated futures contract.This is a con-sale when you enter into certain transactions tract that: Appreciated financial position.This is anyinvolving an appreciated financial position (de-
interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or 1. Provides that amounts that must be depos-instrument (including a futures or forward con-certain debt instruments. You must recognize ited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourtract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofgain as if the position were disposed of at its fair margin account depend on daily marketmarket value on the date of the constructivethe interest would result in a gain. conditions (a system of marking to mar-sale. This gives you a new holding period for the ket), andExceptions. An appreciated financial posi-position that begins on the date of the construc-tion does not include the following. 2. Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, ative sale. Then, when you close the transaction,
qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedyou reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by1. Any position from which all of the apprecia-board of exchange is a domestic board ofthe gain recognized on the constructive sale.tion is accounted for under marked to mar-trade designated as a contract market byket rules, including section 1256 contractsConstructive sale.You are treated as having the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-(described later under Section 1256 Con-made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-tracts Marked to Market).nancial position if you: proved by the Secretary of the Treasury, or
a national securities exchange registered2. Any position in a debt instrument if:1. Enter into a short sale of the same or sub- with the Securities and Exchange Commis-stantially identical property, a. The position unconditionally entitles thesion.
holder to receive a specified principal2. Enter into an offsetting notional principal
amount,contract relating to the same or substan- Foreign currency contract.This is a contracttially identical property, b. The interest payments (or other similarthat:
amounts) with respect to the position3. Enter into a futures or forward contract to
are payable at a fixed rate or a variable1. Requires delivery of a foreign currency thatdeliver the same or substantially identical
rate described in Regulations section has positions traded through regulated fu-property (including a forward contract that
1.860G-1(a)(3), and tures contracts (or settlement of which de-provides for cash settlement), or
pends on the value of that type of foreignc. The position is not convertible, either4. Acquire the same or substantially identical currency),directly or indirectly, into stock of theproperty (if the appreciated financial posi-
issuer (or any related person). 2. Is traded in the interbank market, andtion is a short sale, an offsetting notional
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Is entered into at arm’s length at a price The loss carried back to any year under this
1. Is entered into by the dealer (or, in thedetermined by reference to the price in the election cannot be more than the net section
case of an option, is purchased or grantedinterbank market. 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, the
by the dealer) in the normal course of theamount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearBank forward contracts with maturity datesdealer’s activity of dealing in this type ofcannot increase or produce a net operating lossthat are longer than the maturities ordinarilycontract (or option), and for that year.available for regulated futures contracts are con- The loss is carried to the earliest carryback2. Is traded on a qualified board or exchangesidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur- year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can(as defined under Regulated futures con-rency contract if the above three conditions are then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. Intract, earlier.)satisfied. each carryback year, treat 60% of the carrybackSpecial rules apply to certain foreign cur-A securities futures contract that is not a dealeramount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as arency transactions. These transactions may re-securities futures contract is treated as de-short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. Forscribed later under Securities Futures Con-tracts.details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988tracts. If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and
tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,1.988-3.
the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,Marked to Market RulesNonequity option. This is any listed option under the capital loss carryover rules, to the year
(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- following the loss. (See Capital Losses underA section 1256 contract that you hold at the end
quity options include debt options, commodity Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at
futures options, currency options, and ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossits fair market value on the last business day of
broad-based stock index options. A year, you had an additional short-term capitalthe tax year, and you must recognize any gain or
broad-based stock index is based upon the gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into
value of a group of diversified stocks or securi- contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsaccount in figuring your gain or loss when you
ties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in- and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%later dispose of the contract, as shown in the
dex). of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatexample under 60/40 rule, below.
Warrants based on a stock index that are any capital loss carryover from losses on section
economically, substantially identical in all mate-Hedging exception. The marked to market 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from section
rial respects to options based on a stock indexrules do not apply to hedging transactions. See1256 contracts for that year.
are treated as options based on a stock index.Hedging Transactions, later. Net section 1256 contracts loss.This loss
Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op- is the lesser of:60/40 rule.Under the marked to market sys-tions based on a stock index and either tradedtem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be1. The net capital loss for your tax year deter-on or subject to the rules of a qualified board oftreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andmined by taking into account only theexchange are nonequity options if the Securities40% will be treated as a short-term capital gaingains and losses from section 1256 con-and Exchange Commission (SEC) determines or loss. This is true regardless of how long youtracts, orthat the stock index is broad based. actually held the property.This rule does not apply to options estab- 2. The capital loss carryover to the next taxlished before the SEC determines that the stockExample. On June 23, 2004, you bought a year determined without this election.index is broad based. regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
cember 31, 2004 (the last business day of yourNet section 1256 contracts gain.This gainListed option.This is any option that is
tax year), the fair market value of the contractis the lesser of:traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under
1. The capital gain net income for the car-your 2004 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract). A listed option,
ryback year determined by taking into ac-and 40% short-term capital gain.however, does not include an option that is a
count only gains and losses from sectionOn February 2, 2005, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer.
1256 contracts, orfor $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
Dealer equity option.This is any listed optiongain on your 2004 return, you recognize a 2. The capital gain net income for that year.that, for an options dealer: $1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2005
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain fortax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%1. Is an equity option, any carryback year without regard to the netshort-term capital loss.
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or2. Is bought or granted by that dealer in theLimited partners or entrepreneurs.The any later tax year.normal course of the dealer’s business ac-60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts thatTraders in section 1256 contracts.Gain orresult in capital gain or loss allocable to limited3. Is listed on the qualified board of exchange loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts ispartners or limited entrepreneurs (defined laterwhere that dealer is registered. capital gain or loss subject to the marked tounder Hedging Transactions). Instead, thesemarket rules. However, this does not apply toAn “options dealer” is any person registeredgains or losses are treated as short term.contracts held for purposes of hedging propertywith an appropriate national securities ex-
if any loss from the property would be an ordi-change as a market maker or specialist in listedTerminations and transfers.The marked to nary loss.options. market rules also apply if your obligation or
rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-Treatment of underlying property.TheEquity option.This is any option: nated or transferred during the tax year. In thisdetermination of whether an individual’s gain or
case, use the fair market value of each sectionloss from any property is ordinary or capital gain1. To buy or sell stock, or
1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-or loss is made without regard to the fact that the
2. That is valued directly or indirectly by refer-fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orindividual is actively engaged in dealing in or
ence to any stock or narrow-based securitytransfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-trading section 1256 contracts related to that
index. ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-property.
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.Equity options include options on a group of
stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stockLoss carryback election.An individual hav-How To Reportindex. ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (defined
Dealer securities futures contract.For later) for 2005 can elect to carry this loss back 3 If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign
any dealer in securities futures contracts or op- years, instead of carrying it over to the next year. currency contracts in 2005 (or had unrealized
tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu- See How To Report, later, for information about profit or loss on these contracts that were open
tures contract (or option on such a contract) that: reporting this election on your return. at the end of 2004 or 2005), you should receive
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 41

Page 42 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from ing transaction (determined without regard toCost Basis
your broker. the limit) are more than the income received or
accrued during the tax year from this transac-The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gainstion. The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and obligations, or other property or services.Any hedging loss that is allocated to you forStraddles, to report your gains and losses fromthe tax year is limited to your taxable income forall section 1256 contracts that are open at the Unstated interest.If you buy property on athat year from the trade or business in which theend of the year or that were closed out during time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-the year. This includes the amount shown in box est, the basis of your property is your stateding transaction items in determining this taxable11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amount purchase price, minus the amount considered toincome. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-of these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form be unstated interest. You generally have un-lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your stated interest if your interest rate is less than
to the next tax year as a deduction resulting fromincome tax return. the applicable federal rate. For more informa-
a hedging transaction.If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issue
If the hedging transaction relates to propertystraddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-may be necessary to show certain adjustments
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- Basis Other Than Costtions for completing Part I. preneur is an individual.
There are times when you must use a basisThe limit on hedging losses does not apply toLoss carryback election.To carry back your other than cost. In these cases, you may need toany hedging loss to the extent that it is moreloss under the election procedures described know the property’s fair market value or thethan all your unrecognized gains from hedgingearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- adjusted basis of the previous owner.transactions at the end of the tax year that aretion for Tentative Refund, for the year to whichfrom the trade or business in which the hedgingyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form Fair market value.This is the price at whichtransaction occurred. The term “unrecognized6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. the property would change hands between again” has the same meaning as defined underFollow the instructions for completing Form buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy orStraddles, later.6781 for the loss year to make this election. sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,Sale of property used in a hedge.Once you around the same date, may be helpful in figuring
identify personal property as being part of aHedging Transactions fair market value.
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its
The marked to market rules, described earlier,sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-gain. Property Received for Servicestion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
ing conditions are met. If you receive investment property for services,
Self-Employment Income you must include the property’s fair market value1. You entered into the transaction in the nor- in income. The amount you include in incomemal course of your trade or business pri-Gains and losses derived in the ordinary coursethen becomes your basis in the property. If themarily to manage the risk of: of a commodity or option dealer’s trading inservices were performed for a price that was
section 1256 contracts and property related toagreed to beforehand, this price will be accepteda. Price changes or currency fluctuationsthese contracts are included in net earningsas the fair market value of the property if there ison ordinary property you hold (or willfrom self-employment. In addition, the rules re-no evidence to the contrary.hold), or lating to contributions to self-employment retire-
Restricted property.If you receive, as pay-b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur-ment plans apply. For information on retirement
ment for services, property that is subject torency fluctuations, on your current orplan contributions, see chapter 3 of Publication
certain restrictions, your basis in the propertyfuture borrowings or ordinary obliga-535, Business Expenses, Publication 560, Re-
generally is its fair market value when it be-tions. tirement Plans for Small Business, and Publica-
comes substantially vested. Property becomestion 590, Individual Retirement Arrangementssubstantially vested when it is transferable or is2. You clearly identified the transaction as(IRAs). no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,being a hedging transaction before the
whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-close of the day on which you entered
erty in Publication 525 for more information.into it.
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentBasis ofThis hedging transaction exception does not
property at less than fair market value, as pay-apply to transactions entered into by or for any
Investment Property ment for services, you must include the differ-syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
ence in income. Your basis in the property is theporation, or other entity (other than a regular
Terms you may need to know price you pay plus the amount you include incorporation) that allocates more than 35% of its
income.(see Glossary):losses to limited partners or limited entrepre-
neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as aBasis
Property Receivedlimited partner) and who does not actively par-
in Taxable TradesFair market valueticipate in its management. However, an inter-
est is not considered held by a limited partnerOriginal issue discount (OID) If you received investment property in trade foror entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
other property, the basis of the new property isparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years)
its fair market value at the time of the tradein the management of the entity, or is theBasis is a way of measuring your investment inunless you received the property in a nontaxablespouse, child (including a legally adoptedproperty for tax purposes. You must know thetrade.child), grandchild, or parent of an individualbasis of your property to determine whether you
who actively participates in the management ofhave a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-Example. You trade A Company stock for Bthe entity. tion. Company stock having a fair market value of
Investment property you buy normally has anHedging loss limit.If you are a limited partner $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyor entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable
in some way other than buying it, such as by gifthedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A
or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- Company stock is more than $1,200, you have a
portant in figuring the basis.ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg- deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B value of the property at the time of the gift was gift, as described in the preceding discussion.
Company stock for $1,300, you will have a gain For figuring loss, your basis is limited to theequal to or more than the donor’s adjusted basis
of $100. property’s fair market value at the time of thejust before the gift, your basis for gain or loss on
transfer.its sale or other disposition is the donor’s ad-
justed basis plus or minus any required adjust-Gift tax information.For information on giftProperty Received ments to basis during the period you hold thetax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Estatein Nontaxable Trades property. Also, you may be allowed to add to theand Gift Taxes.donor’s adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-paid, depending on the date of the gift.ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the
Property Received as InheritanceGift received before 1977.If you receivedproperty you received in the trade. See Nontax-
property as a gift before 1977, your basis in theable Trades, later. If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-property is the donor’s adjusted basis increasedThe basis of property you received in a non- erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally praised value on the federal estate tax return)your basis cannot be more than the fair marketthe same as the adjusted basis of the property on:value of the gift at the time it was given to you.you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash
you paid, additional costs you had, and any gain 1. The date of the decedent’s death, orExample 1. You were given XYZ Companyrecognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or
2. The later alternate valuation date if the es-stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stockunlike property you received, any loss recog-
tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’snized, and any liability of yours that was as-
nate valuation.adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid asumed or treated as assumed.
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain orIf no federal estate tax return was filed, use the
loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plusappraised value on the date of death for state
the amount of gift tax paid.Property Received inheritance or transmission taxes.
From Your Spouse Appreciated property you gave theExample 2. The facts are the same as in
decedent. Your basis in certain appreciatedIf property is transferred to you from your spouseExample 1 except that the gift tax paid was
property that you inherited is the decedent’s(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad-
adjusted basis in the property immediatelyyour divorce), your basis is the same as yourjusted basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to
before death rather than its fair market value.spouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis justthe fair market value of the stock at the time of
This applies to appreciated property that you orbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between the gift.
your spouse gave the decedent as a gift duringSpouses, later. Gift received after 1976.If you received the one-year period ending on the date of death.Recordkeeping. The transferor mustproperty as a gift after 1976, your basis is theAppreciated property is any property whose fairgive you the records necessary to de-donor’s adjusted basis increased by the part ofmarket value on the day you gave it to thetermine the adjusted basis and hold-the gift tax paid that was for the net increase inRECORDS
decedent was more than its adjusted basis.ing period of the property as of the date of thevalue of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
More information.See Publication 551, Ba-transfer. ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The
sis of Assets, for more information on the basisnumerator (top part) is the net increase in value
of inherited property, including community prop-of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) is
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a jointProperty Received as a Gift the amount of the gift.
tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualifiedThe net increase in value of the gift is the fairTo figure your basis in property that you re- joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-market value of the gift minus the donor’s ad-ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted ness.justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valuebasis to the donor just before it was given to you,for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-its fair market value at the time it was given to Adjusted Basisnual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and thetion that applies to the gift.date it was given to you. Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
exchange, or other disposition of property orFair market value less than donor’s adjustedExample. In 2005, you received a gift of
figure allowable depreciation, depletion, orbasis. If the fair market value of the property atproperty from your mother. At the time of the gift,
amortization, you usually must make certain ad-the time of the gift was less than the donor’sthe property had a fair market value of $101,000
justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis forand an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. The
sis of the property. The result of thesegain on its sale or other disposition is the sameamount of the gift for gift tax purposes was
adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.as the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any$90,000 ($101,000 minus the $11,000 annual
Adjustments to the basis of stocks andrequired adjustments to basis during the periodexclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax of
bonds are explained in the following discussion.you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its$21,000. You figure your basis in the following
For information about other adjustments to ba-fair market value at the time of the gift plus orway:
sis, see Publication 551.minus any required adjustments to basis during
Fair market value............. $101,000the period you hold the property.
Minus: Adjusted basis.......... 40,000 Stocks and BondsNo gain or loss. If you use the basis forNet increase in value of gift...... $61,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then The basis of stocks or bonds you own generallyuse the basis for figuring a loss and the result isGift tax paid................ $21,000 is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.Multiplied by .678 ($61,000 ÷ such as commissions and recording or transfer
$90,000) .................. .678 fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanExample. You receive a gift of investmentGift tax due to net increase in value $14,238by purchase, your basis is usually determinedproperty having an adjusted basis of $10,000 atPlus: Adjusted basis of property to by fair market value or the previous owner’sthe time of the gift. The fair market value at theyour mother................ 40,000 adjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basistime of the gift is $9,000. You later sell theYour basis in the property $54,238 Other Than Cost.property for $9,500. You have neither gain nor The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, andPart sale, part gift.If you get property in atain events that occur after purchase. For exam-$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss.transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourple, if you receive more stock from nontaxableYour basis for figuring loss is $9,000, andbasis is the larger of the amount you paid for thestock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in thethe basis of your original stock. You must also
property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatFair market value equal to or more than reduce your basis when you receive nondivi-
amount the amount of any gift tax paid on thedonor’s adjusted basis.If the fair market dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1).
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 43

Page 44 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50 shares (50 × $10) balance ofThese distributions, up to the amount of your shares of common stock. Your basis in each
stock bought in 1992.......... $500 share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3).basis, are a nontaxable return of capital.
80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in
January 1993............... 8 8 0 Example 2. You owned two shares of com-Identifying stock or bonds sold.If you can Total basis of stock sold in 2005$1,380 mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and theadequately identify the shares of stock or the
other for $45. The corporation distributed twobonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
new shares of common stock for each shareShares in a mutual fund or REIT.The basisbasis of the particular shares of stock or bonds. held. You had six shares after the distribution—of shares in a regulated investment companyAdequate identification.You will make an three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) and(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust
adequate identification if you show that certifi- three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).(REIT) is generally figured in the same way as
cates representing shares of stock from a lot thatthe basis of other stock. New and old stock not identical.If theyou bought on a certain date or for a certain new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-Mutual fund load charges.Your cost basisprice were delivered to your broker or other dend is not identical to the old stock on which itin a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, alsoagent. was declared, the basis of the new stock isknown as a load charge. But, in certain cases,
calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisBroker holds stock. If you have left theyou cannot include the entire amount of a load
of the old stock between the old and the newstock certificates with your broker or othercharge in your basis if the charge gives you a
stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachagent, you will make an adequate identification ifreinvestment right. For more information, see
lot of stock to the total fair market value of bothyou: Publication 564.
lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.Choosing average basis for mutual fund1. Tell your broker or other agent the particu-shares. You can choose to use the average Example. You bought a share of commonlar stock to be sold or transferred at thebasis of mutual fund shares if you acquired thestock for $100. Later, the corporation distributedtime of the sale or transfer, and shares at various times and prices and left thema share of preferred stock for each share of2. Receive a written confirmation of this from on deposit in an account kept by a custodian orcommon stock held. At the date of distribution,agent. The methods you can use to figure aver-your broker or other agent within a reason- your common stock had a fair market value ofage basis are explained in Publication 564.able time. $150 and the preferred stock had a fair market
value of $50. You figure the basis of the old andUndistributed capital gains.If you had toStock identified this way is the stock sold or
new stock by dividing your $100 basis betweeninclude in your income any undistributed capitaltransferred even if stock certificates from a dif-
them. The basis of your common stock is $75gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase yourferent lot are delivered to the broker or other
($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the newbasis in the stock by the difference between theagent.
preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).amount you included and the amount of tax paidSingle stock certificate.If you bought for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed Stock bought at various times.Figure thestock in different lots at different times and youcapital gains of mutual funds and REITs under basis of stock dividends received on stock youhold a single stock certificate for this stock, youCapital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. bought at various times and at different prices bywill make an adequate identification if you: allocating to each lot of stock the share of theAutomatic investment service.If you partici-stock dividends due to it.1. Tell your broker or other agent the particu-pate in an automatic investment service, your
lar stock to be sold or transferred when Taxable stock dividends.If your stock divi-basis for each share of stock, including frac-
you deliver the certificate to your broker or dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis oftional shares, bought by the bank or other agent
other agent, and your new stock is its fair market value on theis the purchase price plus a share of the broker’s
date of distribution. The basis of your old stockcommission.2. Receive a written confirmation of this from does not change.your broker or other agent within a reason-Dividend reinvestment plans.If you partici-able time. Stock splits.Figure the basis of stock splits inpate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receive
the same way as stock dividends if identicalstock from the corporation at a discount, yourIf you sell part of the stock represented by a
stock is distributed on the stock held.basis is the full fair market value of the stock onsingle certificate directly to the buyer instead of
the dividend payment date. You must includethrough a broker, you will make an adequate Stock rights.A stock right is a right to acquirethe amount of the discount in your income.identification if you keep a written record of the a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it mayparticular stock that you intend to sell. Public utilities.If, before 1986, you ex-be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.
cluded from income the value of stock you hadBonds. These methods of identification Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receive
received under a qualified public utility reinvest-also apply to bonds sold or transferred. them. See Distributions of Stock and Stock
ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.Rights under Nondividend Distributions in chap-Identification not possible.If you buy and ter 1.sell securities at various times in varying quanti-Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri-
ties and you cannot adequately identify the Taxable stock rights.If you receive stockbutions made by a corporation of its own stock.
rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isshares you sell, the basis of the securities youGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable to
their fair market value at the time of distribution.you. However, see Distributions of Stock andsell is the basis of the securities you acquired
The basis of the old stock does not change.Stock Rights under Nondividend Distributions infirst. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-
chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-cussed later, you cannot use the average price Nontaxable stock rights.If you receivedends are not taxable, you must divide yourper share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-basis for the old stock between the old and newshares. pire, they have no basis.stock. If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stockExample. You bought 100 shares of stock rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stockNew and old stock identical.If the newof XYZ Corporation in 1992 for $10 a share. In rights had a fair market value of 15% or more ofstock you received as a nontaxable dividend isJanuary 1993 you bought another 200 shares the fair market value of the old stock, you mustidentical to the old stock on which the dividend
for $11 a share. In July 1993 you gave your son divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the
50 shares. In December 1995 you bought 100 tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use aold stock by the number of shares of old and
shares for $9 a share. In April 2005 you sold 130 ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalnew stock. The result is your basis for each
shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis- fair market value of both at the time of distribu-share of stock.
posed of, so you must use the stock you ac- tion.
quired first to figure the basis. The shares ofExample 1. You owned one share of com- If the fair market value of the stock rights was
stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, you
× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares oftion distributed two new shares of common can choose to divide the basis of the old stock
stock you sold in 2005 as follows: stock for each share held. You then had three between the old stock and the stock rights. To
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Acquisition discount on short-termmake the choice, attach a statement to your• Any nonseparately stated loss of the S
obligations.If you include acquisition dis-return for the year in which you received the corporation.
count on a short-term obligation in your incomerights, stating that you choose to divide the basis• Any expense of the S corporation that iscurrently, increase the basis of the obligation byof the stock. not deductible in figuring its taxable in-the amount of acquisition discount you include inBasis of new stock. If you exercise the come and not properly chargeable to a your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost capital account. gations in chapter 1 for more information.plus the basis of the stock rights exercised.• The amount of your deduction for deple-
Original issue discount (OID) on debttion of oil and gas wells to the extent theExample. You own 100 shares of ABC instruments. Increase the basis of a debt in-deduction is not more than your share ofCompany stock, which cost you $22 per share. strument by the amount of OID that you includethe adjusted basis of the wells.The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable in your income. See Original Issue Discount
stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 moreHowever, your basis in the stock cannot be(OID) in chapter 1.
shares at $26 per share. At the time the stockreduced below zero.
Discounted tax-exempt obligations.OIDrights were distributed, the stock had a market
on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-Specialized small business investment com-value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each
able. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex-pany stock or partnership interest.If youstock right had a market value of $3. The market
empt obligation issued after September 3, 1982,bought this stock or interest as replacementvalue of the stock rights was less than 15% of
that you acquired after March 1, 1984, you mustproperty for publicly traded securities you sold atthe market value of the stock, but you chose to
accrue OID on the obligation to determine itsa gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock ordivide the basis of your stock between the stock
adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to theinterest by the amount of any postponed gain onand the rights. You figure the basis of the rights
basis of the obligation to determine your gain orthat sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publiclyand the basis of the old stock as follows:
loss.Traded Securities, later.
For information on determining OID on a100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old
Qualified small business stock. If you long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-stock
bought this stock as replacement property forsued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985 or
other qualified small business stock you sold atDebt Instruments Issued After 1984, whichever100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of
a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-old stock applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID
placement stock by the amount of any post-on Long-Term Debt Instruments.
10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rightsponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of
Qualified Small Business Stock, later. 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, acquisition discount on short-term obligations.
Short sales. If you cannot deduct paymentsnew basis of old stock See Discount on Short-Term Obligations in
you make to a lender in lieu of dividends onchapter 1.($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to
Stripped tax-exempt obligation.If you ac-rights the lender is a capital expense, and you must
quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or couponadd it to the basis of the stock used to close theIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID onshort sale.gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-See Payments in lieu of dividends, later, foryou exercise the rights, the basis of the stock pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds orinformation about deducting payments in lieu ofyou acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part ofdividends.basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID onper share. The remaining basis of the old stockPremiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at athese obligations in the manner described inis $21.78 per share. premium, the premium is treated as part of yourchapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.
basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize theIncrease your basis in the stripped tax-ex-Investment property received in liquidation.
premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-empt bond or coupon by the taxable and nontax-In general, if you receive investment property as
duce the basis of the bond by the amortized partable accrued OID. Also increase your basis bya distribution in partial or complete liquidation of
of the premium each year over the life of thethe interest that accrued (but was not paid, anda corporation and if you recognize gain or loss
bond. was not previously reflected in your basis)when you acquire the property, your basis in the
Although you cannot deduct the premium onbefore the date you sold the bond or coupon. Inproperty is its fair market value at the time of the
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987,distribution.
termine your adjusted basis in the bond. Youadd to your basis any accrued market discount
S corporation stock.You must increase yourmust reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-not previously reflected in basis.
basis in stock of an S corporation by your pro mium you amortized for the period you held the
rata share of the following items. bond.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter• All income items of the S corporation, in-3 for more information. How To Figurecluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-
rately stated and passed through to you asMarket discount on bonds. If you include Gain or Lossa shareholder. market discount on a bond in income currently,
increase the basis of your bond by the amount of• The nonseparately stated income of the S You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of
market discount you include in your income. Seecorporation. property by comparing the amount you realize
Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 for morewith the adjusted basis of the property.• The amount of the deduction for depletioninformation.
(other than oil and gas depletion) that is Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale ormore than the basis of the property beingBonds purchased at par value.A bond pur- trade is more than the adjusted basis of thedepleted. chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-property you transfer, the difference is a gain.mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise
You must decrease your basis in stock of an Sdispose of the bond, you figure the gain or lossLoss. If the adjusted basis of the property you
corporation by your pro rata share of the follow-by comparing the bond proceeds to the transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
ing items. purchase price of the bond. difference is a loss.
• Distributions by the S corporation thatExample. You purchased a bond several Amount realized. The amount you realizewere not included in your income. years ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold from a sale or trade of property is everything you
• All loss and deduction items of the S cor- the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gainreceive for the property. This includes the
poration that are separately stated and of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for money you receive plus the fair market value of
passed through to you. $9,900, you would have a loss of $100. any property or services you receive.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 45

Page 46 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your For more information on nontaxable trades, see qualified intermediaries or involving multiple
property and the debt instrument does not pro- properties.chapter 1 of Publication 544.
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated Partly nontaxable exchange.If you receiveinterest that you must report as ordinary incomeLike-Kind Exchanges money or unlike property in addition to the likewill reduce the amount realized from the sale. property, and the preceding six conditions areFor more information, see Publication 537.If you trade business or investment property formet, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You areIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru-other business or investment property of a liketaxed on any gain you realize, but only up to thement to the seller of the property, the amountkind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deductamount of the money and the fair market valuerealized is determined by reference to the issueany loss until you sell or dispose of the propertyof the unlike property you receive. You cannotprice of the debt instrument, which may or mayyou receive. To be nontaxable, a trade mustdeduct a loss.not be the fair market value of the debt instru-meet all six of the following conditions. 
Like property and unlike property trans-ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g).
1. The property must be business or invest-ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-However, if the debt instrument was previously
ment property. You must hold both the tion to the like property, you must recognize gainissued by a third party (one not part of the sale
or loss on the unlike property you give up. Thetransaction), the fair market value of the debt property you trade and the property you
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-instrument is used to determine the amount real-receive for productive use in your trade or
justed basis of the unlike property and its fairized. business or for investment. Neither prop-
market value.erty may be property used for personalFair market value.Fair market value is the purposes, such as your home or familyprice at which property would change hands Like property and money transferred. Ifcar.between a buyer and a seller, neither being conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax-
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable able trade even if you pay money in addition to2. The property must not be held primarily for
knowledge of all the relevant facts. the like property.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
erty you receive must not be property youBasis of property received.You figure yourExample. You trade A Company stock with sell to customers, such as merchandise.basis in property received in a nontaxable oran adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company partly nontaxable trade as explained earlier3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier.notes, choses in action, certificates of trustis your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000or beneficial interest, or other securities or($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a How to report. You must report the trade ofevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-note for $6,000 that has an issue price of like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-cluding partnership interests. However,$6,000, your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 plus nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onyou can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-$6,000 minus $7,000). Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,rate stocks under a different rule, as dis-Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.Debt paid off.A debt against the property, cussed later under Corporate Stocks. For information on using Form 4797, seeor against you, that is paid off as a part of the chapter 4 of Publication 544.4. There must be a trade of like property. Thetransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must
trade of real estate for real estate, or per-be included in the amount realized. This is true
sonal property for similar personal prop-Corporate Stockseven if neither you nor the buyer is personally
erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeliable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
The following trades of corporate stocks gener-of an apartment house for a store building,trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is aloan, the amount you realize generally includes
loss.trade of like property. The trade of a piecethe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
of machinery for a store building is not aeven if the amount of the note is more than the Corporate reorganizations. In some in-trade of like property. Real property lo-fair market value of the property. stances, a company will give you common stockcated in the United States and real prop-for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonerty located outside the United States areExample. You sell stock that you had stock, or stock in one corporation for stock innot like property. Also, personal propertypledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. another corporation. If this is a result of aused predominantly within the UnitedYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledStates and personal property usedpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-predominantly outside the United Statescash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-are not like property.plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.minus $6,000). 5. The property to be received must be identi-
Example 1. On April 19, 2005, KP1 Corpo-fied in writing within 45 days after the datePayment of cash. If you trade property and
ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. Youyou transfer the property given up in thecash for other property, the amount you realize
held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis oftrade. If you received the replacementis the fair market value of the property you re-
$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re-property before the end of the 45-day pe-ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-
ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange forriod, you automatically are treated as hav-tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis
your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain oring met the 45-day written noticeof the property you trade in from the amount you
loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70requirement.realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a
shares of the new stock is still $3,500.gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a6. The property to be received must be re-loss. ceived by the earlier of: Example 2. On July 27, 2005, RGB corpo-
No gain or loss.You may have to use a basis ration divests itself of SFH corporation. You holda. The 180th day after the date on whichfor figuring gain that is different from the basis 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of $5,400.you transfer the property given up in theused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as a resulttrade, orneither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in of the spin-off. You do not recognize any gain or
the discussion on the basis of property you re-b. The due date, including extensions, forloss on the transaction. You receive information
ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost, your tax return for the year in which thefrom RGB corporation that your basis in SFH
earlier. transfer of the property given up occurs.stock is equal to 10.9624% of your basis in RGB
stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis in SFH stock is
If you trade property with a related party in a$592.00. Your basis in RGB stock (after the
like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 – $592).
See Related Party Transactions, later in thisNontaxable Trades
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting
for more information on exchanges of businessThis section discusses trades that generally do corporation should send you information that
property and special rules for exchanges usingnot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. includes details on how to allocate basis be-
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa- The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + Increase this amount by any amount that was
tion until the period of limitations expires for the $99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Yourtreated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized
year in which you dispose of the stock in a holding period for the part based on your owner-on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash
taxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem-you received and the fair market value of any
the date the return was due or filed, or 2 years ber 2. Your holding period for the part based onother property you received.
from the date the tax was paid, whichever is your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on theThe basis of any other property you receive
later. day after you acquired the share of stock. is its fair market value on the date of the trade.
Bonds for stock of another corporation.Stock for stock of the same corporation. Insurance PoliciesGenerally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-You can exchange common stock for common
ration into common stock of another corporation,and Annuitiesstock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
according to the terms of the bond issue, yousame corporation without having a recognized
must recognize gain or loss up to the difference You will not have a recognized gain or loss if thegain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
between the fair market value of the stock re-insured or annuitant is the same under bothstockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-contracts and you trade:holder and the corporation.
changed. In some instances, however, such asIf you receive cash for fractional shares, see 1. A life insurance contract for another lifetrades that are part of mergers or other corpo-Fractional shares under Distributions of stock insurance contract or for an endowment orrate reorganizations, you will have no recog-and stock rights in chapter 1. annuity contract,nized gain or loss if certain requirements are
Money or other property received.If in anmet. For more information about the tax conse-2. An endowment contract for an annuity con-otherwise nontaxable trade you receive moneyquences of converting securities of one corpora-tract or for another endowment contractor other property in addition to stock, then yourtion into common stock of another corporation,that provides for regular payments begin-gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up tounder circumstances such as those just de- ning at a date not later than the beginningthe amount of the money or other property. Anyscribed, consult the respective corporations anddate under the old contract, orloss is not recognized. the terms of the bond issue. This information is
3. An annuity contract for another annuityalso available on the prospectus of the bondIf you received cash for fractional shares,
contract.issue.see Fractional shares under Distributions of
Stock and Stock Rights in chapter 1. You also may not have to recognize gain or lossProperty for stock of a controlled corpora-
from an exchange of a portion of an annuitytion. If you transfer property to a corporationNonqualified preferred stock.Nonquali-
contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-
nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-and immediately after the trade you are in con-erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to
nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin istrol of the corporation, you ordinarily will notpreferred stock with one or more of the following
available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothfeatures.
irb03-33.pdf.to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-
• The holder has the right to require theerty to a corporation. It does not apply if theExchanges of contracts not included in thisissuer or a related person to redeem orcorporation is an investment company. list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-purchase the stock. If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro-ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-
ceeding and you transfer property to a controlledtract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.• The issuer or a related person is required
corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani-to redeem or purchase the stock.
zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the
• The issuer or a related person has thestock you receive in the exchange is used to payDemutualization of Liferight to redeem the stock, and on the issueoff your debts. Insurance Companiesdate, it is more likely than not that the rightFor this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
will be exercised. A life insurance company may change from aration, you or your group of transferors must
mutual company to a stock company. This isown, immediately after the exchange, at least• The dividend rate on the stock varies with
commonly called demutualization. If you were a80% of the total combined voting power of allreference to interest rates, commodity
policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%prices, or similar indices.
pany, you may have received either stock in theof the outstanding shares of each class of non-
For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- stock company or cash in exchange for yourvoting stock of the corporation.
ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter-If this provision applies to you, you must equity interest in the mutual company.
nal Revenue Code. attach to your return a complete statement of allIf the demutualization transaction qualifies
facts pertinent to the exchange. as a tax-free reorganization under sectionConvertible stocks and bonds.You gener- 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainMoney or other property received.If, in anally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you or loss is recognized on the exchange. Yourotherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor-convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into holding period for the new stock includes theporate stock, you also receive money or prop-common stock of the same corporation accord- period you held an equity interest in the mutualerty other than stock, you may have a taxableing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the company as a policyholder or annuitant.gain. However, you are taxed only up to thebond or the preferred stock certificate.
If the demutualization transaction does notamount of money plus the fair market value of
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-the other property you receive. The rules forExample. In November, you bought for $1 a
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youfiguring taxable gain in this situation generallyright issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on
must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangepayment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued
ing period for the stock does not include thediscussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. Ifby that corporation.
period you held an equity interest in the mutualthe property you give up includes depreciableOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond, company.property, the taxable gain may have to be re-which was issued on December 9. The bond
ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-If you received cash in exchange for yourcontained a clause stating that you would re-
tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossequity interest, you must recognize a capitalceive one share of XYZ Corporation common
is recognized. gain. If you held an equity interest for more thanstock on surrender of one bond and the payment
Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-1 year, your gain is long-term.of $50.
lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-Later, you presented the bond and $50 andtion) received is generally treated as propertyU.S. Treasuryreceived one share of XYZ Corporation commonother than stock.stock. You did not have a recognized gain or Notes or Bonds
loss. This is true whether the fair market value ofBasis of stock or other property received.
You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasurythe stock was more or less than $150 on the The basis of the stock you receive is generally
obligations for other issues, designated by thedate of the conversion. the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 47

Page 48 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss 2. Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theLike-Kind Exchanges
recognized on the trade. fiduciary and beneficiary of two different
Generally, if you trade business or investmenttrusts, if the same person is the grantor ofSee the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S.
property for other business or investment prop-both trusts.Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information
erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.about income from these investments. 3. A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichSee Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non- more than 50% in value of the outstandingtaxable Trades. stock is directly or indirectly owned by orThis rule also applies to trades of propertyfor the trust, or by or for the grantor of the
between related parties, defined next underTransfers Between trust.
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property. How-
4. A corporation and a partnership if theever, if either you or the related party disposes ofSpouses same persons own more than 50% inthe like property within 2 years after the trade,
value of the outstanding stock of the cor-Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on ayou both must report any gain or loss not recog-poration and more than 50% of the capitaltransfer of property from an individual to (or innized on the original trade on your return for theinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident toyear in which the later disposition occurs. nership.a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognitionThis rule generally does not apply to:
rule does not apply in the following situations. 5. Two S corporations if the same persons
• Dispositions due to the death of either re-own more than 50% in value of the out-• The recipient spouse or former spouse is lated party, standing stock of each corporation.a nonresident alien.
• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of6. Two corporations, one of which is an S• Property is transferred in trust. Gain mustPublication 544), or corporation, if the same persons own morebe recognized to the extent the amount of than 50% in value of the outstanding stock• Trades and later dispositions whose mainthe liabilities assumed by the trust, plus of each corporation.purpose is not the avoidance of federalany liabilities on the property, exceed the
income tax.adjusted basis of the property. 7. An executor and a beneficiary of an estate
(except in the case of a sale or trade to• An installment obligation is transferred inIf a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop-satisfy a pecuniary bequest).trust. For information on the disposition oferty is substantially diminished during any pe-an installment obligation, see Publication 8. Two corporations that are members of theriod, that period is not counted in determining537, Installment Sales. same controlled group (under certain con-whether the property was disposed of within 2ditions, however, these losses are not dis-• Certain stock redemptions, which are tax-years. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub-allowed but must be deferred).able to a spouse under the tax law, a di-stantially diminished by:
vorce or separation instrument, or a valid 9. Two partnerships if the same persons own,
• The holding of a put on the property,written agreement, discussed in Regula- directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the
tions section 1.1041-2. capital interests or the profit interests in• The holding by another person of a right to
both partnerships.acquire the property, orAny transfer of property to a spouse or former
• A short sale or any other transaction.spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is Multiple property sales or trades.If you selltreated by the recipient as a gift and is not or trade to a related party a number of blocks ofconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient’sLosses on Sales or stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youbasis in the property will be the same as the must figure the gain or loss separately for eachTrades of Propertyadjusted basis of the giver immediately before block of stock or piece of property. The gain onthe transfer. This carryover basis rule appliesYou cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade ofeach item may be taxable. However, you cannotwhether the adjusted basis of the transferredproperty, other than a distribution in completededuct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotproperty is less than, equal to, or greater thanliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction isreduce gains from the sales of any of theseeither its fair market value at the time of transferdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-items by losses on the sales of any of the otheror any consideration paid by the recipient. This items.ing related parties. rule applies for purposes of determining loss as
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct1. Members of your family. This includes onlyin trust increases the basis. your loss on the sale of stock through youryour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is does not apply to a trade between related par-scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
related to the ending of the marriage. For more ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
2. A partnership in which you directly or indi-information, see Property Settlements in Publi- dental and is not prearranged.
rectly own more than 50% of the capitalcation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals.
interest or the profits interest. Constructive ownership of stock.In deter-
mining whether a person directly or indirectly3. A corporation in which you directly or indi-owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of thetion, the following rules apply.Related Party outstanding stock (see Constructive own-
ership of stock, later). Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
Transactions or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust4. A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-is considered owned proportionately by or for itsganization that is directly or indirectly con-Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.trolled, in any manner or by any method,erty between related parties.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownby you or by a member of your family,
the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orwhether or not this control is legally en-Gain on Sale or Trade for his or her family. Family includes only broth-forceable.of Depreciable Property ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyspouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.Your gain from the sale or trade of property to ais not deductible if the transaction is directly or
related party may be ordinary income, rather Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byindirectly between the following related parties.
than capital gain, if the property can be depreci- applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is
1. A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in considered to own the stock that is directly or
and beneficiary, of any trust.Publication 544 for more information. indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock your capital gains and losses as either short c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-
constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is term or long term. If you have long-term gains ample, by gift) entitling you to the basis
treated as actually owned by that person. But and losses, you must identify your 28% rate of the person who created the property
stock constructively owned by an individual gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, or for whom it was prepared or pro-
under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by you must also identify any unrecaptured section duced.
that individual for again applying either rule 2 or 1250 gain.
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired inrule 3 to make another person the constructiveThe correct classification and identification
the ordinary course of a trade or businessowner of the stock. helps you figure the limit on capital losses and
for services rendered or from the sale ofthe correct tax on capital gains. For informationProperty received from a related party.If property described in (1).about determining whether your capital gain oryou sell or trade at a gain property that youloss is short term or long term, see Holdingacquired from a related party, you recognize the 6. U.S. Government publications that you re-Period, later. For information about 28% rategain only to the extent that it is more than the ceived from the government for free or forgain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250loss previously disallowed to the related party. less than the normal sales price, or thatgain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-This rule applies only if you are the original you acquired under circumstances entitlinging Capital Gains and Losses, later.transferee and you acquired the property by you to the basis of someone who received
purchase or exchange. This rule does not apply the publications for free or for less than the
Capital or Ordinaryif the related party’s loss was disallowed be- normal sales price.
cause of the wash sale rules, described later
Gain or Loss 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-under Wash Sales. struments held by commodities derivativesIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible lossIf you sell or trade at a loss property that you dealers. For more information, see sectionfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gainacquired from a related party, you cannot recog- 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending onnize the loss that was not allowed to the related
the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-party.
a capital asset (defined next) results in a capitalaction is clearly identified as a hedging
gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital assetExample 1. Your brother sells you stock for transaction before the close of the day on
generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother which it was acquired, originated, or en-
pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss oncannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell tered into. For more information, see the
a sale or trade of property used in a trade orthe same stock to an unrelated party for definition of hedging transaction earlier,
business may be treated as either capital or$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- and the discussion of hedging transactions
ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. Inable gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus the under Commodity Futures, later.
some situations, part of your gain or loss may be$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother. 9. Supplies of a type you regularly use ora capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-consume in the ordinary course of yournary gain or loss.Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the trade or business.stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-
nized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basis
Capital Assets and Investment property.Investment property isminus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that
a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale orNoncapital Assetswas not allowed to your brother.
trade generally is a capital gain or loss.
For the most part, everything you own and useGold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.for personal purposes, pleasure, or investmentThese are capital assets except when they areis a capital asset. Some examples are:Capital Gains held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from
• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
and Losses count, loss.
• A house owned and used by you and your Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All ofTerms you may need to know
family, these, including stock received as a dividend,(see Glossary):
are capital assets except when they are held for• Household furnishings, sale by a securities dealer. However, seeCall • A car used for pleasure or commuting,Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock
and Losses on Small Business InvestmentCommodity future • Coin or stamp collections, Company Stock, later.Conversion transaction • Gems and jewelry, and
Personal use property.Property held for per-Forward contract • Gold, silver, or any other metal. sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
Limited partner capital asset, and you must report a gain from itsAny property you own is a capital asset, ex-sale as a capital gain. However, you cannotListed option cept the following noncapital assets. deduct a loss from selling personal use property.
Nonequity option 1. Property held mainly for sale to customers
Options dealer or property that will physically become a
part of the merchandise that is for sale toDiscounted Debt InstrumentsPut customers.
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,Regulated futures contract 2. Depreciable property used in your trade oror retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentSection 1256 contract business, even if fully depreciated. originally issued at a discount or bought at a
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-Straddle 3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
plained in the following discussions.ness.Wash sale
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticShort-term government obligations.Treat
composition, a letter or memorandum, orgains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-This section discusses the tax treatment of similar property — ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-gains and losses from different types of invest- gations) as ordinary income up to your ratablea. Created by your personal efforts,ment transactions. share of the acquisition discount. This treatment
Character of gain or loss.You need to clas- b. Prepared or produced for you (in the applies to obligations that have a fixed maturity
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.
capital gains or losses. You then need to classify lar property), or Acquisition discount is the stated redemption
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 49

Page 50 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a was no intention to call the bond before maturity,
tion. capital gain. your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized
However, do not treat these gains as income minus $7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.Long-term debt instruments issued afterto the extent you previously included the dis-1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before JulyExample 2. If, in Example 1, at the time ofcount in income. See Discount on Short-Term 2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you original issue there was an intention to call theObligations in chapter 1 for more information.sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of thesebond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinarydebt instruments, the part of your gain that is notShort-term nongovernment obligations. income. You figure this as follows:more than your ratable share of the OID at theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-
time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.gations as ordinary income up to your ratable 1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated
The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,redemption price at maturity minusshare of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-
there was an intention to call the debt instrument$7,600 issue price).......... $2,400tions that have a fixed maturity date of not more
before maturity, all of your gain that is not more2) Minus: Amount previously includedthan 1 year from the date of issue.
than the entire OID is treated as ordinary incomein income................ 3 3 4However, to the extent you previously in-
at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable3) Maximum amount of ordinarycluded the discount in income, you do not have
income .................. $2,066gain also applies to corporate instruments is-to include it in income again. See Discount on
sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-Short-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for more Because the amount in (3) is more than yourmitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andinformation. gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-at all times thereafter. come.Tax-exempt state and local government
Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-bonds. If these bonds were originally issued Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-ernment bond for $700 at original issue on Aprilat a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ment has market discount and you chose to1, 1986, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2005,acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your include the discount in income as it accrued,for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure increase your basis in the debt instrument by theAt the time of original issue, there was no inten-your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss ontion to call the bond before maturity. You havebonds, reduce the amount realized by your part its disposition. If you did not choose to includeheld the bond for 228 full months. Do not countof the OID. the discount in income as it accrued, you mustthe additional days that are less than a fullIf the bonds were issued after September 3, report gain as ordinary interest income up to themonth. The number of complete months from1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar-date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30crease the adjusted basis by your part of the ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of theyears). The fraction 228/360 multiplied by theOID to figure gain or loss. For more information gain is capital gain.discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal toon the basis of these bonds, see Discounted However, a different rule applies if you dis-$190. This is your ratable share of OID for thetax-exempt obligations under Stocks and pose of a market discount bond that was:period you owned the bond. You must treat anyBonds, earlier in this chapter.
part of the gain up to $190 as ordinary income.Any gain from market discount is usually 1. Issued before July 19, 1984, andAs a result, $190 is treated as ordinary incometaxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-
2. Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.and $10 is capital gain.empt bonds. If you bought the bonds before May
1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capital In that case, any gain is treated as interestLong-term debt instruments issued aftergain. If you bought the bonds after April 30, income up to the amount of your deferred inter-May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-1993, the gain from market discount is ordinary est deduction for the year you dispose of theernment instrument).If you hold one of theseincome. bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (Thedebt instruments, you must include a part of theYou figure market discount by subtracting limit on the interest deduction for market dis-OID in your gross income each year that youthe price you paid for the bond from the sum of count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 underown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-the original issue price of the bond and the When To Deduct Investment Interest.)strument is increased by the amount of OID thatamount of accumulated OID from the date of Report the sale or trade of a market discountyou have included in your gross income. Seeissue that represented interest to any earlier bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or lineOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.holders. For more information, see Market Dis- 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you didIf you sell or trade the debt instrument beforecount Bonds in chapter 1. not choose to include market discount in incomematurity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifA loss on the sale or other disposition of a currently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” onat the time the instrument was originally issuedtax-exempt state or local government bond is the next line in column (a) and the amount of thethere was an intention to call it before its matur-deductible as a capital loss. accrued market discount as a loss in column (f).ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the
Also report the amount of accrued market dis-Redeemed before maturity. If a state or extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts
count in column (f) as interest income on Sched-local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, of OID previously includible in your income. In
ule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it asis redeemed before it matures, the OID is not this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
“Accrued Market Discount.”taxable to you. An intention to call a debt instrument before
If a state or local bond issued after June 8, maturity means there is a written or oral agree-
Retirement of debt instrument.Any amount1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of ment or understanding not provided for in the
that you receive on the retirement of a debtthe OID that is earned while you hold the bond is debt instrument between the issuer and original
instrument is treated in the same way as if younot taxable to you. However, you must report the holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru-
had sold or traded that instrument.unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru-
ments that are part of an issue, the agreement orNotes of individuals.If you hold an obligationExample. On July 1, 1994, the date of is-understanding must be between the issuer andof an individual that was issued with OID aftersue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondthe original holders of a substantial amount ofMarch 1, 1984, you generally must include thefor $800. The face amount of the bond wasthe debt instruments in the issue. OID in your income currently, and your gain or$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time
loss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalthe bond was issued, the issuer had no intentionExample 1. On February 4, 2003, you
gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-of redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasbought at original issue for $7,600, Jones
plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-callable at its face amount beginning 10 years Corporation’s 10-year, 5% bond which has a
als and all of the following requirements are met.after the issue date. stated redemption price at maturity of $10,000.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of On February 3, 2005, you sold the bond for1. The lender is not in the business of lending11 years (July 1, 2005) for its face amount of $9,040. Assume you have included $334 of themoney.$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The OID in your gross income (including the amount
OID earned during the time you held the bond, accrued for 2005) and increased your basis in 2. The amount of the loan, plus the amount of
$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual the bond by that amount. Your basis is now any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 or
interest also is not taxable. However, you must $7,934. If at the time of the original issue there less.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- 3. You are related to such an owner or of-Applicable imputed income amount.Figure
cipal purposes of the loan. ficer. You are related if you and the owner this amount as follows.
or officer are “related parties,” as definedIf the exception applies, or the obligation was 1. Figure the amount of interest that wouldearlier under Related Party Transactions,issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include have accrued on your net investment inor if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orthe OID in your income currently. When you sell the conversion transaction for the periodniece of the owner or officer.or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain ending on the earlier of:that is not more than your accrued share of the If the actual loss that is finally determined is
OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of more than the amount you deducted as an esti-a. The date when you dispose of the posi-
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as ation, or
sale or redemption is capital loss. bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the
b. The date when the transaction stopsamount deducted as an estimated loss, you
being a conversion transaction.must include in income (in the final determina-
Bearer Obligations tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov- To figure this amount, use an interest rate
eries in Publication 525, Taxable and equal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-You cannot deduct any loss on an obligationNontaxable Income. fined later.required to be in registered form that is instead
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the 2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated asNonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose
sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- ordinary income from any earlier disposi-to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss
nary income. However, if the issuer was subject tion or other termination of a position heldor an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the
to a tax when the obligation was issued, then as part of the same conversion transac-amount of the actual loss is determined and
you can deduct any loss, and any gain may tion.deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.
qualify for capital gain treatment. Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-
Applicable rate.If the term of the conver-ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi-Obligations required to be in registered
ness Bad Debts, later. sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rateform. Any obligation must be in registered
is the federal short-term rate in effect underform unless:
section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code
Sale of Annuity1. It is issued by a natural person, during the period of the conversion transaction,
compounded daily.2. It is not of a type offered to the public,The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityIn all other cases, the applicable rate is thecontract before its maturity date that is based on3. It has a maturity at the date of issue of not “applicable federal rate” determined as if theinterest accumulated on the contract is ordinarymore than 1 year, or conversion transaction were a debt instrumentincome. and compounded semi-annually.4. It was issued before 1983.
The rates discussed above are published by
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, youConversion Transactions
can contact the IRS to get these rates. SeeDeposit in Insolvent or Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversionchapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS.Bankrupt Financial Institution transaction is treated as ordinary income. This
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi-Net investment. To determine your net in-If you lose money you have on deposit in a
nation of any position you held as part of avestment in a conversion transaction, includequalified financial institution that becomes insol-
conversion transaction that you entered into af-the fair market value of any position at the time itvent or bankrupt, you may be able to deduct
ter April 30, 1993.your loss in one of three ways. becomes part of the transaction. This means
A conversion transaction is any transactionthat your net investment generally will be the
1. Ordinary loss, that meets both of these tests. total amount you invested, less any amount you
received for entering into the position (for exam-2. Casualty loss, or 1. Substantially all of your expected returnple, a premium you received for writing a call).from the transaction is due to the time3. Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital
value of your net investment. In otherloss). Position with built-in loss.A special rule ap-words, the return on your investment is, inplies when a position with a built-in loss be-substance, like interest on a loan.Ordinary loss or casualty loss.If you can comes part of a conversion transaction. Areasonably estimate your loss, you can choose2. The transaction is one of the following.built-in loss is any loss that you would haveto treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary realized if you had disposed of or otherwiseloss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eithera. A straddle as defined under Straddles, terminated the position at its fair market value atway, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc- later, but including any set of offsettingthe time it became part of the conversion trans-tion. positions on stock established beforeaction.If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aOctober 22, 2004.
When applying the conversion transactionmiscellaneous itemized deduction on Scheduleb. Any transaction in which you acquirerules to a position with a built-in loss, use theA (Form 1040), line 22. The maximum amount property (whether or not actively traded)position’s fair market value at the time it becameyou can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are at substantially the same time that youpart of the transaction. But, when you dispose ofmarried filing separately) reduced by any ex- contract to sell the same property, oror otherwise terminate the position in a transac-pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is substantially identical property, at ation in which you recognize gain or loss, yousubject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income price set in the contract. must recognize the built-in loss. The conversionlimit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary
transaction rules do not affect whether theloss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.c. Any other transaction that is marketed
built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capitalIf you claim a casualty loss, attach Form or sold as producing capital gains from
loss.4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return. a transaction described in (1).
Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your total
casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10% Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
Amount treated as ordinary income. Theof your adjusted gross income. tions. Before determining the amount of gain
amount of gain treated as ordinary income is theYou cannot choose either of these methods treated as ordinary income, you can net certain
smaller of:if: gains and losses from positions of the same
conversion transaction. To do this, you have to1. You own at least 1% of the financial institu- 1. The gain recognized on the disposition ordispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-tion, other termination of the position, or riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot
net the built-in loss against the gain.2. You are an officer of the institution, or 2. The “applicable imputed income amount.”
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 51

Page 52 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can net gains and losses only if gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax is loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a
you identify the conversion transac- increased by an interest charge. capital loss.
tion as an identified netting transac-
RECORDS
Constructive ownership transactions.The Section 1244 (small business) stock.This istion on your books and records. Each position offollowing are constructive ownership transac-stock that was issued for money or propertythe conversion transaction must be identifiedtions. (other than stock and securities) in a domesticbefore the end of the day on which the position
small business corporation. During its 5 mostbecomes part of the conversion transaction. For1. A notional principal contract in which yourecent tax years before the loss, this corporationconversion transactions entered into before have the right to receive all or substantiallymust have derived more than 50% of its grossFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if theall of the investment yield on a financialreceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi-identification was made by that date. asset and you are obligated to reimbursedends, interest, annuities, and gains from salesall or substantially all of any decline inOptions dealers and commodities traders. and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora-value of the financial asset.These rules do not apply to options dealers and tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less
commodities traders. 2. A forward or futures contract to acquire athan 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax
financial asset. years ending before the loss. If the corporationHow to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% testLosses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad- 3. The holding of a call option and writing of aapplies to the entire period the corporation wasdles, to report conversion transactions. See the put option on a financial asset at substan-in existence before the day of the loss. However,instructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. tially the same strike price and maturityif the corporation’s deductions (other than thedate. net operating loss and dividends received de-
This provision does not apply if all the posi-ductions) were more than its gross income dur-Commodity Futures tions are marked to market. Marked to marketing this period, this 50% test does not apply.
rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed inThe corporation must have been largely anA commodity futures contract is a standardized,
detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked tooperating company for ordinary loss treatmentexchange-traded contract for the sale or
Market, earlier. to apply.purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a
future date for a fixed price. If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,Financial asset.A financial asset, for this
If the contract is a regulated futures contract, the stock must be common stock. If issued afterpurpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through
the rules described earlier under Section 1256 July 18, 1984, the stock may be either commonentity. Pass-through entities include partner-
Contracts Marked to Market apply to it. or preferred. For more information about theships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-
The termination of a commodity futures con- requirements of a small business corporation orment companies, and real estate investment
tract generally results in capital gain or loss the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-trusts.
unless the contract is a hedging transaction. tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its
Amount of ordinary income.Long-term cap- regulations.Hedging transaction. A futures contract thatital gain is treated as ordinary income to the
is a hedging transaction generally produces or-extent it is more than the net underlyingThe stock must be issued to the person tak-
dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-long-term capital gain. The net underlyinging the loss.You must be the original owner
ing transaction if you enter into the contract inlong-term capital gain is the amount of net capi-of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat-
the ordinary course of your business primarily total gain you would have realized if you acquiredment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued
manage the risk of interest rate or price changesthe asset for its fair market value on the date theto your partnership, you must have been a part-
or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinaryconstructive ownership transaction was opened,ner when the stock was issued and have re-
property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-and sold the asset for its fair market value on themained so until the time of the loss. You add
dinary property or obligations are those that can-date the transaction was closed. If you do notyour distributive share of the partnership loss to
not produce capital gain or loss under anyestablish the amount of net underlying long-termany individual section 1244 stock loss you may
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, ithave before applying the ordinary loss limit.
cise of a futures contract that protects againstis treated as zero. Stock distributed by partnership.If yourprice changes in your business inventory results
partnership distributes the stock to you, you can-More information. For more informationin an ordinary gain or loss.
not treat any later loss on that stock as anabout constructive ownership transactions, seeFor more information about hedging transac-
ordinary loss.section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.tions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,
see Hedging Transactions under Section 1256 Stock sold through underwriter. Stock
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier. sold through an underwriter is not section 1244Losses on Section 1244 stock unless the underwriter only acted as aIf you have numerous transactions in(Small Business) Stock selling agent for the corporation.the commodity futures market during
the year, the burden of proof is on youYou can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanRECORDS
Stock dividends and reorganizations.Stockto show which transactions are hedging transac-as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, oryou receive as a stock dividend qualifies astions. Clearly identify any hedging transactionsworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report thesection 1244 stock if:on your books and records before the end of theloss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,
day you entered into the transaction. It may beline 10. 1. You receive it from a small business cor-helpful to have separate brokerage accounts forAny gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalporation in which you own stock, andyour hedging and nonhedging transactions. Forgain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.
specific requirements concerning identification 2. The stock you own meets the require-Do not offset gains against losses that are within
of hedging transactions and the underlying item, ments when the stock dividend is distrib-the ordinary loss limit, explained later in this
items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged, uted.discussion, even if the transactions are in stock
see Regulations section 1.1221-2(f). of the same company. Report the gain on If you trade your section 1244 stock for newSchedule D (Form 1040). stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-If you must figure a net operating loss, anytion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that isGains From Certain Constructive ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stockonly a change in identity, form, or place of organ-Ownership Transactions is a business loss. ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the
stock you trade meets the requirements whenIf you have a gain from a constructive ownershipOrdinary loss limit.The amount that you can
the trade occurs.transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in- deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000
volving a financial asset (discussed later) and each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000, If you hold section 1244 stock and other
the gain normally would be treated as long-term even if only one spouse has this type of loss. If stock in the same corporation, not all of the stock
capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has no you receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani-
instead as ordinary income. In addition, if any loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary zation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Only
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that part based on the section 1244 stock you If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can auction on the basis of yield starts the day after
deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital the Secretary of the Treasury, through newshold will qualify.
loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless- releases, gives notification of acceptance to
Example. Your basis for 100 shares of Xness of that stock. A gain from the sale or trade successful bidders. The holding period of U.S.
common stock is $1,000. These shares qualifyof that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset your Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-
as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stockgains and losses, even if they are on stock of the ing on a subscription basis at a specified yield
dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-same company. starts the day after the subscription is submitted.
mon stock, the basis of which is determined fromHow to report.You report this type of ordinaryAutomatic investment service. In determin-the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are alsoloss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition toing your holding period for shares bought by thesection 1244 stock. the information required by the form, you mustbank or other agent, full shares are consideredIf you also own stock in the corporation thatinclude the name and address of the companybought first and any fractional shares are con-is not section 1244 stock when you receive thethat issued the stock. If applicable, also includesidered bought last. Your holding period startsstock dividend, you must divide the shares youthe reason the stock is worthless and the ap-on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If areceive as a dividend between the section 1244proximate date it became worthless. Report ashare was bought over more than one purchasestock and the other stock. Only the shares fromcapital gain from the sale of SBIC stock ondate, your holding period for that share is a splitthe former can be section 1244 stock. Schedule D of Form 1040. holding period. A part of the share is considered
to have been bought on each date that stockShort sale.If you close a short sale of SBICContributed property.To determine ordinary was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofstock with other SBIC stock that you bought onlyloss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade available funds.for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale isfor property, you have to reduce the basis of the
a capital loss. See Short Sales, later in thisstock if: Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investmentchapter, for more information. property in a trade for other investment property1. The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of the and your basis for the new property is deter-property, immediately before the trade,Holding Period mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in thewas more than its fair market value, and old property, your holding period for the new
If you sold or traded investment property, youproperty begins on the day following the date2. The basis of the stock is determined by themust determine your holding period for the prop-you acquired the old property.basis of the property. erty. Your holding period determines whether
Reduce the basis of the stock by the differenceany capital gain or loss was a short-term or aProperty received as a gift.If you receive a
between the adjusted basis of the property andlong-term capital gain or loss. gift of property and your basis is determined by
its fair market value at the time of the trade. You the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodLong-term or short-term.If you hold invest-reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss. is considered to have started on the same dayment property more than 1 year, any capital gainDo not reduce the basis of the stock for any the donor’s holding period started.or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If youother purpose. If your basis is determined by the fair markethold the property 1 year or less, any capital gainvalue of the property, your holding period startsor loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.Example. You transfer property with an ad- on the day after the date of the gift.To determine how long you held the invest-justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of
ment property, begin counting on the date afterInherited property.If you inherit investment$250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.
the day you acquired the property. The day youproperty, your capital gain or loss on any laterThe basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure
disposed of the property is part of your holdingdisposition of that property is treated as athe ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of
period. long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If you
gardless of how long you actually held the prop-later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your
Example. If you bought investment propertyerty.$800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital
on February 5, 2004, and sold it on February 5,loss of $750.
2005, your holding period is not more than 1Real property bought. To figure how long
year and you have a short-term capital gain oryou have held real property bought under anContributions to capital.If the basis of your
loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2005, yourunconditional contract, begin counting on thesection 1244 stock has increased, through con-
holding period is more than 1 year and you haveday after you received title to it or on the daytributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat
a long-term capital gain or loss. after you took possession of it and assumed thethis increase as applying to stock that is not
burdens and privileges of ownership, whicheversection 1244 stock when you figure an ordinarySecurities traded on an established market.happened first. However, taking delivery or pos-loss on its sale. For securities traded on an established securi-session of real property under an option agree-ties market, your holding period begins the dayment is not enough to start the holding period.Example. You buy 100 shares of sectionafter the trade date you bought the securities,The holding period cannot start until there is an1244 stock for $10,000. You are the originaland ends on the trade date you sold them.actual contract of sale. The holding period of theowner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to
Do not confuse the trade date with theseller cannot end before that time.capital that increases the total basis of the 100
settlement date, which is the date byshares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares Real property repossessed.If you sell realwhich the stock must be delivered andfor $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You canCAUTION
!
property but keep a security interest in it, andpayment must be made.deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) then later repossess the property under theas an ordinary loss under these rules. The re- terms of the sales contract, your holding periodExample. You are a cash method, calendarmaining $500 is a capital loss. for a later sale includes the period you held theyear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-
Recordkeeping. You must keep rec- property before the original sale and the periodcember 29, 2005. According to the rules of the
ords sufficient to show your stock after the repossession. Your holding periodstock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery
qualifies as section 1244 stock. Your does not include the time between the originalRECORDS
of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on
records must also distinguish your section 1244 sale and the repossession. That is, it does notJanuary 4, 2006. You received payment of the
stock from any other stock you own in the corpo- include the period during which the first buyersale price on that same day. Report your gain on
ration. held the property.your 2005 return, even though you received the
payment in 2006. The gain is long term or shortStock dividends.The holding period for stockterm depending on whether you held the stockyou received as a taxable stock dividend beginsLosses on Small Business more than 1 year. Your holding period ended onon the date of distribution.Investment Company Stock December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss,The holding period for new stock you re-you would also report it on your 2005 return.A small business investment company (SBIC) is ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on
one that is licensed and operated under theU.S. Treasury notes and bonds.The holding the same day as the holding period of the old
Small Business Investment Act of 1958. period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 53

Page 54 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or When deductible. You can take a bad debt
Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must besecurities in a controlled corporation. deduction only in the year the debt becomes
treated as a long-term capital loss to the extentworthless. You do not have to wait until a debt isNontaxable stock rights.Your holding periodyou received, from that stock, qualified divi-due to determine whether it is worthless. A debtfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the samedends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-becomes worthless when there is no longer anyday as the holding period of the underlyingnary dividends. This is true regardless of howchance that the amount owed will be paid.stock. The holding period for stock acquiredlong you actually held the stock. Generally, anIt is not necessary to go to court if you canthrough the exercise of stock rights begins onextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equalsshow that a judgment from the court would bethe date the right was exercised. or exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferreduncollectible. You must only show that you have
stock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.Section 1256 contracts.Gains or losses on
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-section 1256 contracts open at the end of the
dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofyear, or terminated during the year, are treatedNonbusiness Bad Debts
an unsecured and unpreferred debt.as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-
If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in aIf someone owes you money that you cannotless of how long the contracts were held. See
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent orcollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able toSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-
Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier.deduct the amount owed to you when you figurelier.
your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-Filing a claim for refund.If you do notOption exercised. Your holding period forless. deduct a bad debt on your original return for theproperty you acquire when you exercise an op-There are two kinds of bad debts — busi-year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimtion begins the day after you exercise the option.ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To dogenerally, is one that comes from operating yourWash sales. Your holding period for substan- this, use Form 1040X to amend your return fortrade or business and is deductible as a busi-tially identical stock or securities you acquire in a the year the debt became worthless. You mustness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusinesswash sale includes the period you held the old file it within 7 years from the date your originalbad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-stock or securities. return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearstal losses. from the date you paid the tax, whichever isQualified small business stock.Your hold-
later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthlessing period for stock you acquired in a tax-freeExample. An architect made personal loanssecurities generally must be filed within 3 yearsrollover of gain from a sale of qualified smallto several friends who were not clients. Shefrom the date a return is filed, or 2 years from thebusiness stock, described later under Gains on could not collect on some of these loans. Theydate the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For moreQualified Small Business Stock, includes theare deductible only as nonbusiness bad debtsinformation about filing a claim, see Publicationperiod you held the old stock. because the architect was not in the business of556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,lending money and the loans do not have anyCommodity futures. Futures transactions in and Claims for Refund.relationship to her business.any commodity subject to the rules of a board of
trade or commodity exchange are long term if Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debtBusiness bad debts.For information on busi-the contract was held for more than 6 months. that becomes worthless, you cannot take a badness bad debts of an employee, see PublicationYour holding period for a commodity re- debt deduction for your payments on the debt529. For information on other business badceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures unless you can show either that your reason fordebts, see chapter 11 of Publication 535.contract, other than a regulated futures contract making the guarantee was to protect your in-
subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256, vestment or that you entered the guaranteeDeductible nonbusiness bad debts.To beincludes your holding period for the futures con- transaction with a profit motive. If you make thedeductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to-tract if you held the contract as a capital asset. guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partlyceive any consideration in return, your pay-worthless nonbusiness debt.Securities futures contract.Your holding pe- ments are considered a gift and you cannot takeriod for a security received in satisfaction of aGenuine debt required. A debt must be a deduction.securities futures contract, other than one that isgenuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt isa section 1256 contract, includes your holdinggenuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin-period for the futures contract if you held thetionship based on a valid and enforceable obli-cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation,contract as a capital asset. gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum ofguaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora-Your holding period for a security received inmoney. tion received. The corporation defaulted on thesatisfaction of a securities futures contract to loan and Henry made full payment. Because heLoan or gift.For a bad debt, you must showsell, other than one that is a section 1256 con- guaranteed the loan to protect his investment inthat there was an intention at the time of thetract, is determined by the rules that apply to the corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinesstransaction to make a loan and not a gift. If youshort sales, discussed later under Short Sales. bad debt deduction.lend money to a relative or friend with the under-Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.months or less. If you hold stock in a regu-ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badMilt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note atlated investment company (commonly called adebt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badtheir local credit union. John does not pay themutual fund) or real estate investment trustdebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the(REIT) for 6 months or less and then sell it at ationship between you and the person or organi-note. However, since he did not enter into theloss (other than under a periodic liquidationzation that owes you the money. guarantee agreement to protect an investmentplan), special rules may apply. When minor children borrow from their par-or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtents to pay for their basic needs, there is noCapital gain distributions received.The deduction.genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deductedloss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-
for such a loan. Deductible in year paid.Unless you havedends you received, as explained next) is
rights against the borrower, discussed next, atreated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalBasis in bad debt required.To deduct a payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isof any capital gain distributions you receivedbad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is,deductible in the year you make the payment.and your share of any undistributed capitalyou must have already included the amount ingains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyour income or loaned out your cash. For exam-Rights against the borrower.When youloss. ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for make payment on a loan that you guaranteed,
Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundcourt-ordered child support not paid to you by you may have the right to take the place of the
stock. If you received exempt-interest divi- your former spouse. If you are a cash method lender (the right of subrogation). The debt is
dends on the stock, at least part of your loss is taxpayer (most individuals are), you generally then owed to you. If you have this right, or some
disallowed. You can deduct only the amount of cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid other right to demand payment from the bor-
loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi- salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, rower, you cannot take a bad debt deduction
dends. and similar items. until these rights become totally worthless.
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Debts owed by political parties.You cannot gal action to collect would probably not Special rules.Special rules may apply to
take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any gains and losses from short sales of stocks,result in payment of any part of the debt.
worthless debt owed to you by: securities, and commodity and securities futures
(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-
1. A political party, Short Sales quired property substantially identical property
to that sold short. But if the amount of property2. A national, state, or local committee of aA short sale occurs when you agree to sellyou sold short is more than the amount of thatpolitical party, or property you do not own (or own but do not wishsubstantially identical property, the special rulesto sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.3. A committee, association, or organization do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.
that either accepts contributions or spends
Gains and holding period.If you held the1. You sell short. You borrow property andmoney to influence elections.
substantially identical property for 1 year or lessdeliver it to a buyer.
on the date of the short sale, or if you acquiredMechanics’ and suppliers’ liens.Workers 2. You close the sale. At a later date, youthe substantially identical property after theand material suppliers may file liens againsteither buy substantially identical propertyshort sale and by the date of closing the shortproperty because of debts owed by a builder orand deliver it to the lender or make deliv-sale, then:contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo-ery out of property that you held at the time
sure and loss of your property, you are entitledof the sale. Delivery of property borrowedRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close theto repayment from the builder or contractor. Iffrom another lender does not satisfy thisshort sale is a short-term capital gain, andthe debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debtrequirement. Rule 2. The holding period of the substantiallydeduction.
You do not realize gain or loss until delivery ofidentical property begins on the date of theInsolvency of contractor.You can take a property to close the short sale. You will have aclosing of the short sale or on the date of thebad debt deduction for the amount you depositcapital gain or loss if the property used to closesale of this property, whichever comes first.with a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-the short sale is a capital asset.
vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.
Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, youIf the deposit is for work unrelated to your tradeException if property becomes worthless. held substantially identical property for moreor business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-A different rule applies if the property sold shortthan 1 year, any loss you realize on the shorttion. becomes substantially worthless. In that case,sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you heldyou must recognize gain as if the short sale wereSecondary liability on home mortgage.If the property used to close the sale for 1 year orclosed when the property became substantiallythe buyer of your home assumes your mort- less. Certain losses on short sales of stock orworthless.gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re- securities are also subject to wash sale treat-
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later.
Exception for constructive sales.Enteringdefaults on the loan and the house is then sold
Mixed straddles. Under certain elections,into a short sale may cause you to be treated asfor less than the amount outstanding on the
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a shortmortgage, you may have to make up the differ- having made a constructive sale of property. In
sale as long term under the special rule. Theseence. You can take a bad debt deduction for thethat case, you will have to recognize gain on the
elections are for positions that are part of aamount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if youdate of the constructive sale. For details, see
mixed straddle. See Other elections undercannot collect it from the buyer. Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po-
Mixed Straddle Elections, later, for more infor-sitions, earlier.Worthless securities.If you own securities mation about these elections.
that become totally worthless, you can take aExample. On May 3, 2005, you bought 100deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seeshares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.Worthless Securities under What Is a Sale or Reporting Substitute PaymentsOn September 3, 2005, you sold short 100Trade, earlier in this chapter. shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. YouIf any broker transferred your securities for usemade no other transactions involving BakerRecovery of a bad debt.If you deducted a in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re-stock for the rest of 2005 and the first 30 days ofbad debt and in a later tax year you recover ceived certain substitute dividend payments on2006. Your short sale is treated as a construc-(collect) all or part of it, you may have to include your behalf while the short sale was open, thattive sale of an appreciated financial positionthe amount you recover in your gross income. broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or abecause a sale of your Baker stock on the dateHowever, you can exclude from gross income similar statement, reporting the amount of theseof the short sale would have resulted in a gain.the amount recovered up to the amount of the payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used forYou recognize a $600 short-term capital gaindeduction that did not reduce your tax in the year those substitute payments totaling $10 or morefrom the constructive sale and your new holdingdeducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525. that are known on the payment’s record date to
period in the Baker stock begins on Septemberbe in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi- 3. tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orSchedule D (Form 1040). that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do notOn Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the nameShort-Term or Long-Term treat these substitute payments as dividends orof the debtor and “statement attached” in col-Capital Gain or Loss interest. Instead, report the substitute paymentsumn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in shown on Form 1099-MISC as “Other income”parentheses in column (f). Use a separate lineAs a general rule, you determine whether youon line 21 of Form 1040.for each bad debt. have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss
For each bad debt, attach a statement toon a short sale by the amount of time you actu-Substitute payment. A substitute paymentyour return that contains: ally hold the property eventually delivered to themeans a payment in lieu of:lender to close the short sale.1. A description of the debt, including the 1. Tax-exempt interest (including OID) thatamount, and the date it became due, Example. Even though you do not own any has accrued while the short sale was
stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell2. The name of the debtor, and any business open, and
100 shares of it, which you borrow from youror family relationship between you and the 2. A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterbroker. After 13 months, when the price of thedebtor, the transfer of stock for use in a short salestock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace3. The efforts you made to collect the debt, and before the closing of the short sale.Corporation stock and immediately deliver themand to your broker to close out the short sale. Your
loss is a short-term capital loss because your4. Why you decided the debt was worthless. Payments in lieu of dividends.If you borrow
holding period for the delivered property is lessFor example, you could show that the bor- stock to make a short sale, you may have to
than one day.rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le- remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 55

Page 56 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dends distributed while you maintain your short within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares 4. Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-
position. You can deduct these payments only if cantly from the conversion ratio, andof the same stock for $800. Because you bought
you hold the short sale open at least 46 dayssubstantially identical stock, you cannot deduct5. Is unrestricted as to convertibility.(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinaryyour loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add
dividend as defined below) and you itemize yourthe disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of theMore or less stock bought than sold.If thedeductions. new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newnumber of shares of substantially identical stockYou deduct these payments as investment stock, which is $1,050. or securities you buy within 30 days before orinterest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter- after the sale is either more or less than theExample 2. You are an employee of a cor-est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information. number of shares you sold, you must determineporation that has an incentive pay plan. UnderIf you close the short sale by the 45th day the particular shares to which the wash salethis plan, you are given 10 shares of theafter the date of the short sale (1 year or less in rules apply. You do this by matching the sharescorporation’s stock as a bonus award. You in-the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can- bought with an equal number of the shares sold.clude the fair market value of the stock in yournot deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend Match the shares bought in the same order thatgross income as additional pay. You later sellthat you make to the lender. Instead, you must you bought them, beginning with the first sharesthese shares at a loss. If you receive anotherincrease the basis of the stock used to close the bought. The shares or securities so matched arebonus award of substantially identical stockshort sale by that amount. subject to the wash sale rules.within 30 days of the sale, you cannot deductTo determine how long a short sale is kept
your loss on the sale.open, do not include any period during which Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M
you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a stock on September 24, 2004, for $5,000. OnOptions and futures contracts.The washcontractual obligation to buy substantially identi- December 18, 2004, you bought 50 shares ofsale rules apply to losses from sales or trades ofcal stock or securities. substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-contracts and options to acquire or sell stock orIf your payment is made for a liquidating cember 26, 2004, you bought 25 shares of sub-securities. They do not apply to losses fromdistribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if stantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januarysales or trades of commodity futures contractsyou buy more shares equal to a stock distribu- 6, 2005, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youand foreign currencies. See Coordination oftion issued on the borrowed stock during your bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules undershort position, you have a capital expense. You on the sale. However, because you bought 75Straddles, later, for information about the taxmust add the payment to the cost of the stock shares of substantially identical stock within 30treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-sold short. days before the sale, you cannot deduct the losstions in a straddle. ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the lossException. If you close the short sale within
($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of theSecurities futures contract to sell.Losses45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay in
50 shares bought on December 18, 2004, isfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of alieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the
increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750securities futures contract to sell generally areextent the payments are more than the amount
disallowed loss. The new basis of those sharestreated in the same manner as losses from thethat you receive as ordinary income from the
is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25closing of a short sale, discussed later in thislender of the stock for the use of collateral with
shares bought on December 26, 2004, is in-section under Short sales.the short sale. This exception does not apply to
creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125payments in place of extraordinary dividends.Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you+ $250).sell common stock at a loss and, at the sameExtraordinary dividends.If the amount of time, buy warrants for common stock of the Example 2. You bought 100 shares of Many dividend you receive on a share of preferredsame corporation. But if you sell warrants at astock on September 24, 2004. On February 3,stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofloss and, at the same time, buy common stock in2005, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.other stock) of the amount realized on the shortthe same corporation, the wash sale rules applyOn each of the 4 days from February 10-13,sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-only if the warrants and stock are considered2005, you bought 50 shares of substantiallynary dividend. substantially identical, as discussed next.identical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000
loss. You must add half the disallowed lossWash Sales Substantially identical. In determining ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought onwhether stock or securities are substantiallyFebruary 10. Add the other half ($500) to theYou cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesidentical, you must consider all the facts andbasis of the shares bought on February 11.of stock or securities in a wash sale. circumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-
A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade Loss and gain on same day. Loss from aily, stocks or securities of one corporation are
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 days wash sale of one block of stock or securitiesnot considered substantially identical to stocks
before or after the sale you: cannot be used to reduce any gains on identicalor securities of another corporation. However,
blocks sold the same day.they may be substantially identical in some1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-cases. For example, in a reorganization, theties, Example. During 2000, you bought 100stocks and securities of the predecessor and
shares of X stock on each of three occasions.2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-successor corporations may be substantially
You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100curities in a fully taxable trade, oridentical.
shares, $100 a share for the second block, andSimilarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- $95 a share for the third block. On December 23,poration are not ordinarily considered substan-stantially identical stock or securities. 2005, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 atially identical to the common stock of the same
share. On January 6, 2006, you bought 250If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-corporation. However, where the bonds or pre-
shares of identical X stock. You cannot deducttion you control buys substantially identicalferred stock are convertible into common stock
the loss of $33 a share on the first block becausestock, you also have a wash sale. of the same corporation, the relative values,
within 30 days after the date of sale you boughtIf your loss was disallowed because of theprice changes, and other circumstances may
250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youwash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to themake these bonds or preferred stock and the
cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofcost of the new stock or securities. The result iscommon stock substantially identical. For exam-
the second and third blocks of stock by this loss.your basis in the new stock or securities. Thisple, preferred stock is substantially identical to
adjustment postpones the loss deduction untilthe common stock if the preferred stock: Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to athe disposition of the new stock or securities. dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a1. Is convertible into common stock,Your holding period for the new stock or securi- transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-ties begins on the same day as the holding ness.2. Has the same voting rights as the commonperiod of the stock or securities sold. stock, Short sales.The wash sale rules apply to a
3. Is subject to the same dividend restric-Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter
tions,for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and into another short sale of, substantially identical
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
stock or securities within a period beginning 30 cago Board Options Exchange. (But see SectionOptions
1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier, fordays before the date the short sale is complete
special rules that may apply to nonequity op-and ending 30 days after that date. Options are generally subject to the rules de-
tions and dealer equity options.) These rules arescribed in this section. If the option is part of aFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a short also presented in Table 4-1.straddle, the loss deferral rules covered latersale is considered complete on the date theunder Straddles may also apply. For special Calls and puts are issued by writers (grant-short sale is entered into, if: rules that apply to nonequity options and dealerors) to holders for cash premiums. They are
equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.1. On that date, you own stock or securitiesMarked to Market, earlier. A “call option” is the right to buy from theidentical to those sold short (or by thatGain or loss from the sale or trade of anwriter of the option, at any time before a speci-date you enter into a contract or option tooption to buy or sell property that is a capitalfied future date, a stated number of shares ofacquire that stock or those securities), andasset in your hands, or would be if you acquiredstock at a specified price. Conversely, a “put
it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or2. You later deliver the stock or securities to option” is the right to sell to the writer, at any time
would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss isclose the short sale. before a specified future date, a stated number
ordinary gain or loss. of shares at a specified price.Otherwise, a short sale is not considered
complete until the property is delivered to closeExample 1. You purchased an option to buyHolders of calls and puts.If you buy a call orthe sale. 100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stocka put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital
This treatment also applies to losses fromincreases in value and you sell the option forexpenditure.
the sale, exchange, or termination of a securities more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalIf you sell the call or the put before you
gain because the stock underlying the optionfutures contract to sell. exercise it, the difference between its cost and
would have been a capital asset in your hands.the amount you receive for it is either a
Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
Example 2. The facts are the same as instock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of pending on how long you held it.
Example 1, except that the stock decreases inthe stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7, If the option expires, its cost is either avalue and you sell the option for less than youyou buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750. long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingpaid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.You close the short sale on November 17 by on your holding period, which ends on the expi-
delivering the shares bought on June 2. You ration date.Option not exercised.If you have a loss be-
cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750) If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basiscause you did not exercise an option to buy or
because the date of entering into the short sale of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,sell, you are considered to have sold or traded
(October 6) is considered the date the sale is reduce your amount realized on the sale of thethe option on the date that it expired.
complete for wash sale purposes and you underlying stock by the cost of the put whenWriter of option.If you write (grant) an option,bought substantially identical stock within 30 figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on thehow you report your gain or loss depends ondays from that date. sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortwhether it was exercised. term depending on your holding period for theIf you are not in the business of writing op-underlying stock.Residual interests in a REMIC.The wash tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-
sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your Put option as short sale.Buying a put op-ties, commodities, or commodity futures is not
residual interest in a real estate mortgage in- tion is generally treated as a short sale, and theexercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-
vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-ceive is a short-term capital gain.
beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter- ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. IfIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-
you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orerty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts,est and ending 6 months after that sale, you
less at the time you buy the put, any gain on thelater.acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aany interest in a taxable mortgage pool that isSection 1256 contract options.Gain or loss short-term capital gain. The same is true if youcomparable to a residual interest. REMICs areis recognized on the exercise of an option on abuy the underlying stock after you buy the putdiscussed in chapter 1. section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contractsbut before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Yourare defined under Section 1256 Contracts holding period for the underlying stock begins onMarked to Market, earlier.How to report.Report a wash sale or trade on the earliest of:line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),Cash settlement option.A cash settlement
whichever is appropriate. Show the full amount 1. The date you dispose of the stock,option is treated as an option to buy or sell
of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On theproperty. A cash settlement option is any option2. The date you exercise the put,next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) andthat on exercise is settled in, or could be settled
the amount of the loss not allowed as a positive 3. The date you sell the put, orin, cash or property other than the underlying
amount in column (f). property. 4. The date the put expires.
How to report.Gain or loss from the closing or
expiration of an option that is not a section 1256Securities Futures Contracts Writers of calls and puts.If you write (grant)
contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,a call or a put, do not include the amount you
is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040).A securities futures contract is a contract of sale receive for writing it in your income at the time of
If an option you purchased expired, enter thefor future delivery of a single security or of a receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:
expiration date in column (c) and enter “Expired”narrow-based security index.
in column (d). 1. Your obligation expires,Gain or loss from the contract generally willIf an option that you wrote expired, enter thebe treated in a manner similar to gain or loss 2. You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in theexpiration date in column (b) and enter “Expired”from transactions in the underlying security. This case of a put, the underlying stock whenin column (e).means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, or the option is exercised, or
termination of the contract will generally have 3. You engage in a closing transaction.the same character as gain or loss from transac-Calls and Putstions in the property to which the contract re- If your obligation expires, the amount you
lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale, received for writing the call or put is short-termCalls and puts are options on securities and are
exchange, or termination of a contract to sell capital gain.covered by the rules just discussed for options.
property will be considered short-term, regard- If a call you write is exercised and you sellThe following are specific applications of these
less of how long you hold the contract. These the underlying stock, increase your amount real-rules to holders and writers of options that are
contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless ized on the sale of the stock by the amount youbought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
they are dealer securities futures contracts). received for the call when figuring your gain ornational securities exchange, such as the Chi-
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 57

Page 58 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss. The gain or loss is long term or short term 3.Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on
depending on your holding period of the stock. personal property. For example, a straddle mayexcept that the options were exercised on
If a put you write is exercised and you buy consist of a purchased option to buy and aMay 27, 2005. The buyer adds the cost of
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the purchased option to sell on the same number ofthe options to the basis of the stock bought
stock by the amount you received for the put. shares of the security, with the same exercisethrough the exercise of the options. The
Your holding period for the stock begins on the price and period.writer adds the amount received from writ-date you buy it, not on the date you wrote theing the options to the amount realized fromPersonal property.This is any property of aput. selling the stock to figure gain or loss. Thetype that is actively traded. It includes stockIf you enter into a closing transaction bygain or loss is short term or long term de-options and contracts to buy stock, but generallypaying an amount equal to the value of the call does not include stock.pending upon the holding period of theor put at the time of the payment, the difference
stock.between the amount you pay and the amount Straddle rules for stock.Although stock is
you receive for the call or put is a short-term generally excluded from the definition of per-4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the
capital gain or loss. sonal property when applying the straddle rules,same as in (1), except the options were
it is included in the following two situations. nonequity options, subject to the rules forExamples of non-dealer transactions.
section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer1. The stock is of a type which is actively1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- of the options, you would recognize a traded and at least 1 of the offsetting posi-sued on April 8, 2005, for $4,000. These short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a tions is a position on that stock or substan-equity options expired in December 2005, long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you tially similar or related property.without being exercised. If you were a were a writer of the options, you would2. The stock is in a corporation formed orholder (buyer) of the options, you would recognize a short-term capital gain of availed of to take positions in personalrecognize a short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a long-term capital gain of property that offset positions taken by any$4,000. If you were a writer of the options,$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts shareholder.you would recognize a short-term capital Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor-gain of $4,000. mation. Note. For positions established before Oc-2. Closing transaction. The facts are the
tober 22, 2004, condition (1) above does notsame as in (1), except that on May 10,
apply. Instead, personal property includes stockStraddles2005, the options were sold for $6,000. If
if condition (2) above applies or the stock wasyou were the holder of the options who
This section discusses the loss deferral rulespart of straddle in which at least one of thesold them, you would recognize a
that apply to the sale or other disposition ofoffsetting positions was:short-term capital gain of $2,000. If you
positions in a straddle. These rules do not applywere the writer of the options and you • An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-to the straddles described under Exceptions,bought them back, you would recognize a stantially identical stock or securities,
short-term capital loss of $2,000. later.
• A securities futures contract on the stock
or substantially identical stock or securi-Table 4-1. Puts and Calls
ties, or
Puts • A position on substantially similar or re-
lated property (other than stock).When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Position. A position is an interest in personalIs exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received forproperty. A position can be a forward or futures
cost of the put. the put. contract, or an option.
An interest in a loan that is denominated in a
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for foreign currency is treated as a position in that
loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.currency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur-
rency for which there is an active interbank mar-
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if youket is considered to be actively-traded personalcost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the property. See also Foreign currency contractreceive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount youunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar-loss.* pay and the amount you received for
ket, earlier.the put as a short-term capital gain
or loss.) Offsetting position.This is a position that
substantially reduces any risk of loss you may
Calls have from holding another position. However, if
a position is part of a straddle that is not an
When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: identified straddle (described later), do not treat
it as offsetting to a position that is part of an
Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on identified straddle.
in the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
Presumed offsetting positions.Two orreceived for the call.
more positions will be presumed to be offsetting
if:Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.
1. The positions are established in the same
personal property (or in a contract for thisIs sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
property), and the value of one or morecost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the
positions varies inversely with the value ofreceive for it as a capital gain or difference between the amount you
loss.* pay and the amount you received for one or more of the other positions,
the call as a short-term capital gain2. The positions are in the same personalor loss.)
property, even if this property is in a sub-
stantially changed form, and the positions’*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or
loss is short term or long term. values vary inversely as described in the
first condition,
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. The positions are in debt instruments with 4. Straddles consisting entirely of section A qualified covered call option is any option
a similar maturity, and the positions’ values 1256 contracts, as described earlier under you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock
vary inversely as described in the first con-Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Marketyou acquire in connection with granting the op-
dition, (but see Identified straddle, next). tion), but only if all of the following are true.
4. The positions are sold or marketed as off- 1. The option is traded on a national securi-Note. For positions established before Oc-setting positions, whether or not the posi- ties exchange or other market approved bytober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also dotions are called a straddle, spread, the Secretary of the Treasury.not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-butterfly, or any similar name, or
2. The option is granted more than 30 daysdle at the end of the tax year.5. The aggregate margin requirement for the before its expiration date.Identified straddle.Any straddle (otherpositions is lower than the sum of the mar- For covered call options entered into afterthan a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) isgin requirements for each position if held July 28, 2002, the option is granted notan identified straddle if both of the followingseparately. more than 12 months before its expirationconditions exist. date or satisfies term limitation and qualifiedRelated persons. To determine if two or benchmark requirements published in the1. You clearly identified the straddle on yourmore positions are offsetting, you will be treated Internal Revenue Bulletin.records before the close of the day onas holding any position that your spouse holds
which you acquired it.during the same period. If you take into account 3. The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-
part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by tion.2. The straddle is not part of a larger strad-a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership ordle. 4. You are not an options dealer who grantedtrust, you are also considered to hold that posi- the option in connection with your activityIf there is a loss from any identified positiontion. of dealing in options.in an identified straddle, you must increase the
basis of each of the identified positions that5. Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or
offset the loss position in the identified straddle.Loss Deferral Rules loss.
The increase is the loss multiplied by a fraction. A deep-in-the-money option is an optionGenerally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-The numerator of the fraction is the unrecog-with a strike price lower than the lowest qualifiedtion of one or more positions only to the extentnized gain (if any) on the offsetting position andbenchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price atthat the loss is more than any unrecognized gainthe denominator of the fraction is the total unrec-which the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesyou have on offsetting positions. Unused lossesognized gain on all positions that offset the lossare listed in the financial section of many news-are treated as sustained in the next tax year.position in the identified straddle. For this pur-papers. The LQB is the highest available strikepose, your unrecognized gain is the excess ofUnrecognized gain. This is: price that is less than the applicable stock price.the fair market value of the identified positionHowever, the LQB for an option with a term ofthat is part of an identified straddle at the time1. The amount of gain you would have had more than 90 days and a strike price of moreyou incur a loss on another identified position inon an open position if you had sold it on than $50 is the second highest available strikethe identified straddle, over the fair market valuethe last business day of the tax year at its price that is less than the applicable stock price.of that position when you identified it as a posi-fair market value, and The availability of strike prices for equity op-tion in the straddle.2. The amount of gain realized on a position tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-Neither you nor anyone else can take intoif, as of the end of the tax year, gain has termination of the LQB for an option that is notaccount any loss on an identified position that isbeen realized, but not recognized. an equity option with flexible terms.part of an identified straddle to the extent thatThe applicable stock price for any stock forthe loss increases the basis of any identifiedwhich an option has been granted is:Example. On July 1, 2005, you entered intopositions that offset the loss position in the iden-
a straddle. On December 16, 2005, you closedtified straddle. 1. The closing price of the stock on the mostone position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.
recent day on which that stock was tradedOn December 31, 2005, the end of your tax Note. For positions established before Oc-before the date on which the option wasyear, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750tober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meetgranted, orin the offsetting open position. On your 2005two additional conditions:
return, your deductible loss on the position you 2. The opening price of the stock on the day• All of the original positions that you identifyclosed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750). on which the option was granted, but onlywere acquired on the same day.You must carry forward to 2006 the unused loss if that price is greater than 110% of the
of $12,750. price determined in (1).• All of the positions included in item (1)
were disposed of on the same day during If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, theNote. If you physically settle a position es-the tax year, or none of the positions wereLQB will be treated as not less than 85% of thetablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of adisposed of by the end of the tax year.applicable stock price. If the applicable stockstraddle by delivering property to which the posi-
price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asAlso, the losses from positions are deferred untiltion relates (and you would realize a loss on that
not less than an amount that is $10 below theyou dispose of all the positions in the straddle.position if you terminated it), you are treated as
applicable stock price.The rule discussed above for increasing thehaving terminated the position for its fair market
basis of each of the identified positions does notvalue immediately before the settlement and as Example. On May 13, 2005, you held XYZapply.having sold the property used to physically settle stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call
the position at its fair market value. option with a strike price of $120. The closingQualified covered call options and op-
price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12,tioned stock.A straddle is not subject to theExceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-
2005, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/loss deferral rules for straddles if both of theply to:
September call options offered on May 13,following are true.
2005, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,1. Identified positions established after Octo-
$130, and $135. Because the option has a termber 21, 2004, comprising an identified 1. All of the offsetting positions consist of one
of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, thestraddle, or more qualified covered call options and
second highest strike price that is less thanthe stock to be purchased from you under2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified $130.25, the applicable stock price. The callthe options.covered call options and the stock to be option is a deep-in-the-money option becausepurchased under the options, 2. The straddle is not part of a larger strad- its strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore,dle.3. Hedging transactions, described earlier the option is not a qualified covered call option,
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked toBut see Special year-end rule, later, for an ex- and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out
Market, and ception. the option or the stock at a loss during the year.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 59

Page 60 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Capital loss on qualified covered call you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem-Loss carryover.If you have a disallowed loss
options. If you hold stock and you write aber 16, the value of the put option had declined, that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,
qualified covered call option on that stock with aeliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On you must carry it over to the next tax year and
strike price less than the applicable stock price,December 16, you bought a second XX stock apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.
treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-position that is substantially identical to the XX For example, a loss disallowed in 2004 under
tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain stock you sold on December 13. At the end of Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2005, unless the
the year there is no unrecognized gain in the put substantially identical stock or securities (whichon the sale or exchange of the stock would be
option or in the XX stock. Under these circum- caused the loss to be disallowed in 2004) weretreated as long-term capital gain. The holding
stances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2005 disposed of during 2005. In addition, the carry-period of the stock does not include any period
under Rule 1 because, within a period beginning over loss will not be allowed in 2005 if Rule 1 orduring which you are the writer of the option.
30 days before December 13, and ending 30 Rule 2 disallows it.Special year-end rule.The loss deferraldays after that date, you bought stock substan-rules for straddles apply if all of the following are Example. The facts are the same as in thetially identical to the XX stock you sold.true. example under Rule 1 above. On December 30,
Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-2006, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss1. The qualified covered call options aresition of less than all of the positions of a strad-and there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the putclosed or the stock is disposed of at a lossdle (your loss position) to the extent that anyoption. Under these circumstances, you cannotduring any tax year. unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year indeduct in 2006 either the $20 loss disallowed in
one or more of the following positions is more2. Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on 2005 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-
than the amount of any loss disallowed underthe options is includible in gross income in cember 30, 2006, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does
Rule 1.a later tax year. not apply because the substantially identical XX
stock was sold during the year and no substan-3. The stock or options were held less than1. Successor positions. tially identical stock or securities were bought30 days after the closing of the options or within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does2. Offsetting positions to the loss position.the disposition of the stock. apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain3. Offsetting positions to any successor posi-in the put option, an offsetting position to the losstion. positions.
How To Report Gains Capital loss carryover.If the sale of a lossSuccessor position.A successor positionand Losses (Form 6781) position would have resulted in a capital loss,is a position that is or was at any time offsetting
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss onto a second position, if both of the followingReport each position (whether or not it is part of
the date it is allowed, even if you would treat theconditions are met.a straddle) on which you have unrecognized
gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-gain at the end of the tax year and the amount of1. The second position was offsetting to thenary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of athis unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.loss position that was sold. loss position (in the case of section 1256 con-Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains and
tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term2. The successor position is entered into dur-losses on straddles before entering these capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,ing a period beginning 30 days before, andamounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include a you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule,ending 30 days after, the sale of the losscopy of Form 6781 with your income tax return. even if you would treat any gain or loss on anyposition.
successor positions as 100% long-term or
short-term capital gain or loss.Coordination of Loss Deferral Example 1. On November 1, 2005, you en-Rules and Wash Sale Rules Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-tered into offsetting long and short positions in
dle losses and wash sales do not apply to thenon-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any following loss situations.2005, you disposed of the long position at a $10disposition of a position or positions of a strad-loss. On November 14, you entered into a newdle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then 1. Loss on the sale of one or more positionslong position (successor position) that is offset-apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-ting to the retained short position, but that is notstocks or securities make up a position that is actions are described under Section 1256substantially identical to the long position dis-part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)posed of on November 12. You held both posi-does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.tions through year end, at which time there was2. Loss on the sale of a loss position in a
$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor longmixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad-Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-position and no unrecognized gain in the offset-dle account (Election C), later.)sition of shares of stock or securities that maketing short position. Under these circumstances,up the positions of a straddle if, within a period 3. Loss on the sale of a position that is part ofthe entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2005beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo- a straddle consisting only of section 1256because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in thesition and ending 30 days after that date, you contracts.successor long position.acquired substantially identical stock or securi-
ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to theExample 2. The facts are the same as infollowing tax year, subject to any further applica-Example 1, except that at year end you have $4Holding Period andtion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsoof unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Loss Treatment Rulesapply if you entered into a contract or option totion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingacquire the stock or securities within the timeshort position. Under these circumstances, the The holding period of a position in a straddleperiod described above. See Loss carryover, entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2005 be- generally begins no earlier than the date onlater, for more information about how to treat thecause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized which the straddle ends (the date you no longerloss in the following tax year. gain in the successor long position and offset- hold an offsetting position). This rule does not
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se-ting short position. apply to any position you held more than 1 year
curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any before you established the straddle. But see
Example 3. The facts are the same as inlosses you sustained in the ordinary course of Exceptions, later.
Example 1, except that at year end you have $8your business.
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-Example. On March 6, 2004, you acquired
Example. You are not a dealer in stock ortion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsetting gold. On January 5, 2005, you entered into an
securities. On December 2, 2005, you boughtshort position. Under these circumstances, $8 of offsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-
stock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed for lated futures contract). On April 1, 2005, you
setting put option. On December 13, 2005, there2005 because there is $8 of unrecognized gain disposed of the short gold forward contract at no
was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option andin the successor long position. gain or loss. On April 8, 2005, you sold the gold
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1 2. Are included in a straddle consisting only 2. The time the position is disposed of.
year or less before the offsetting short position of section 1256 contracts, or If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddlewas entered into, the holding period for the gold3. Are included in a mixed straddle account before the end of the day on which the straddlebegins on April 1, 2005, the date the straddle(Election C), discussed later. is established, this identification must be madeended. Gain recognized on the sale of the gold by the time you dispose of the position. You arewill be treated as short-term capital gain. presumed to have properly identified a mixed
straddle if independent verification is used.Loss treatment.Treat the loss on the sale ofMixed Straddle Elections
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss underone or more positions (the loss position) of a
this election depends on which side of the strad-If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddlestraddle as a long-term capital loss if both of the
dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netand make one of the elections described in thefollowing are true.
gain or loss from the straddle is due to thefollowing discussions, report your gain or loss as
section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asindicated in those discussions. If you do not1. You held (directly or indirectly) one or
60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40%make any of the elections, report your gain ormore offsetting positions to the loss posi-
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gainloss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed oftion on the date you entered into the loss
or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify thethe section 1256 component of the straddle,position.
election by checking box B.enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or2. You would have treated all gain or loss onyour gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of FormIf the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec-one or more of the straddle positions as6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13tion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-termlong-term capital gain or loss if you had(Part II). capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain or loss onsold these positions on the day you en- Part I of Schedule D and identify the election.tered into the loss position. Mixed straddle election (Election A).You For the specific application of the rules of thiscan elect out of the marked to market rules,election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T.Mixed straddles.Special rules apply to adiscussed under Section 1256 Contracts
loss position that is part of a mixed straddle andMarked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256Example. On April 1, you entered into athat is a non-section 1256 position. A mixedcontracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In-non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-straddle is a straddle: stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles willtion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-apply to these contracts. However, if you maketion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed1. That is not part of a larger straddle,this election for an option on a section 1256straddle. On April 8, you disposed of thecontract, the gain or loss treatment discussed2. In which all positions are held as capital non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and theearlier under Options will apply, subject to theassets, section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Undergain and loss rules for straddles. these circumstances, the $600 loss on the3. In which at least one (but not all) of theYou can make this election if: non-section 1256 position will be offset againstpositions is a section 1256 contract, and
the $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The1. At least one (but not all) of the positions is4. For which the mixed straddle election net gain of $200 from the straddle will be treateda section 1256 contract, and(Election A, discussed later) has not been as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%
made. 2. Each position forming part of the straddleshort-term capital gain because it is due to the
is clearly identified as being part of thatsection 1256 contract.Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andstraddle on the day the first section 125640% short-term capital loss, if all of the following Mixed straddle account (Election C).Youcontract forming part of the straddle is ac-conditions apply. may elect to establish one or more accounts forquired. determining gains and losses from all positions1. Gain or loss from the sale of one or moreIf you make this election, it will apply for allin a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa-of the straddle positions that are sectionlater years as well. It cannot be revoked withoutrate mixed straddle account for each separate1256 contracts would be considered gainthe consent of the IRS. If you made this election,designated class of activities.or loss from the sale or exchange of acheck box A of Form 6781. Do not report theGenerally, you must determine gain or losscapital asset. section 1256 component in Part I. for each position in a mixed straddle account as
2. The sale of no position in the straddle, of the close of each business day of the tax year.Other elections. You can avoid the 60%other than a section 1256 contract, would You offset the net section 1256 contractslong-term capital loss treatment required for aresult in a long-term capital gain or loss. against the net non-section 1256 positions tonon-section 1256 loss position that is part of adetermine the “daily account net gain or loss.”3. You have not made a straddle-by-straddlemixed straddle, described earlier, if you chooseIf the daily account amount is due toidentification election (Election B) or mixedeither of the two following elections to offsetnon-section 1256 positions, the amount isstraddle account election (Election C), bothgains and losses for these positions. treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If thediscussed later.
daily account amount is due to section 12561. Election B. Make a separate identification
contracts, the amount is treated as 60%of the positions of each mixed straddle forExample. On March 1, 2005, you entered long-term and 40% short-term capital gain orwhich you are electing this treatment (theinto a long gold forward contract. On July 15, loss.straddle-by-straddle identification method).2005, you entered into an offsetting short gold On the last business day of the tax year, youregulated futures contract. You did not make an2. Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-determine the “annual account net gain or loss”election to offset gains and losses from positionscount for a class of activities for whichfor each account by netting the daily accountin a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2005, you gains and losses will be recognized andamounts for that account for the tax year. Thedisposed of the long forward contract at a loss.offset on a periodic basis. “total annual account net gain or loss” is deter-Because the gold forward contract was part of aThese two elections are alternatives to themined by netting the annual account amountsmixed straddle and the disposition of thismixed straddle election. You can choose onlyfor all mixed straddle accounts that you hadnon-section 1256 position would not result inone of the three elections. Use Form 6781 toestablished.long-term capital loss, the loss recognized onindicate your election choice by checking box A,The net amounts keep their long-term orthe termination of the gold forward contract willB, or C, whichever applies. short-term classification. However, no morebe treated as a 60% long-term and 40%
than 50% of the total annual account net gain forshort-term capital loss. Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-
the tax year can be treated as long-term capitaltion (Election B).Under this election, you
gain. Any remaining gain is treated asExceptions. The special holding period andmust clearly identify each position that is part of
short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%loss treatment for straddle positions does notthe identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:
of the total annual account net loss can beapply to positions that:
1. The close of the day the identified mixed treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining
1. Constitute part of a hedging transaction, straddle is established, or loss is treated as long-term capital loss.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 61

Page 62 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The election to establish one or more mixed was filed on time, you may make the election on This means that if you buy certain replacement
straddle accounts for each tax year must be an amended return filed no later than 6 months property and make the choice described in this
made by the due date (without extensions) of after the due date of your return (excluding ex- section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
your income tax return for the immediately pre-tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to sectionYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis
ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,of the replacement property as described in Ba-
class of activities during a tax year, you must and file it at the same address you used for yoursis of replacement property, later. This
make the election for the new class of activities original return. postpones your gain until the year you dispose
by the later of either: of the replacement property.How to report and postpone gain.Report You qualify to make this choice if you meetthe entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.1. The due date of your return for the immedi- all the following tests.To make the choice to postpone gain, enterately preceding tax year (without exten-
“Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the linesions), or 1. You sell publicly traded securities at adirectly below the line on which you reported thegain. Publicly traded securities are securi-2. 60 days after you entered into the firstgain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gainties traded on an established securitiesmixed straddle in the new class of activi-you are postponing or expecting to postpone.market.ties. Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual
2. Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.postponed gain is different from the amount youYou make the election on Form 6781 by
report, file an amended return.checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in- 3. During the 60-day period beginning on theAlso attach the following statements.come tax return for the immediately preceding date of the sale, you buy replacement
tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies. property. This replacement property must1. A “statement of election” that indicates youReport the annual account net gain or loss from be either common stock or a partnershipare making an election under sectiona mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781. interest in a specialized small business in-1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code andIn addition, you must attach a statement to Form vestment company (SSBIC). This is anythat includes the following information.6781 specifically designating the class of activi- partnership or corporation licensed by the
ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab- Small Business Administration under sec-a. A description of the securities sold, the
lished. tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-date of the sale, the amount realized on
For the specific application of the rules of this ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,the sale, and the adjusted basis of the
election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T. 1993.securities.
Interest expense and carrying charges re- b. The name of the ESOP or cooperativelating to mixed straddle account positions. Amount of gain recognized.If you make theto which the qualified securities wereYou cannot deduct interest and carrying choice described in this section, you must rec-sold.charges that are allocable to any positions held ognize gain only up to the following amount:
c. For a sale that was part of a single,in a mixed straddle account. Treat these
interrelated transaction under a prear-1. The amount realized on the sale, minuscharges as an adjustment to the annual account
ranged agreement between taxpayersnet gain or loss and allocate them proportion- 2. The cost of any common stock or partner-involving other sales of qualified securi-ately between the net short-term and the net ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtties, the names and identifying numberslong-term capital gains or losses. during the 60-day period beginning on theof the other taxpayers under the agree-To find the amount of interest and carrying date of sale (and did not previously takement and the number of shares sold bycharges that is not deductible and that must be into account on an earlier sale of publiclythe other taxpayers.added to the annual account net gain or loss, traded securities).apply the rules described earlier to the positions
2. A notarized “statement of purchase” If this amount is less than the amount of yourheld in the mixed straddle account. See Interest
describing the qualified replacement prop-gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,expense and carrying charges on straddles in
erty, date of purchase, and the cost of thesubject to the limit described next. If this amountchapter 3 under Nondeductible Expense.
property and declaring the property to beis equal to or more than the amount of your gain,
qualified replacement property for the qual-you must recognize the full amount of your gain.Sales of Stock to ESOPs ified stock you sold. The statement mustLimit on gain postponed.The amount ofor Certain Cooperatives have been notarized no later than 30 daysgain you can postpone each year is limited to theafter the purchase. If you have not yet pur-If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3 smaller of:chased the qualified replacement property,years to an employee stock ownership plan you must attach the notarized “statement1. $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,of purchase” to your income tax return forfile a separate return), oryou may be able to elect to postpone all or partthe year following the election year (or theof the gain on the sale if you bought qualified 2. $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married andelection will not be valid).replacement property (certain securities) within file a separate return), minus the amount
3. A verified written statement of the domes-the period that began 3 months before the sale of gain you postponed for all earlier years.
tic corporation whose employees are cov-and ended 12 months after the sale. If you make
ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,the election, you must recognize gain on the
Basis of replacement property.You mustor of any authorized officer of the coopera-sale only to the extent the proceeds from the
subtract the amount of postponed gain from thetive, consenting to the taxes under sec-sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-
basis of your replacement property.tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internalment property.
Revenue Code on certain dispositions, andYou must reduce the basis of the replace- How to report and postpone gain. Reportprohibited allocations of the stock pur-ment property by any postponed gain. If you the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 orchased by the ESOP or cooperative.dispose of any replacement property, you may line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever ishave to recognize all of the postponed gain. appropriate. To make the choice to postponeGenerally, to qualify for the election theMore information. For details, see sectiongain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of theESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of 1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-line directly below the line on which you reportedthe outstanding stock of the corporation that tions section 1.1042-1T. the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed inissued the qualified securities. Also, the quali- column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).fied replacement property must have been is-Rollover of Gain Also, attach a schedule showing how yousued by a domestic operating corporation.From Publicly figured the postponed gain, the name of the
How to make the election.You must make SSBIC in which you purchased common stockTraded Securities
the election no later than the due date (including or a partnership interest, the date of that
extensions) for filing your tax return for the year You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain purchase, and your new basis in that SSBIC
in which you sold the stock. If your original return gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. stock or partnership interest.
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must make the choice to postpone gainActive business test.A corporation meets You can make this choice if you meet all the
no later than the due date (including extensions) this test for any period of time if, during that following tests.
for filing your tax return for the year in which you period, both the following are true.
1. You buy replacement stock during thesold the securities. If your original return was
60-day period beginning on the date of the1. It was an eligible corporation, defined be-filed on time, you may make the choice on an
sale.low.amended return filed no later than 6 months
after the due date of your return (excluding ex- 2. The replacement stock is qualified small2. It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets
tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to section business stock.in the active conduct of at least one quali-
301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,fied trade or business, defined below.3. The replacement stock continues to meetand file it at the same address you used for your
the active business requirement for smalloriginal return. Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized business stock for at least the first 6Your choice is revocable with the consent ofsmall business investment company (SSBIC) ismonths after you buy it.the IRS. treated as meeting the active business test. An
SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensed
Amount of gain recognized.If you make the
Gains on Qualified to operate under section 301(d) of the Small
choice described in this section, you must rec-Business Investment Act of 1958 as in effect onSmall Business Stock ognize the capital gain only up to the followingMay 13, 1993.
amount:This section discusses two provisions of the lawEligible corporation.This is any U.S. cor-that may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofporation other than: 1. The amount realized on the sale, minusqualified small business stock. You may qualify
2. The cost of any qualified small businessfor a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.1. A Domestic International Sales Corpora-
stock you bought during the 60-day periodYou may be able to exclude part of the gain fromtion (DISC) or a former DISC,
beginning on the date of sale (and did notyour income.
2. A corporation that has made, or whose previously take into account on an earlierQualified small business stock. This is subsidiary has made, an election under sale of qualified small business stock).stock that meets all the following tests. section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,
If this amount is less than the amount of yourconcerning the Puerto Rico and posses-1. It must be stock in a C corporation. capital gain, you can postpone the rest of thatsion tax credit,
gain. If this amount equals or is more than the2. It must have been originally issued after3. A regulated investment company, amount of your capital gain, you must recognizeAugust 10, 1993.
the full amount of your gain.4. A real estate investment trust (REIT),3. The corporation must have total gross as-
5. A real estate mortgage investment conduitsets of $50 million or less at all times after Basis of replacement stock.You must sub-
(REMIC),August 9, 1993, and before it issued the tract the amount of postponed gain from the
stock. Its total gross assets immediately af- basis of your replacement stock.6. A financial asset securitization investmentter it issued the stock must also be $50 trust (FASIT), or Holding period of replacement stock.Yourmillion or less.
holding period for the replacement stock in-7. A cooperative.When figuring the corporation’s total
cludes your holding period for the stock sold,gross assets, you must also count the as-
except for the purpose of applying the 6-monthQualified trade or business.This is anysets of any predecessor of the corporation.
holding period requirement for choosing to rolltrade or business other than:In addition, you must treat all corporations
over the gain on its sale.that are members of the same parent-sub-
1. One involving services performed in thesidiary controlled group as one corporation. Pass-through entity.A pass-through entity (afields of health, law, engineering, architec-
4. You must have acquired the stock at its partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund orture, accounting, actuarial science, per-
original issue, directly or through an under- other regulated investment company) also mayforming arts, consulting, athletics, financial
writer, in exchange for money or other make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit ofservices, or brokerage services,
property (not including stock), or as pay for the postponed gain applies to your share of the2. One whose principal asset is the reputa-services provided to the corporation (other entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest intion or skill of one or more employees,than services performed as an underwriter the entity for the entire period the entity held the
of the stock). In certain cases, your stock stock.3. Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing,
may also meet this test if you acquired it If a pass-through entity sold qualified smallinvesting, or similar business,
from another person who met this test, or business stock held for more than 6 months and4. Any farming business (including the busi-through a conversion or trade of qualified you held an interest in the entity for the entireness of raising or harvesting trees),small business stock that you held. period the entity held the stock, you also may
choose to postpone gain if you, rather than the5. Any business involving the production or5. The corporation must have met the active pass-through entity, buy the replacement stockextraction of products for which percent-business test, defined next, and must have within the 60-day period.age depletion can be claimed, orbeen a C corporation during substantially
all the time you held the stock. 6. Any business of operating a hotel, motel,How to report gain. Report the entire gain
restaurant, or similar business. realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of6. Within the period beginning 2 years before
Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri-and ending 2 years after the stock was
ate. To make the choice to postpone the gain,issued, the corporation cannot have
enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) ofbought more than a de minimis amount of Rollover of Gain
the line directly below the line on which youits stock from you or a related party.
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalreported the gain. Enter the amount of gain7. Within the period beginning 1 year beforegain from the sale of qualified small businesspostponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (inand ending 1 year after the stock was is-stock held more than 6 months. This means that,parentheses).sued, the corporation cannot have boughtif you buy certain replacement stock and makeYou must make the choice to postpone gainmore than a de minimis amount of its stockthe choice described in this section, you post-no later than the due date (including extensions)from anyone, unless the total value of thepone part or all of your gain. for filing your tax return for the year in which youstock it bought is 5% or less of the totalYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis sold the stock. If your original return was filed onvalue of all its stock. of the replacement stock as described in Basis time, you may make the choice on an amended
For more information about tests 6 and 7, seeof replacement stock, later. This postpones your return filed no later than 6 months after the due
the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter- gain until the year you dispose of the replace- date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter
nal Revenue Code. ment stock. “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2” at the top
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 63

Page 64 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the amended return, and file it at the same For more information about empowerment gain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenue
address you used for your original return. zone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In- Code.
centives for Distressed Communities.
Section 1202 Exclusion Rollover of Gain Reporting CapitalFrom Sale ofYou generally can exclude from your income up
to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of
Empowerment Zone Assets Gains and Lossesqualified small business stock held by you for
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainmore than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to This section discusses how to report your capitalgains from the sale of qualified empowerment60% for certain empowerment zone business gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040).zone assets. This means that if you buy certainstock. See Empowerment zone business stock, Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds,replacement property and make the choice de-later. etc., and real estate (if not reported on Formscribed in this section, you postpone part or all ofThe eligible gain minus your section 1202 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 ofthe recognition of your gain.exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. IncludeYou qualify to make this choice if you meetTax Rates, later. all these transactions even if you did not receiveall the following tests. a Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small
ment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-business investment company (SSBIC) stock 1. You hold a qualified empowerment zone
tion schedule to report more transactions.that you bought as replacement property for asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a
Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, yougain.
umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total onmust reduce the basis of the stock by the 2. Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.line 3. Also add all sales price entries in columnamount of any postponed gain on that earlier
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gain 3. During the 60-day period beginning on the
Then add the following amounts reported to youFrom Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re- date of the sale, you buy a replacement
for 2005 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-Sduce your basis by that amount when figuringqualified empowerment zone asset in the
(or on substitute statements):your section 1202 exclusion. same zone as the asset sold.
1. Proceeds from transactions involvingLimit on eligible gain.The amount of your Any part of the gain that is ordinarystocks, bonds, and other securities, andgain from the stock of any one issuer that is income cannot be postponed andeligible for the exclusion in 2005 is limited to the 2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-must be recognized.CAUTION
!
greater of: tions (other than the sale of your main
Qualified empowerment zone asset. This home if you had no taxable gain) not re-1. Ten times your basis in all qualified stockmeans certain stock or partnership interests inported on another form or schedule.of the issuer that you sold or exchangedan enterprise zone business. It also includesduring the year, or If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andcertain tangible property used in an enterprise10, attach a statement to your return explainingzone business. You must have acquired the2. $10 million ($5 million for married individu- the difference.asset after December 21, 2000.als filing separately) minus the amount of
gain from the stock of the same issuer that Installment sales.You cannot use the install-Amount of gain recognized.If you make theyou used to figure your exclusion in earlier ment method to report a gain from the sale ofchoice described in this section, you must rec-years. stock or securities traded on an established se-ognize gain only up to the following amount:curities market. You must report the entire gain
How to report gain. Report the entire gain in the year of sale (the year in which the trade1. The amount realized on the sale, minus
realized from the sale on Schedule D (Form date occurs).2. The cost of any qualified empowerment1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the line
zone asset that you bought during theAt-risk rules.Special at-risk rules apply toon which you report the gain, enter “Section
60-day period beginning on the date ofmost income-producing activities. These rules1202 exclusion” in column (a) and enter the
sale (and did not previously take into ac-limit the amount of loss you can deduct to theamount of the allowable exclusion in column (f).
count in rolling over gain on an earlier saleamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-riskEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you are
of qualified empowerment zone assets).rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade ofcompleting line 18 of Schedule D, enter as a
an asset used in an activity to which the at-riskpositive number the amount of the exclusion onIf this amount is equal to or more than therules apply. For more information, see Publica-line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in theamount of your gain, you must recognize the fulltion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.Schedule D instructions. But if you excludedamount of your gain. If this amount is less thanUse Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion. the amount of your gain, you can postpone thethe amount of loss you can deduct.rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of yourMore information.For information about ad-replacement property as described next. Passive activity gains and losses.If youditional requirements that may apply, see sec-
have gains or losses from a passive activity, yoution 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. Basis of replacement property.You must may also have to report them on Form 8582. Insubtract the amount of postponed gain from theEmpowerment zone business stock. You some cases, the loss may be limited under thebasis of the qualified empowerment zone assetscan exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsyou bought as replacement property.all of the following additional requirements. separate instructions for more information about
How to report and postpone capital gain. reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation thatReport the entire gain realized from the sale on sive activity.qualifies as an empowerment zone busi-Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other-Form 1099-B transactions.If you sold prop-ness during substantially all of the time youwise would without regard to the choice to post-erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-held the stock, and pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain,ties, through a broker, you should receive Formenter “Section 1397B Rollover” in column (a) of2. You acquired the stock after December 21, 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-the line directly below the line on which you2000. ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-reported the gain. Enter the amount of gainCondition (1) will still be met if the corporation ment to complete Schedule D.postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (inceased to qualify after the 5-year period that Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofparentheses).begins on the date you acquired the stock. How- Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-More information. For more information (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
sion cannot be more than the gain you would about empowerment zones, see Publication whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
have had if you had sold the stock on the date 954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi- vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross
the corporation ceased to qualify. ties. For more information about this rollover of proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and option premiums were reported to the IRS, ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiring ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either the biggest interest in the property. see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. 1098, 5498, and W-2G.Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-
ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-If the net sales price is entered in column (d),
Sale of property bought at various times.Iflow the instructions for Schedule D to reportdo not include the commissions and option pre-
you sell a block of stock or other property thatthese transactions, and include them on line 1 ormiums in column (e).
you bought at various times, report the8 as appropriate.Section 1256 contracts and straddles. short-term gain or loss from the sale on one lineIt is unlawful for any real estate reportingUse Form 6781 to report gains and losses from in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orperson to separately charge you for complyingsection 1256 contracts and straddles before en- loss on one line in Part II. Enter “Various” inwith the requirement to file Form 1099-S.tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See the
copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return. Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in yourMarket discount bonds.Report the sale or
Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-name but actually belong to someone else),trade of a market discount bond on Schedule D
sis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees,report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the(Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade
commissions, state and local transfer taxes, andproceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol-results in a gain and you did not choose to
option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount inlowing amounts reported to you for 2005 oninclude market discount in income currently,
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of ScheduleForms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next line
D, whichever applies, unless you reported thements) that you are not reporting on anotherin column (a) and the amount of the accrued
net sales price amount in column (d).form or schedule included with your return:market discount as a loss in column (f). Also
report the amount of accrued market discount as1. Proceeds from transactions involving Short-term gains and losses.Capital gain orinterest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), linestocks, bonds, and other securities, andloss on the sale or trade of investment property1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.” held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theForm 1099-S transactions. If you sold or tions (other than the sale of your mainamount you report in column (f) is a loss, show ittraded reportable real estate, you generallyhome if you are not required to report it).in parentheses.should receive from the real estate reportingIf the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total ofYou combine your share of short-term capitalperson a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your returngain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-explaining the reason for the difference.and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossceeds.
carryover, with your other short-term capitalFile Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the“Reportable real estate” is defined as any gains and losses to figure your net short-termIRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-present or future ownership interest in any of the capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.nee in 2005, you must file a Form 1099-B orfollowing:
Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.Long-term gains and losses.A capital gainSend the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a1. Improved or unimproved land, including air or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofspace, erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capitalU.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-2. Inherently permanent structures, including gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedulenue Service Center by February 28, 2006any residential, commercial, or industrial D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,(March 31, 2006, if you file Form 1099-B or Formbuilding, show it in parentheses.1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of
You also report the following in Part II ofthe proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or3. A condominium unit and its accessory fix- Schedule D:Form 1099-S by January 31, 2006. On Formtures and common elements, including
1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” Theland, and 1. Undistributed long-term capital gains fromother owner should be listed as the “Recipient.”4. Stock in a cooperative housing corporation a regulated investment company (mutualOn Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the(as defined in section 216 of the Internal fund) or real estate investment trust“Filer.” The other owner should be listed as theRevenue Code). (REIT),“Transferor.” You do not, however, have to file a
A “real estate reporting person” could include Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds 2. Your share of long-term capital gains or
the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title or for your spouse. For more information about the losses from partnerships, S corporations,
escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- reporting requirements and the penalties for fail- and fiduciaries,
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2005 to 2006 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, is a loss. Otherwise, you do not have any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses............ 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount............................... 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0-......................................... 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3.................................................. 4.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount............................... 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15................................ 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6.............................................................. 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2006. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0-...... 8.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount............................... 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7................................. 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-........................ 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11............................................................ 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2006. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0-..... 13.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 65

Page 66 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. All capital gain distributions from mutual Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),
enclosed in parentheses. can be carried over to 2006.funds and REITs not reported directly on
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital1040, and capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is theThey would have no carryover.4. Long-term capital loss carryovers. lesser of: 
Use short-term losses first.When you fig-The result after combining these items with1. $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and fileure your capital loss carryover, use youryour other long-term capital gains and losses isa separate return), or short-term capital losses first, even if you in-your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you2. Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofSchedule D). have not reached the limit on the capital lossSchedule D.Capital gain distributions only.You do deduction after using the short-term capital
You can use your total net loss to reduce yournot have to file Schedule D if both of the follow- losses, use the long-term capital losses until you
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.ing are true. reach the limit.
Capital loss carryover.If you have a total netDecedent’s capital loss.A capital loss1. The only amounts you would have to re-loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more thansustained by a decedent during his or her lastport on Schedule D are capital gain distri-the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, youtax year (or carried over to that year from anbutions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (orcan carry over the unused part to the next yearearlier year) can be deducted only on the finalsubstitute statement). and treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextreturn filed for the decedent. The capital loss
2. You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,year. If part of the loss is still unused, you canlimits discussed earlier still apply in this situa-
or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute carry it over to later years until it is completelytion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct any
used up.statement). of the loss or carry it over to following years.
When you figure the amount of any capitalIf both of the above statements are true, report Joint and separate returns.If you and yourloss carryover to the next year, you must takeyour capital gain distributions directly on line 13 spouse once filed separate returns and are nowthe current year’s allowable deduction into ac-of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also, filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-count, whether or not you claimed it.use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourWhen you carry over a loss, it remains longTax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to spouse once filed a joint return and are nowterm or short term. A long-term capital loss youfigure your tax. filing separate returns, any capital loss carryovercarry over to the next tax year will reduce that
from the joint return can be deducted only on theYou can report your capital gain distributionsyear’s long-term capital gains before it reduces
return of the spouse who actually had the loss.on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Formthat year’s short-term capital gains.
1040, if both of the following are true. Figuring your carryover.The amount of Capital Gain Tax Ratesyour capital loss carryover is the amount of your1. None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:statements) you received have an amount The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are
in box 2b, 2c, or 2d. generally lower than the tax rates that apply to1. Your allowable capital loss deduction forother income. These lower rates are called thethe year, or2. You do not have to file Form 1040 for any maximum capital gain rates.other capital gains or losses. 2. Your taxable income increased by your al-The term “net capital gain” means the
lowable capital loss deduction for the yearamount by which your net long-term capital gain
and your deduction for personal exemp-Total net gain or loss.To figure your total net for the year is more than your net short-term
tions.gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital capital loss.
gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termIf your deductions are more than your gross For 2005, the maximum capital gain rates
capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result onincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- are 5%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 for
Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses areable income in computing the amount in item (2). details.
more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the If you figure your tax using the maxi-If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 ofpart of your capital loss for 2005 that you can mum capital gain rate and the regularForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain carry over to 2006. tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP
Tax Rates, later. the regular tax computation applies.Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in
2005. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofCapital Losses Example. All of your net capital gain is from$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldIf your capital losses are more than your capitalTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their jointbe 28%. Because you are single and your tax-gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. 2005 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-able income is $25,000, none of your taxable
income will be taxed above the 15% rate. TheTable 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate? 28% rate does not apply.
THEN your maximum Investment interest deducted.If you claim aIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... deduction for investment interest, you may have
to reduce the amount of your net capital gaincollectibles gain 28%
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain
section 1202 exclusion 28% you choose to include in investment income
when figuring the limit on your investment inter-unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% est deduction. This is done on the Schedule D
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and
or higher 15% Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-
tion about the limit on investment interest, seeother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is Interest Expenses in chapter 3.lower than 25% 5%
28% rate gain.This gain includes gain or loss1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain
from the sale of qualified small business stock
minus the section 1202 exclusion.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain or (See Capital gain distributions only ear- The entries shown in box 2 of these forms total
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, lier.) $14,100.
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emilynum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-more than zero. makes sure that the total of the amounts re-erage held more than 1 year. ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale ule D is not less than the total of the amountsAlternative minimum tax.These capital gainof an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or shown on the Forms 1099-B she received fromrates are also used in figuring alternative mini-trust due to unrealized appreciation of col- her broker. For 2005, the total of lines 3 and 10mum tax.lectibles. of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same
Gain on qualified small business stock.If amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B
Comprehensive Exampleyou realized a gain from qualified small business (not shown).
stock that you held more than 5 years, you Form 6781. On June 2, 2005, Emily had aEmily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesgenerally can exclude up to 50% of your gain realized loss from a regulated futures contract offrom her job, she has income from stocks andfrom your income. The exclusion can be up to $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked toother securities. For the 2005 tax year, she had60% for certain empowerment zone business market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at thethe following capital gains and losses, which shestock. The eligible gain minus your section 1202 end of 2005. She had reported an unrealizedreports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule Dexclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2004 taxis shown at the end of this example.Qualified Small Business Stock, earlier in this return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from herchapter. Capital gains and losses—Schedule D. 2005 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxes
Emily sold stock in two different companies thatUnrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally, 8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she received
she held for less than a year. In June, she soldthis is any part of your capital gain from selling from her broker for these transactions. Box 11
100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadsection 1250 property (real property) that is due shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000
bought in February. She had an adjusted basisto depreciation (but not more than your net sec- − $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain in
of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for ation 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She shows
loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4, col-
Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions umn (f) of Schedule D and 60% ($9,000) as
She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. long-term gain on line 11 of Schedule D.
and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. SheFor more information about section 1250 prop- The Form 1099-B that Emily received from
reports these short-term transactions on line 1 inerty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.
Part I of Schedule D.Publication 544. Capital loss carryover from 2004.EmilyEmily had three other stock sales that sheTax computation using maximum capital has a capital loss carryover to 2005 of $800, ofreports as long-term transactions on line 8 ingains rates.Use the Qualified Dividends and which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D is long-term capital loss. She enters theseshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inheritedTax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Shethe Car stock from her father. Its fair marketyour tax if you have qualified dividends or net also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-value at the time of his death was $2,500, whichcapital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched- ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. sheet.Because she had inherited the stock, her loss is
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andSchedule D Tax Worksheet.You must use
over Worksheet in her 2004 edition of Publica-her father actually held the stock. She enters thethe Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule
tion 550 (not shown), so she could properlyloss in column (f) of line 8.D instructions to figure your tax if:
report her loss carryover for the 2005 tax yearIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.• You have to file Schedule D, and without refiguring it.stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of those
shares in 1994, for $1,000. She had bought 100• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line Tax computation. Because Emily has gainsmore shares in 1996 for $2,200, and an addi-19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, shetional 300 shares in 1999 for $1,500. Her totalmore than zero. checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes to linebasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300See the Comprehensive Example later for an 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 of($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which sheexample of how to figure your tax using the the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18enters in column (f) of line 8.Schedule D Tax Worksheet. is greater than zero, she checks the “No” box onIn December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheetstock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax
to figure her tax.ness stock that she had bought in SeptemberWorksheet. If you do not have to use the
After entering the gain from line 16 on line 132000. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained
of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofgain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.above) and any of the following apply, use the
Form 1040 through line 43. She enters theBecause she held the stock more than 5 years,Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theshe has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. Shesheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theclaims the exclusion on the line below by enter-1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax ising $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also• You received qualified dividends. (See $3,279. This is less than the tax she would haveenters the exclusion as a positive amount on lineQualified Dividends in chapter 1.) figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,171.2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.
  .• You do not have to file Schedule D and She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)
you received capital gain distributions. from her broker for each of these transactions.  .
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 67

Page 68 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page D–9 of the Instructions for Schedule D to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or
• Form 1040, line 43, is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43.............................................. 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b....... 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4g . . .3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* . . .4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-.......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-...................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D......... 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4.................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-...................... 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9......................................................... 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D................................ 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11............................................. 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10.............................................................. 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-.............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $29,700 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 29,700
$59,400 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$39,800 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15............................... 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-......... 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17.......................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15................................................ /H1707519. 8,600
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05).............................................................. 20. 430
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13................................ 21. 8,900
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-)................ 22. 8,600
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-............................... /H1707523. 300
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15)............................................................. 24. 45
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19.................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18.............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above.................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0-.................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0-............................... /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25)............................................................. 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29.................................................. 31. 30,000
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1.................................................. 32. 0
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28)............................................................. 33. 0
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies...... 34. 2,804
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34........................................................... 35. 3,279
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies....... 36. 4,171
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44.................................................. 37. 3,279
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1........................................................... 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain . . .2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824............................ 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d,
}
............. 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041),5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0-..................... 6. -0-
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18............................................................ 7. 1,000.00
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
1,000(11,000)
27,000 15,000
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged 5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description 7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2005
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2004
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2005
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name, street address, city, state, and ZIP code
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2005
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 69

Page 70 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-05
6-29-05
6-12-05
7-30-05
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-28-00
2-3-05
6-29-05
12-15-05
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 13 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2005
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
1,000
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result. If line 16 is a loss, skip lines 17 through 20, and
go to line 21. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 13, and then go to line 17 below
16
16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-7 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2005
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-8 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of:21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040. Do not complete
lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Schedule D Tax Worksheet
on page D-9 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, and then complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Instructions for Form 1040.
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 71

Page 72 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must keep detailed records to distinguishHow To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investmentMark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2006,day you got them (for example, by holding themTraders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 15, 2006. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
2005 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-How To Report for an extension of time to file that return. Theties for your own account. To be engaged in
statement must include the following informa-Transactions from trading activities result in cap-business as a trader in securities, you must
tion.ital gains and losses and must be reported onmeet all the following conditions.
Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these 1. That you are making an election under• You must seek to profit from daily markettransactions are subject to the limit on capitalsection 475(f) of the Internal Revenuemovements in the prices of securities andlosses explained earlier in this chapter. Code.not from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
Mark-to-market election made.If you madepreciation. 2. The first tax year for which the election isthe mark-to-market election, you should reporteffective.• Your activity must be substantial. all gains and losses from trading as ordinary
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead3. The trade or business for which you are• You must carry on the activity with con-
of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. Inmaking the election.tinuity and regularity.
that case, securities held at the end of the yearIf you are not required to file a 2005 incomein your business as a trader are marked to mar-The following facts and circumstances should tax return, you make the election by placing theket by treating them as if they were sold (andbe considered in determining if your activity is a above statement in your books and records noreacquired) for fair market value on the lastsecurities trading business. later than March 15, 2006. Attach a copy of thebusiness day of the year. But do not mark tostatement to your 2006 return.• Typical holding periods for securitiesmarket any securities you held for investment.After making the election to change to thebought and sold. Report sales from those securities on Schedulemark-to-market method of accounting, you mustD, not Form 4797.• The frequency and dollar amount of your change your method of accounting for securitiestrades during the year. Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-under Revenue Procedure 2002-9. Revenue
ment expenses that an investor would deduct on• The extent to which you pursue the activity Procedure 2002-9 requires you to file Form
Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by ato produce income for a livelihood. 3115, Application for Change in Accounting
trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orMethod. Follow its instructions. Label the Form• The amount of time you devote to the ac-Loss From Business, if the expenses are from3115 as filed under “Section 10A of the Appen-tivity. the trading business. Commissions and otherdix of Rev. Proc. 2002-9.”
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities areOnce you make the election, it will apply toIf your trading activities are not a business,not deductible but must be used to figure gain or2006 and all later tax years, unless you getyou are considered an investor, and not a trader.loss. The limit on investment interest expense,permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect ofIt does not matter whether you call yourself awhich applies to investors, does not apply tomaking the election is described undertrader or a “day trader.” interest paid or incurred in a trading business.Mark-to-market election made, earlier.
For more information on this election, seeSelf-employment tax.Gains and losses fromNote. You may be a trader in some securi- Revenue Procedure 99-17, 1999-1 CB 503.selling securities as part of a trading businessties and have other securities you hold for in-
are not subject to self-employment tax. This isvestment. The special rules discussed here do
true whether the election is made or not.not apply to the securities held for investment.
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Research your tax questions online. cery stores, copy centers, city and county
government offices, credit unions, and of-• Search publications online by topic or
fice supply stores have a collection ofkeyword.5. products available to print from a• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
CD-ROM or photocopy from reproduciblepublished in the last few years.
proofs. Also, some IRS offices and librar-• Figure your withholding allowances using ies have the Internal Revenue Code, reg-How To Get Tax our Form W-4 calculator. ulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and• Sign up to receive local and national taxCumulative Bulletins available for re-news by email.Help search purposes.
• Get information on starting and operating• Services. You can walk in to your locala small business.You can get help with unresolved tax issues, Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- ness day for personal, face-to-face taxPhone. Many services are availabletions, and get information from the IRS in sev- help. An employee can explain IRS let-by phone.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best ters, request adjustments to your tax ac-for you, you will have quick and easy access to count, or help you set up a payment plan.• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-tax help. If you need to resolve a tax problem,tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order have questions about how the tax lawContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you current-year forms, instructions, and pub-applies to your individual tax return, orhave attempted to deal with an IRS problem lications and prior-year forms and instruc-you’re more comfortable talking withunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- tions. You should receive your order someone in person, visit your local Tax-payer Advocate. within 10 days. payer Assistance Center where you canThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with spread out your records and talk with anresents your interests and concerns within theyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-IRS by protecting your rights and resolving• Solving problems. You can get pointment is necessary, but if you prefer,problems that have not been fixed through nor-face-to-face help solving tax problemsmal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- you can call your local Center and leaveevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-not change the tax law or make a technical tax a message requesting an appointment tosistance Centers. An employee can ex-decision, they can clear up problems that re- resolve a tax account issue. A represen-plain IRS letters, request adjustments tosulted from previous contacts and ensure that tative will call you back within 2 businessyour account, or help you set up a pay-your case is given a complete and impartial days to schedule an in-person appoint-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As-review. ment at your convenience. To find thesistance Center for an appointment. ToTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate: number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontactsfind the number, go to or look in the phone book under United• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the States Government, Internal Revenue1-877-777-4778. phone book under United States Govern- Service.ment, Internal Revenue Service.• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
Mail. You can send your order foroffice in your area. • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
forms, instructions, and publicationsto TTY/TDD equipment, call• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a to the address below and receive a1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions orTTY/TDD user. response within 10 business days after yourto order forms and publications.
request is received.• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate. • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and
press 2 to listen to pre-recordedFor more information, see Publication 1546, National Distribution Centermessages covering various tax topics.How To Get Help With Unresolved Tax P.O. Box 8903• Refund information. If you would like toProblems (now available in Chinese, Korean, Bloomington, IL 61702-8903check the status of your 2005 refund, callRussian, and Vietnamese, in addition to English CD-ROM for tax products. You can1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for auto-and Spanish). order Publication 1796, IRS Taxmated refund information or call
Products CD-ROM, and obtain:Free tax services.To find out what services 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to6 weeks from the date you filed your re-• A CD that is released twice so you haveFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free taxturn (3 weeks if you filed electronically).the latest products. The first releasepublications and an index of tax topics. It alsoHave your 2005 tax return available be- ships in late December and the final re-describes other free tax information services,cause you will need to know your social lease ships in late February.including tax education and assistance pro- security number, your filing status, and• Current-year forms, instructions, andgrams and a list of TeleTax topics. the exact whole dollar amount of your publications.refund.Internet. You can access the IRS • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-website 24 hours a day, 7 days a cations.Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-week, at www.irs.gov to: • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andices. To ensure that IRS representatives give• E-file your return. Find out about com- finding aid.accurate, courteous, and professional answers,mercial tax preparation and e-file serv- • Tax law frequently asked questionswe use several methods to evaluate the qualityices available free to eligible taxpayers. (FAQs).of our telephone services. One method is for a• Check the status of your 2005 refund.second IRS representative to sometimes listen• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-Click on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to in on or record telephone calls. Another is to asksponse system.wait at least 6 weeks from the date yousome callers to complete a short survey at the• Fill-in, print, and save features for mostfiled your return (3 weeks if you filedend of the call. tax forms.electronically). Have your 2005 tax return
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.Walk-in. Many products and servicesavailable because you will need to know
are available on a walk-in basis.your social security number, your filing • Toll-free and email technical support.
status, and the exact whole dollar Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Infor-
amount of your refund. mation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders• Products. You can walk in to many post
• Download forms, instructions, and publi- for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick
cations. toll free to buy the CD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5up certain forms, instructions, and publi-
handling fee).• Order IRS products online. cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CD-ROM for small businesses. • Tax law changes for 2005. • “Rate the Product” survey—your oppor-
Publication 3207, The Small Business tunity to suggest changes for future edi-• IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, in-
Resource Guide CD-ROM for 2005, tions.structions, and publications by searching
has a new look and enhanced navigation fea- An updated version of this CD is available eachon a keyword or topic.
tures. This year’s CD includes: year in early April. You can get a free copy by• Web links to various government agen-calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting• Helpful information, such as how to pre- cies, business associations, and IRS or-www.irs.gov/smallbiz.pare a business plan, find financing for ganizations.
your business, and much more.
• All the business tax forms, instructions,
and publications needed to successfully
manage a business.
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of theInvestment interest:The inter- Passive activity:An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a. A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnershipboth of the following are true.b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property 1. More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option:Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of,2. You perform more than 750At-risk rules:Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a businesses in which you ma-treatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in terially participate.contract (defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
your investment in property for tax Portfolio income:Gross incomeif it were sold for its fair marketpurposes. The basis of property from interest, dividends, annuities,value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable inyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is or royalties that is not derived in thefull at any time upon demand by thethe year.used to figure gain or loss on the ordinary course of a trade or busi-lender.sale or disposition of investment ness. It includes gains from theMarket discount: The stated re-
property. sale or trade of property (other thanDividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur-
an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by aity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders outimmediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-applicable federal rate, or a term Premium: The amount by whichEquity option:Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is
1. To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any
the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. bond having market discount ex-2. That is valued directly or indi- the bond after you get it (other thancept:rectly by reference to anyCall: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).1. Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1Private activity bond:A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,that is part of a state or local gov-Fair market value:The price atof shares of stock at a specified
ernment bond issue of which:which property would change 2. Tax-exempt obligations thatprice.
hands between a willing buyer and you bought before May 1,
1. More than 10% of the pro-Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-1993, ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant 3. U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in whichfacts.
you actually or constructively re- 4. Certain installment obliga- 2. More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at theNominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a. Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in tradingpayable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis-minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedmarket by the Commodities Fu- Forward contract:A contract tooption that is not an equity option,b. Derived from payments fortures Trading Commission. deliver a substantially fixed amountsuch as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for afutures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.calling for the sale or purchase of aFutures contract: An
fixed amount of a commodity at aexchange-traded contract to buy orOptions dealer:Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thefuture date for a fixed price. sell a specified commodity or finan-istered with an appropriate nationalpurchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified pricesecurities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See alsotransaction that you entered into maker or specialist in listed op- property such as a stated numberCommodity future.after April 30, 1993, that meets tions. of shares of stock at a specified
both of these tests. Gift loan:Any below-market loan price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the
The amount by which the stated1. Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest:Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
sue price.of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Page 75

Page 76 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop-Restricted stock:Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b. Does not participate in cor-
for services you perform that is buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any signif-erty, with multiple classes of inter-
nontransferable and is subject to a substantially identical property and icant extent, andests held by investors. These
substantial risk of forfeiture. deliver it to the lender.interests may be either regular or c. Has a fixed redemption
residual. price.Section 1256 contract:Any: Straddle: Generally, a set of off-
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract:A 1. Regulated futures contract,erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-2. Foreign currency contract as demand loan.chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 under1. Provides that amounts that number of shares of the security,Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-Section 1256 Contractsmust be deposited to, or may with the same exercise price andcurities at a loss within 30 daysMarked to Market,be withdrawn from, your mar- period. before or after you buy or acquire ingin account depend on daily 3. Nonequity option, a fully taxable trade, or acquire amarket conditions (a system Stripped preferred stock:Stock contract or option to buy, substan-4. Dealer equity option, orof marking to market), and that meets the following tests.tially identical stock or securities.5. Dealer securities futures con-2. Is traded on, or subject to the 1. There has been a separationtract.rules of, a qualified board of in ownership between the
exchange, such as a domestic stock and any dividend on theSecurities futures contract:Aboard of trade designated as stock that has not becomecontract of sale for future deliverya contract market by the Com- payable.of a single security or of amodity Futures Trading Com-narrow-based security index. 2. The stock:mission or any board of trade
or exchange approved by theShort sale:The sale of property a. Is limited and preferred as
Secretary of the Treasury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 76

Page 77 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Private activity.........12, 75 Custodian account for....... 3 Market discount bonds (SeeA
Gifts to..................... 4 Market discount bonds)Redemption or retirementAbusive tax shelters (See Tax
Investment income of.....3 ,  3 4o f ....................... 3 9 Original issue discount (Seeshelters)
Qualified dividends......... 3 4 Original issue discount (OID))Sold between interestAccounting fees............. 3 6
Savings account with parent asdates.................... 1 1 Short-term obligations..... 1 5 ,Accrual method ...... 7 ,  16, 25, trustee.................... 5 49State and local33, 75 U.S. savings bond owner.... 8government.............. 5 0 Stripped bonds andAccuracy-related penalty..... 5 coupons ................. 1 4Stripped............12, 14, 45 Clerical help................. 3 6Acquisition discount....16, 45 Tax-exempt................ 5 0 Discounted debtCo-owners of U.S. savingsAdjusted basis.......21, 43, 45 Traded flat.................. 6 instruments............... 1 3bonds ...................... 8Alaska Permanent Fund U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Discounted tax-exemptCollateralized debt obligationsdividends .............23, 34 bonds) obligations................ 4 5(CDOs) .................... 2 6Amortization of bond U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Dividends: (See also FormComments on publication.... 2premium ...............34-36 Treasury bills, notes, and 1099-DIV) ..........19-24, 75Commodities traders........ 7 5Annuities: bonds) Alaska PermanentCommodity futures......52, 54,Borrowing on............... 3 7Brokerage fees..........36, 65 Fund ................23, 3475Interest on.................. 6 Exempt-interest...... 5 ,  22, 54Community property:Life insurance proceeds used to Extraordinary.............. 5 6U.S. savings bonds.......... 8b u y...................... 1 2C Holding period............. 2 0Constructive ownershipSale of..................... 5 1Calls and puts...........57, 75 Insurance policies.......... 2 3transactions..........48, 52Single-premium............ 3 7 Table 4-1.................. 5 8 Money market funds........ 2 1Constructive receipt......... 1 6Trade for...............39, 47 Capital assets............... 4 9 Nominees ..............19, 24Constructive sales.......... 4 0Applicable federal rate....... 6 Capital gain Ordinary................... 2 0
Contractors, insolvencyAppreciated financial distributions......21, 24, 34, Patronage ................. 2 3
of ......................... 5 5positions.................. 4 0 54 Payments in lieu of......... 5 5
ConversionArbitrage bonds............. 1 2 Qualified............20, 24, 34Capital gain tax
transactions..........51, 75 Qualified foreignAssistance (See Tax help) computation .............. 6 7
Convertible stocks and corporation.............. 2 0At-risk rules..........32, 64, 75 Capital gains and
bonds ..................... 4 7Received in January........ 2 0losses..................49-54Attorneys’ fees.............. 3 6
Reinvestment plans....21, 36,Cooperatives, sales of stockConstructive ownershipAutomatic investment 44to ......................... 6 2transactions............. 5 2service.............36, 44, 53 Reporting requirements.... 1 9 ,Corporate distributions..... 1 9Definition.................. 4 9
23-24Capital gain.........24, 34, 54Empowerment zone
Restricted stock............ 2 4Constructive............... 2 2B assets................... 6 4
Sale or trade vs............. 3 9Dividends (See Dividends)Investment property........ 4 9Backup withholding.......... 3
Scrip...................... 2 2Fractional shares........... 2 2Long-term .............55, 65Bad debts ...............51, 54 Sold stock................. 2 0Liquidating.............21, 24Long-term debtBankrupt financial institutions: Stock..................44, 53Nondividend...........21, 24instruments.............. 5 0Deposit in.................. 5 1 Underreported.............. 3Return of capital............ 2 1Losses, limit on............ 6 6Bargain purchases.......... 4 2 Veterans’ insurance......5 ,  2 3Stock rights................ 2 2Passive activities........... 6 4Basis.................42-48, 75 Divorce .................43, 48Undistributed capitalQualified covered callAdjusted............21, 43, 45 gains.................... 2 1options.................. 6 0Cost....................... 4 2 CorporateQualified small businessInherited property.......... 4 3 Ereorganizations........... 4 6stock.................... 6 3Investment property........ 4 2 Education Savings BondReporting requirements.... 6 0 ,Cost basis................... 4 2Like-kind exchanges........ 4 6 Program ...............10-1163, 64 Coupon bonds .............. 1 6Other than cost............. 4 2 Interest excluded under..... 1 8Rollover of gain from sale ofREITs ..................... 4 4 Recordkeepingsecurities................ 6 2REMIC, residual interest.... 2 5 D requirements............. 1 1Short-term.............55, 65Replacement stock......... 6 3 Day traders.................. 7 2Employee stock ownershipTax rates.................. 6 6Stocks and bonds......21, 22, plans (ESOPs), sales of stock28% rate gain worksheet, Dealer equity options........ 4 135, 43 to ......................... 6 2completed sample..... 6 7Dealer securities futuresBearer obligations.......14, 51 Table 4-2................ 6 7 Employer identificationcontracts.................. 4 1Below-market loans.....6-7, 75 numbers (EINs) ........... 2 6Capital loss carryover...... 6 0 ,Debt instruments, retirementBonds: 66, 67 Empowerment zone ......... 6 4of ......................... 5 0Accrued interest on......... 1 9 Worksheet 4-1............. 6 6 Endowment contracts ....... 3 7Decedents ...............43, 66Amortization of premium.... 3 4 Cash method ...... 7 ,  16, 33, 75 U.S. savings bond interest, Enterprise zone facilityArbitrage................... 1 2Reporting options for savings reporting of............... 9 bonds ..................... 1 2Basis..................35, 43 bond interest.............. 7Demand loans ............... 7 5Equity option............41, 75Capital asset............... 4 9Cash-settled options........ 4 1Demutualization............. 4 7Estate income received byConvertible................ 4 7Casualty losses............. 5 1 beneficiary................. 3Deposits, loss on............ 5 1Coupon .................... 1 6
CDOs (Collateralized debt Exempt-interest dividends onEnterprise zone facility...... 1 2 Discount on debt
obligations)............... 2 6 mutual fund stock......... 5 4Federally guaranteed....... 1 2 instruments............13-16
Certificates of depositIdentification............... 4 4 Certificates of deposit....... 1 4Expenses of producing
(CDs) ..................... 1 4Market discount....12, 33, 45, Election to report all interest as income .................... 3 6
Children:50, 65, 75 OID ..................... 1 6
Alaska Permanent FundNew York Liberty bonds.... 1 2 Face-amount certificates.... 1 4
Fdividends................ 3 4Par value.................. 4 5 Gain or loss treatment...... 4 9
Capital gain distributions.... 3 4Premiums on........35, 45, 75 Inflation-indexed ........... 1 4Face-amount certificates.... 1 4
Page 77

Page 78 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value....42, 43, 46, Installment sale Local government obligationsG
75 payments ................. 6 (See State or local governmentGains on qualified small
obligations)Insurance dividends......... 6Federal guarantee on business stock............ 6 3
Money market funds......... 5bonds ..................... 1 2 Long-term capital gains andGains on sales or trades: (See
Nominee distributions........ 5 losses.................55, 65Fees to buy or sell.......... 3 6 also Capital gains and
Prepaid insurance Long-term debtlosses).............45, 48, 49Financial asset securitization
premiums ................. 6 instruments............... 5 0investment trusts Gifts.............. 4 ,  43, 53, 75
Reporting...............16-19(FASITs) .................. 2 6 Losses on sales or trades: (SeeGlossary .................75-76 Seller-financed also Capital gains andForeign currency Government obligations..... 1 6 mortgage ............17, 19 losses).................... 4 9transactions.............. 4 0
Tax refunds................. 6 Amount calculation......... 4 5Foreign income .............. 2 Tax-exempt............12, 17 Carryback election.....41, 42HForgone interest............ 7 5 Taxable............5-6, 11, 12 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldHedging transactions...... 4 1 ,Form 1040 ...............17, 23 U.S. savings bonds, person 6 months or less......... 5 442, 52Schedule B................ 1 7 responsible for tax (Table Passive activities.......26, 27,Help (See Tax help)Form 1040, Schedule D..... 5 5 , 1-2)...................... 8 32, 34Holding period:57, 63, 67 Underreported.............. 3 Related parties............. 4 8Investment property........ 5 3Worksheet, completed Usurious interest............ 6 Section 1244 (small business)Replacement stock......... 6 3sample .................. 6 8 VA insurance dividends...... 5 stock.................... 5 2Straddles.................. 6 0Form 1040A .............17, 23 Small business investmentInvestment clubs.........26-27
Form 1040X ................. 4 0 company stock........... 5 3Investment counsel and
Form 1041 ................... 2 7 Wash sales................ 6 0advice..................... 3 6IForm 1065 ................... 2 7 Investment expenses.....32-38Income from sources outsideSchedule K-1.............. 2 7 Allocated.................. 2 5U.S......................... 2 MForm 1066, Schedule Q...... 2 5 At-risk rules................ 3 2Income tax treaties (Table Mark-to-market election..... 7 2Deductible................. 3 6Form 1096 ............19, 24, 65 1-3)....................... 2 0 Marked to market rules..... 4 1 ,Limits on deductions........ 3 2Form 1099-B .....39, 64, 65, 67Indian tribal government.... 1 2 72, 75Nondeductible............. 3 7Form 1099-DIV .... 3 ,  19, 23, 24 Individual retirement Market discount bonds..... 1 2 ,Pass-through entities....... 3 7Form 1099-INT ..... 3 ,  5 ,  10, 17, arrangements (IRAs): 15, 33, 45, 50, 65, 75Reporting requirements..... 3 819, 25, 26 Interest income.............. 5 Accrued marketInvestment income........... 3Form 1099-MISC .........19, 55 discount................. 1 5Inflation-indexed debt Children.................3 ,  3 4Form 1099-OID ....5 ,  13, 18, 25, instruments...........14, 15 Maximum rate of capital gainsGeneral Information......... 326 (Table 4-2)................ 6 7Inherited property: Net income................ 3 3Form 1099-S ................ 6 5 Mechanics’ and suppliers’Basis...................... 4 3Records to keep............. 3Form 1120 ................... 2 7 liens...................... 5 5Holding period............. 5 3 Reporting of (Table 1-1)..... 5Transfer by inheritance..... 3 9Form 1120-A ................ 2 7 Meetings, expenses ofInvestment property......... 3 2 attending.................. 3 7Insolvency ofForm 2439 ................... 2 1 Basis...................... 4 2contractors............... 5 5 Missing children, photographsForm 3115 ............. 8 ,  36, 72 Definition.................. 3 9of .......................... 2Installment sales............ 6 4Form 4684 ................... 5 1 Gain or loss treatment...... 4 9
Mixed straddles.........55, 61Insurance:Form 4797 ............46, 52, 53 Gift, received as............ 4 3
Borrowing on............... 3 7 Money market funds ........ 2 1Form 4952 ................... 3 4 Holding period............. 5 3
Interest income.............. 5Dividends, interest on.....6 ,  2 3Liquidation, received in..... 4 5Form 6198 ................... 6 4
Interest option on........... 1 2 More information (See Tax help)Nontaxable trades, receivedForm 6781 .....42, 52, 60, 65, 67
Life insurance companies, Mortgages:i n ....................... 4 3Form 8271 ................... 3 0 demutualization.......... 4 7 Revenue bonds ............ 1 2Sales and trades........... 3 9Form 8275 ................... 3 0Life, paid to beneficiary..... 1 2 Secondary liability onServices, received for....... 4 2Form 8275-R ................ 3 0 Prepaid premiums........... 6 home .................... 5 5Spouse, received from...... 4 3Form 8582 ................... 2 6Single-premium life......... 3 7 Seller-financed............. 1 9Taxable trades, receivedForm 8614 .................... 3 Trades..................... 4 7 i n ....................... 4 2Municipal bonds: (See also State
Form 8615 .................... 3 Veterans’ dividends, interest or local government
Form 8815 ...............10, 18 o n.....................5 ,  2 3 obligations).........12, 17, 50
JForm 8824 ................... 4 6Interest expenses: Mutual funds.....21, 32, 34, 37,
Joint accounts............... 4Form 8832 ................... 2 7Allocation of................ 3 2 44, 54
Joint and separateInvestment interest.....32, 75 publicly offered ............. 3 7Form 8886 ...............29, 30
returns................31, 66Limit on.................. 3 3Form:
When to deduct.......... 3 31066 (Schedule Q)......... 3 7 NMargin accounts........... 3 33115 ....................... 8 New York Liberty bonds..... 1 2LPaid in advance............ 3 34952 ...................... 3 4 Nominee distributions:Life insurance companies:Straddles.................. 3 7Form SS-4 ................... 2 6 Dividends..............19, 24demutualization............ 4 7Unstated................... 4 2Form W-8BEN ................ 4 Interest income...........5 ,  1 9Like-kind exchanges....46, 48Interest income.............. 5Form W-9 .................... 3 Original issue discount...... 1 3Basis of propertyAnnuity contracts............ 6Forward contracts........... 7 5 Nominee, defined........... 7 5received................. 4 6Bonds traded flat............ 6Fractional shares........22, 53 Nonbusiness bad debts.... 5 1 ,Reporting requirements..... 4 6Certificates of deposits...... 5Free tax services............ 7 3 54Limited partners............. 7 5Condemnation awards....... 6Frozen deposits...........6 ,  1 9 Noncapital assets........... 4 9LiquidatingDeferred interest
Futures contracts: Nondeductible investmentdistributions..........21, 45accounts ................. 5
expenses ................. 3 7Definition.................. 7 5 Listed options...........41, 75Dividends on deposit or share
Regulated .............40, 76 Nondividendaccounts ................. 5Loans:
distributions.............. 2 1Securities...........54, 56, 57 Frozen deposits..........6 ,  1 9Below-market..........6-7, 75
Nonequity options.......41, 75Futures, commodity.....52, 54, Gift for opening account..... 5 Gift and demand.........6 ,  7 5
75 Individual retirement Guarantees................ 5 4Nonqualified preferred
arrangements (IRAs)...... 5Wash sales................ 5 6 Term ....................6 ,  7 6stock...................... 4 7
Page 78

Page 79 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident aliens: Puts and calls ...........57, 75 Revocable trust, trustee’s State or local government
Table 4-1.................. 5 8commissions for.......... 3 7 obligations.............12-13Backup withholding.......... 4
Market discount bonds (SeeRollover of gain from sale:Nontaxable return of
Market discount bonds)capital.................... 2 1 Empowerment zone
Q Private activity bonds...... 1 2 ,assets................... 6 4Nontaxable stock rights..... 5 4
Qualified dividends.......... 2 4 75Securities..............62, 63Nontaxable trades.......46, 53
Qualified small business Registration requirement.... 1 2Notes: stock...............45, 54, 63 Tax-exempt interest........ 1 2Individuals, bought at Gains on................... 6 3S Taxable interest............ 1 2discount................. 5 0
S corporations..........26, 45 Stock:U.S. Treasury (See U.S.
Basis...........21, 22, 43, 63Safe deposit box............ 3 6Treasury bills, notes, and R Capital asset............... 4 9Sales and trades of investmentbonds) Real estate investment trusts Constructive ownership..... 4 8property................39-72(REITs).............21, 44, 54 Convertible................ 4 7Definition.................. 3 9Real estate mortgageO Corporate.................. 4 6Savings bonds (See U.S.investment conduits Dividends (See Dividends)Office expenses............. 3 6 savings bonds)(REMICs) ........25-26, 37, 75 Fractional shares.......22, 53Options ..................57-58 SBIC stock (See Small businessRegular interest............ 2 5 Identification............... 4 4Calls and puts..........57, 75 investment company stock)Residual interest.......25, 57 Installment sales........... 6 4Cash settlement........41, 57 Scrip dividends............. 2 2Recordkeeping .............. 5 3 Nonqualified preferredDealer equity............... 4 1 Section 1202 gain........... 6 4Recordkeeping requirements: stock.................... 4 7Deep-in-the-money......... 5 9 Section 1244 stock.......... 5 2Education Savings Bond Public utility,Equity.................41, 75 Section 1256 contracts..... 4 0 ,Program ................. 1 1 reinvestment............. 4 4Gain or loss............57, 59 54, 57, 65, 76Investment income.......... 3 Redemption of............. 3 9Holding period............. 5 4 Net gain on................ 4 1Small business stock....... 5 3 Replacement stock......... 6 3Listed.................41, 75 Net loss on................ 4 1Redemption of stock........ 3 9 Restricted stock........24, 76Nonequity..............41, 75 Reporting requirements..... 4 1Redemption or retirement of Rights..............22, 44, 54Qualified covered call....... 5 9 Securities:bonds ..................... 3 9 S corporations............. 4 5Reporting requirements..... 5 7 Holding period............. 5 3Regulated futures Sales to ESOPs orSection 1256 contracts.... 4 0 , Installment sales........... 6 4contract...............40, 76 cooperatives............. 6 257 Lost, stolen, etc., cost of Small business.........45, 54REITs (See Real estateWash sales................ 5 6 replacing................ 3 6 Specialized small businessinvestment trusts (REITs))Options dealer.............. 7 5 Rollover of gain from investment company..... 4 5Related partyOrdinary gains and sale.................62, 63 Splits...................... 4 4transactions.......38, 48-49losses.................49, 51 Traders in.................. 7 2Straddles (See Straddles)Related persons............. 5 9Original issue discount Stripped preferred stock . . . 24,Worthless..............40, 55REMICs  (See Real estate(OID)........12, 13-15, 45, 75 76Securities futuresmortgage investment conduitsAdjustment to.............. 1 9 Surrender of............... 3 9contracts.......41, 54, 57, 76(REMICs))Reporting requirements..... 1 3 Trades..................... 4 7Self-employment income.... 4 2Reorganizations,Rules...................... 1 4 Trust instruments treatedSelf-employment tax........ 7 2corporate ................. 4 6 a s....................... 4 0Seller-financedReporting requirements: Straddles.................58-62mortgages ................ 1 9P Bad debts.................. 5 5 Defined.................... 7 6Bond premium Short sales...............55-56Pass-through entities: Holding period............. 6 0amortization............. 3 6 Adjusted basis............. 4 5Rollover of gain............ 6 3 Interest expense and carryingCapital gains and Defined.................... 7 6Passive activities............ 7 5 charges ................. 3 7losses............60, 63, 64 Expenses of............... 3 7Gains and losses.......26, 27, Loss deferral rules.......... 5 9Dividend income........... 2 3 Extraordinary dividends..... 5 632, 34, 64 Mixed .................55, 61Exempt-interest dividends.... 5 Puts....................... 5 7Patronage dividends........ 2 3 Reporting requirements..... 6 5Interest on U.S. savings Small business investmentPenalties: Stripped bonds andbonds ..................7 ,  8 company stock........... 5 3Accuracy-related.........5 ,  3 0 coupons ...........12, 14, 45Investment expenses....... 3 8Short-term capital gains andBackup withholding.......... 4 Stripped preferred stock... 2 4 ,Like-kind exchanges........ 4 6 losses.................55, 65Civil fraud.................. 3 1 76Options.................... 5 7Short-termEarly withdrawal..........5 ,  1 9Original issue discount...... 1 3 Substitute payments........ 5 5obligations......15-16, 45, 49Failure to pay tax........... 3 1 S corporation income, Suggestions forInterest deduction, limitFailure to supply SSN....... 3 deductions, and publication................. 2o n....................... 3 3Substantial credits................... 2 6understatement.......... 3 0 Sixty/forty rule.............. 4 1Section 1256 contracts..... 4 1
Valuation misstatement..... 3 0 Small business investmentState or local government T
Political parties: company stock ........53, 64obligations............... 1 2 Tables:Debts owed by............. 5 5 Reporting requirements..... 5 3Straddles.................. 6 5 Capital gains maximum rate
Portfolio income............ 7 5 Small business stock....... 4 5 ,Substitute payments........ 5 5 (Table 4-2)............... 6 7
53, 54, 63Tax-exempt interestPreferred stock: Income tax treaties (Table
income .................. 1 7Nonqualified............... 4 7 Social security number (SSN): 1-3)..................... 2 0
Trades..................... 7 2Redeemable at a Custodial accounts.......... 3 Investment income, reporting of
Wash sales................ 5 7premium ................. 2 2 Joint accounts.............. 3 (Table 1-1)................ 5
Stripped...............24, 76 Repossession of real Requirement to give......... 3 Puts and calls (Table
property................... 5 3Premiums on bonds .....35, 45, 4-1)..................... 5 8Specialized small business
75 Restricted property.......... 4 2 U.S. savings bonds, personinvestment company
Private activity bonds...... 1 2 , responsible for tax (TableRestricted stock.........24, 76 stock..................45, 64
75 1-2)...................... 8Retirement of debt Spouses:
Public utility stock Tax help..................... 7 3instrument................ 5 0 Transfers between: (See also
reinvestment.............. 4 4 Tax rates:Related partyReturn of capital (See
Publications (See Tax help) transactions).........43, 48Nondividend distributions) Capital gain and losses ..... 6 6
Page 79

Page 80 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax refunds: Taxpayer identification Treaties, income tax (Table V
Interest on.................. 6 numbers (TINs): 1-3) ....................... 2 0Veterans’ insurance:
Aliens...................... 2Tax shelters..............28-31 Trust income received by Dividends on............... 2 3
Penalties.................. 3 0Term loans................6 ,  7 6beneficiary................. 3
Projected income Trade or business........... 3 2Trustee’s commission for Winvestment............... 2 9 revocable trust............ 3 7Traders in securities........ 7 2 Warrants .................... 5 6Registration number........ 3 0 TTY/TDD information........ 7 3Trades: Wash sales...........56-57, 76Reporting requirements..... 2 9 Insurance.................. 4 7 Holding period............. 5 4Rules to curb abuse........ 2 8 Investment property........ 3 9U Loss deferral rules,Tax-exempt bonds .......... 5 0 Like-kind...............46, 48 straddles................ 6 0U.S. savings bonds: (See alsoTax-exempt income: Nontaxable.........43, 46, 53 Reporting requirements..... 5 7Education Savings BondExpenses of............... 3 7 Reporting requirements..... 7 2 Program) .......... 6 ,  7-11, 11 Withholding, backup......... 3Interest on.............12, 17 Stock...................... 4 7Reporting interest on......6 ,  7Worksheets:Tax-exempt obligations.... 1 2 , Taxable.................... 4 2Retirement or profit-sharing Capital gains, 28% rate15, 45 U.S. Treasury notes or plan, distributed from...... 9 worksheet, completedbonds ................... 4 7Taxable income, expenses Worksheet............... 1 8 sample .................. 6 9of ......................... 3 7Treasury bills, notes, and bondsTax, responsible person (Table Capital loss carryover....... 6 6(See U.S. Treasury bills, notes,Taxes: 1-2)...................... 8Worthless securities....40, 55and bonds)State and local transfer..... 3 6 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, andState income............... 3 7Treasury inflation-indexed ■bonds ........ 6 ,  11-13, 47, 53securities................. 1 4Taxpayer Advocate.......... 7 3 Usurious interest............. 6Treasury inflation-protected
securities (TIPS)......11, 14
Page 80

Page 81 of 81 of Publication 550 8:44 - 20-JAN-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual TaxpayersSee How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by computer,
phone, and mail.
531 Reporting Tip Income 908 Bankruptcy Tax GuideGeneral Guides
534 Depreciating Property Placed in Service915 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad1 Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Before 1987 Retirement Benefits17 Your Federal Income Tax (For
536 Net Operating Losses for Individuals, 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?Individuals)
Estates, and Trusts 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For
537 Installment SalesIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or 926 Household Employer’s Tax Guide
C-EZ 541 Partnerships 929 Tax Rules for Children and Dependents
509 Tax Calendars for 2006 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
553 Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts 946 How To Depreciate Property
910 Guide to Free Tax Services 550 Investment Income and Expenses 947 Practice Before the Internal Revenue
551 Basis of Assets Service and Power of AttorneySpecialized Publication 552 Recordkeeping for Individuals 950 Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes3 Armed Forces’ Tax Guide 554 Older Americans’ Tax Guide 967 Internal Revenue Service Will Figure54 Tax Guide for United States Citizens Your Tax555 Community Propertyand Residents Aliens Abroad 969 Medical Savings Accounts556 Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,225 Farmer’s Tax Guide and Claims for Refund 970 Tax Benefits for Education463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car 559 Survivors, Executors, and 971 Innocent Spouse ReliefExpenses Administrators 972 Child Tax Credit (For Individuals Sent501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and 561 Determining the Value of Donated Here From the Form 1040 or 1040AFiling Information Property Instructions)502 Medical and Dental Expenses 564 Mutual Fund Distributions 1542 Per Diem Rates503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses 570 Tax Guide for Individuals With Income 1544 Reporting Cash Payments of Over504 Divorced or Separated Individuals From United States Possessions $10,000505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 571 Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) 1546 The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the508 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Plans) Internal Revenue ServiceEducation 575 Pension and Annuity Income Spanish Language Publications514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss 1SP Derechos del Contribuyente516  United States Government Civilian Workbook (Personal-Use Property)Employees Stationed Abroad 579SP C´omo Preparar la Declaraci´on de587 Business Use of Your Home (Including Impuesto Federal517 Social Security and Other Information Use by Day-care Providers)for Members of the Clergy and 594SP Qu´e es lo que Debemos Saber sobre el590 Individual Retirement ArrangementsReligious Workers Proceso de Cobro del IRS593 Tax Highlights for United States Citizens519 United States Tax Guide for Aliens 596SP Cr´edito por Ingreso del Trabajoand Residents Going Abroad520 Scholarships and Fellowships 850 English-Spanish Glossary of Words and594 The Internal Revenue Service Collection Phrases Used in Publications Issued521 Moving Expenses Process by the Internal Revenue Service523 Selling Your Home 596 Earned Income Credit 1544SP Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled 721 Tax Guide to United States Civil Service Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en una525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Retirement Benefits Ocupaci´on o Negocio)526 Charitable Contributions 901 United States Tax Treaties527 Residential Rental Property 907 Tax Highlights for Persons with529 Miscellaneous Deductions Disabilities530 Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Commonly Used Tax Forms See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
Form Number and Form Title Form Number and Form Title
1040 United States Individual Income Tax Return 1040X Amended United States Individual Income Tax Return
Schedule A & B Itemized Deductions & Interest and Ordinary 2106 Employee Business Expenses
Dividends 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses
Schedule C Profit or Loss From Business 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals,
Schedule C-EZ Net Profit From Business Estates, and Trusts
Schedule D Capital Gains and Losses 2441 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Schedule D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration of Representative
Schedule E Supplemental Income and Loss 3903 Moving Expenses
Schedule EIC Earned Income Credit 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
Schedule F Profit or Loss From Farming 4868 Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File
United States Individual Income Tax ReturnSchedule H Household Employment Taxes
4952 Investment Interest Expense DeductionSchedule J Income Averaging For Farmers and Fishermen
5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (includingSchedule R Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Individual Retirement Arrangements) and OtherSchedule SE Self-Employment Tax
Tax-Favored Accounts1040A United States Individual Income Tax Return
6251 Alternative Minimum Tax--IndividualsSchedule 1 Interest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A
8283 Non-cash Charitable ContributionsFilers
8582 Passive Activity Loss LimitationsSchedule 2 Child and Dependent Care Expenses for Form
8606 Nondeductible Individual Retirement Arrangements1040A Filers
8812 Additional Child Tax CreditSchedule 3 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled for Form 1040A
Filers 8822 Change of Address
1040EZ Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filers With No8829 Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Dependents 8863 Education Credits
1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals 9465 Installment Agreement Request
Page 81