Contents
Future Developments ............ 1
What's New .................. 2
Reminders ................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Chapter 1. Investment Income ...... 2
General Information ........... 3
Interest Income .............. 5
Discount on Debt Instruments .... 13
When To Report Interest 
Income ............... 16
How To Report Interest Income .... 17
Dividends and Other 
Distributions ............. 19
How To Report Dividend 
Income ............... 23
Stripped Preferred Stock ....... 25
REMICs, FASITs, and Other 
CDOs ................ 25
S Corporations ............. 26
Investment Clubs ............ 27
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other 
Reportable Transactions ...... 28
Abusive Tax Shelters ......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses .... 31
Limits on Deductions .......... 31
Interest Expenses ........... 32
Bond Premium Amortization ..... 34
Expenses of Producing Income .... 35
Nondeductible Expenses ....... 36
How To Report Investment 
Expenses .............. 37
When To Report Investment 
Expenses .............. 37
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of 
Investment Property ......... 37
What Is a Sale or Trade? ....... 38
Basis of Investment Property ..... 41
How To Figure Gain or Loss ..... 45
Nontaxable Trades ........... 47
Transfers Between Spouses ..... 50
Related Party Transactions ...... 50
Capital Gains and Losses ....... 51
Reporting Capital Gains and 
Losses ................ 67
Special Rules for Traders in 
Securities .............. 70
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help .... 71
Index ..................... 75
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 550, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to www.irs.gov/
pub550.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 550
Cat. No. 15093R
Investment
Income and
Expenses
(Including Capital
Gains and Losses)
For use in preparing
2016 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 78  15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mar 13, 2017

What's New
Form 1099-B. Box 1f is now used for reporting 
accrued market discount. Box 1g is used for 
disallowed losses from wash sale transactions. 
An additional check box (“Ordinary”) has been 
added to box 2 for situations in which some of 
your gain or loss may be ordinary rather than 
capital.
Form 1099-INT.  Box 12 was added to report 
the bond premium on Treasury obligations.
Form 1099-OID.  Box 10 was added to report 
bond premium.
Reminders
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. citi-
zen with investment income from sources out-
side the United States (foreign income), you 
must report that income on your tax return un-
less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true 
whether you reside inside or outside the United 
States and whether or not you receive a Form 
1099 from the foreign payer.
Employee stock options.  If you received an 
option to buy or sell stock or other property as 
payment for your services, see Pub. 525, Taxa-
ble and Nontaxable Income, for the special tax 
rules that apply.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited Chil-
dren. Photographs of missing children selected 
by the Center may appear in this publication on 
pages that would otherwise be blank. You can 
help bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication provides information on the tax 
treatment of investment income and expenses. 
It includes information on the tax treatment of 
investment income and expenses for individual 
shareholders of mutual funds or other regulated 
investment companies, such as money market 
funds. It explains what investment income is 
taxable and what investment expenses are de-
ductible. It explains when and how to show 
these items on your tax return. It also explains 
how to determine and report gains and losses 
on the disposition of investment property and 
provides information on property trades and tax 
shelters.
The glossary at the end of this publica­
tion defines many of the terms used.
Investment income.  This generally includes 
interest, dividends, capital gains, and other 
types of distributions including mutual fund dis-
tributions.
Investment expenses. These include interest 
paid or incurred to acquire investment property 
and expenses to manage or collect income 
from investment property.
TIP
Qualified retirement plans and IRAs.  The 
rules in this publication do not apply to invest-
ments held in individual retirement arrange-
ments (IRAs), section 401(k) plans, and other 
qualified retirement plans. The tax rules that ap-
ply to retirement plan distributions are explained 
in the following publications.
Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-
ness.
Pub. 571, Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans.
Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income.
Pub. 590-A, Contributions to Individual Re-
tirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Pub. 590-B, Distributions from Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Pub. 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service 
Retirement Benefits.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments from 
www.irs.gov/formspubs. Click on “More Infor-
mation” and then on “Give us feedback.”
Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone. 
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including 
the area code, in your correspondence.
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax products.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and 
publications. Otherwise, you can go to 
www.irs.gov/orderforms to order current and 
prior-year forms and instructions. Your order 
should arrive within 10 business days.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question 
not answered by this publication, check 
IRS.gov and How To Get Tax Help at the end of 
this publication.
1.
Investment 
Income
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Interest Income,
Discount on Debt Instruments,
When To Report Interest Income,
How To Report Interest Income,
Dividends and Other Distributions,
How To Report Dividend Income,
Stripped Preferred Stock,
Real estate mortgage investment conduits 
(REMICs), financial asset securitization 
investment trusts (FASITs), and other 
collateralized debt obligations (CDOs),
S Corporations, and
Investment Clubs.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Installment Sales
Distributions from Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Guide to Original Issue Discount 
(OID) Instruments
Form (and Instructions)
Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Capital Gains 
and Losses
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns
Notice to Shareholder of 
Undistributed Long-Term Capital 
Gains
Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
Alternative Minimum Tax — 
Individuals
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Tax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income
Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
Exclusion of Interest From Series 
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued 
After 1989
Optional Form To Record 
Redemption of Series EE and I U.S. 
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989
Like-Kind Exchanges
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
Net Investment Income 
Tax—Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for infor-
mation about getting these publications and 
forms.
  525
  537
  590-B
  925
  1212
  Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040)
  Schedule D (Form 1040)
  1040
  1040A
  1040EZ
  1099
  2439
  3115 
  6251 
  8582 
  8615 
  8814 
  8815 
  8818 
  8824 
  8949 
  8960 
Page 2 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2  Chapter 1 Investment Income

General Information
A few items of general interest are covered 
here.
Recordkeeping. You should keep a 
list showing sources and investment in-
come amounts you receive during the 
year. Also keep the forms you receive showing 
your investment income (Forms 1099-INT, In-
terest Income, and 1099-DIV, Dividends and 
Distributions, for example) as an important part 
of your records.
Net investment income tax (NIIT).  You may 
be subject to the NIIT. The NIIT is a 3.8% tax on 
the lesser of your net investment income or the 
amount of your modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) that is over a threshold amount based 
on your filing status.
Filing Status Threshold Amount
Married filing jointly $250,000
Married filing separately $125,000
Single $200,000
Head of household (with 
qualifying person)
$200,000
Qualifying Widow(er) with 
dependent child
$250,000
For more information, see Form 8960 and 
Instructions for Form 8960.
Tax on unearned income of certain chil-
dren. Part of a child's 2016 unearned income 
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may 
happen if all of the following are true.
1. The child had more than $2,100 of un-
earned income.
2. The child is required to file a tax return.
3. The child either:
a. Was under age 18 at the end of 2016,
b. Was age 18 at the end of 2016 and 
did not have earned income that was 
more than half of the child's support, 
or
c. Was a full-time student at least age 19 
and under age 24 at the end of 2016 
and did not have earned income that 
was more than half of the child's sup-
port.
4. At least one of the child's parents was 
alive at the end of 2016.
5. The child does not file a joint return for 
2016.
A child born on January 1, 1999, is considered 
to be age 18 at the end of 2016; a child born on 
January 1, 1998, is considered to be age 19 at 
the end of 2016; a child born on January 1, 
1993, is considered to be age 24 at the end of 
2016.
If all of these statements are true, Form 
8615 must be completed and attached to the 
child's tax return. If any of these statements is 
not true, Form 8615 is not required and the 
RECORDS
child's income is taxed at his or her own tax 
rate.
However, the parent can choose to include 
the child's interest and dividends on the pa-
rent's return if certain requirements are met. 
Use Form 8814 for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on un-
earned income of children and the parents' 
election, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children 
and Dependents.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Interest, 
dividends, and other investment income you re-
ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is 
generally taxable income. You should receive a 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share 
of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fi-
duciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 
1041) and its instructions will tell you where to 
report the income on your Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN).  You must 
give your name and SSN or individual tax iden-
tification number (ITIN) to any person required 
by federal tax law to make a return, statement, 
or other document that relates to you. This in-
cludes payers of interest and dividends. If you 
do not give your SSN or ITIN to the payer of in-
terest, you may have to pay a penalty.
SSN for joint account.  If the funds in a 
joint account belong to one person, list that per-
son's name first on the account and give that 
person's SSN to the payer. (For information on 
who owns the funds in a joint account, see Joint 
accounts, later.) If the joint account contains 
combined funds, give the SSN of the person 
whose name is listed first on the account. This 
is because only one name and SSN can be 
shown on Form 1099.
These rules apply both to joint ownership by 
a married couple and to joint ownership by 
other individuals. For example, if you open a 
joint savings account with your child using 
funds belonging to the child, list the child's 
name first on the account and give the child's 
SSN.
Custodian account for your child.  If your 
child is the actual owner of an account that is 
recorded in your name as custodian for the 
child, give the child's SSN to the payer. For ex-
ample, you must give your child's SSN to the 
payer of dividends on stock owned by your 
child, even though the dividends are paid to you 
as custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply SSN.  You 
will be subject to a penalty if, when required, 
you fail to:
Include your SSN on any return, state-
ment, or other document,
Give your SSN to another person who 
must include it on any return, statement, or 
other document, or
Include the SSN of another person on any 
return, statement, or other document.
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-
mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.
You will not be subject to this penalty if you 
can show that your failure to provide the SSN 
was due to reasonable cause and not to willful 
neglect.
If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be 
subject to backup withholding.
Backup withholding. Your investment income 
is generally not subject to regular withholding. 
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the 
income. Under backup withholding, the bank, 
broker, or other payer of interest, original issue 
discount (OID), dividends, cash patronage divi-
dends, or royalties must withhold, as income 
tax, on the amount you are paid, applying the 
appropriate withholding rate.
Backup withholding applies if:
1. You do not give the payer your identifica-
tion number (either a social security num-
ber or an employer identification number) 
in the required manner,
2. The IRS notifies the payer that you gave 
an incorrect identification number,
3. The IRS notifies the payer that you are 
subject to backup withholding on interest 
or dividends because you have underre-
ported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return, or
4. You are required, but fail, to certify that 
you are not subject to backup withholding 
for the reason described in (3).
Certification. For new accounts paying in-
terest or dividends, you must certify under pen-
alties of perjury that your SSN is correct and 
that you are not subject to backup withholding. 
Your payer will give you a Form W-9, Request 
for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certifi-
cation, or similar form, to make this certification. 
If you fail to make this certification, backup with-
holding may begin immediately on your new ac-
count or investment.
Underreported interest and dividends.
You will be considered to have underreported 
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-
mined for a tax year that:
You failed to include any part of a reporta-
ble interest or dividend payment required 
to be shown on your return, or
You were required to file a return and to in-
clude a reportable interest or dividend pay-
ment on that return, but you failed to file 
the return.
How to stop backup withholding due to 
underreporting. If you have been notified that 
you underreported interest or dividends, you 
can request a determination from the IRS to 
prevent backup withholding from starting or to 
stop backup withholding once it has begun. You 
must show that at least one of the following sit-
uations applies.
No underreporting occurred.
You have a bona fide dispute with the IRS 
about whether underreporting occurred.
Backup withholding will cause or is caus-
ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikely 
that you will underreport interest and divi-
dends in the future.
You have corrected the underreporting by 
filing a return if you did not previously file 
one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and 
interest due for any underreported interest 
or dividend payments.
Page 3 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 3

If the IRS determines that backup withhold-
ing should stop, it will provide you with a certifi-
cation and will notify the payers who were sent 
notices earlier.
How to stop backup withholding due to 
an incorrect identification number.  If you 
have been notified by a payer that you are sub-
ject to backup withholding because you have 
provided an incorrect SSN or employer identifi-
cation number, you can stop it by following the 
instructions the payer gives you.
Reporting backup withholding.  If backup 
withholding is deducted from your interest or 
dividend income or other reportable payment, 
the bank or other business must give you an in-
formation return for the year (for example, a 
Form 1099-INT) indicating the amount withheld. 
The information return will show any backup 
withholding as “Federal income tax withheld.”
Nonresident aliens.  Generally, payments 
made to nonresident aliens are not subject to 
backup withholding. You can use Form 
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of 
Beneficial Owner for United States Tax With-
holding and Reporting (Individuals), to certify 
exempt status. However, this does not exempt 
you from the 30% (or lower treaty) withholding 
rate that may apply to your investment income. 
For information on the 30% rate, see Pub. 519, 
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen-
alties for giving false information to avoid 
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500. 
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine 
of up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, 
or both.
Where to report investment income.  Ta-
ble 1-1 gives an overview of the forms and 
schedules to use to report some common types 
of investment income. But see the rest of this 
publication for detailed information about re-
porting investment income.
Joint accounts.  If two or more persons hold 
property (such as a savings account, bond, or 
stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, 
or tenants in common, each person's share of 
any interest or dividends from the property is 
determined by local law.
Community property states.  If you are mar-
ried and receive a distribution that is community 
income, one-half of the distribution is generally 
considered to be received by each spouse. If 
you file separate returns, you must each report 
one-half of any taxable distribution. See Pub. 
555, Community Property, for more information 
on community income.
If the distribution is not considered commun-
ity property and you and your spouse file sepa-
rate returns, each of you must report your sepa-
rate taxable distributions.
Example. You and your spouse have a 
joint money market account. Under state law, 
half the income from the account belongs to 
you, and half belongs to your spouse. If you file 
separate returns, you each report half the in-
come.
Income from property given to a child.
Property you give as a parent to your child un-
der the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, 
the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar 
law becomes the child's property.
Income from the property is taxable to the 
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal 
obligation to support the child is taxable to the 
parent or guardian having that legal obligation.
Savings account with parent as trustee.
Interest income from a savings account opened 
for a minor child, but placed in the name and 
subject to the order of the parents as trustees, 
is taxable to the child if, under the law of the 
state in which the child resides, both of the fol-
lowing are true.
The savings account legally belongs to the 
child.
The parents are not legally permitted to 
use any of the funds to support the child.
Accuracy-related penalty.  An accuracy-rela-
ted penalty of 20% can be charged for under-
payments of tax due to negligence or disregard 
Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income 
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the 
rest of this publication, especially How To Report Interest Income 
and How To Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.)
Type of Income If you file Form 1040, 
report on ...
If you can file Form 
1040A, report on ...
If you can file Form 
1040EZ, report on ...
Tax-exempt interest (Form 
1099-INT, box 8)
Line 8b Line 8b Space to the left of 
line 2 (enter “TEI” and 
the amount)
Taxable interest that totals 
$1,500 or less
Line 8a (You may need to 
file Schedule B as well.)
Line 8a (You may need to 
file Schedule B as well.)
Line 2
Taxable interest that totals 
more than $1,500
Line 8a; also use 
Schedule B, line 1
Line 8a; also use 
Schedule B, line 1
Savings bond interest you 
will exclude because of 
higher education expenses
Schedule B; also use 
Form 8815
Schedule B; also use 
Form 8815
Ordinary dividends that total 
$1,500 or less
Line 9a (You may need to 
file Schedule B as well.)
Line 9a (You may need to 
file Schedule B as well.)
Ordinary dividends that total 
more than $1,500
Line 9a; also use 
Schedule B, line 5
Line 9a; also use 
Schedule B, line 5
Qualified dividends (if you do 
not have to file Schedule D)
Line 9b; also use the 
Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet, line 2
Line 9b; also use the 
Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet, line 2
Qualified dividends (if you 
have to file Schedule D)
Line 9b; also use the 
Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet or the 
Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet, line 2
You cannot use Form 
1040A
 
 
You cannot use Form 
1040EZ
Capital gain distributions (if 
you do not have to file 
Schedule D)
Line 13; also use the 
Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet, line 3
Line 10; also use the 
Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet, line 3
Capital gain distributions (if 
you have to file Schedule D)
Schedule D, line 13; also 
use the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital 
Gain Tax Worksheet or 
the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet
Section 1250, 1202, or 
collectibles gain (Form 
1099-DIV, box 2b, 2c, or 2d)
Form 8949 and 
Schedule D
Nondividend distributions 
(Form 1099-DIV, box 3)
Generally not reported*
Undistributed capital gains 
(Form 2439, boxes 1a–1d)
Schedule D
Gain or loss from sales of 
stocks or bonds 
Line 13; also use Form 
8949, Schedule D, and 
the Qualified Dividends 
and Capital Gain Tax 
Worksheet or the 
Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet
You cannot use Form 
1040A
Gain or loss from exchanges 
of like-kind investment 
property 
Line 13; also use 
Schedule D, Form 8824, 
and the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital 
Gain Tax Worksheet or 
the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet
*Report any amounts in excess of your basis in your mutual fund shares on Form 8949. Use Part II if you held the shares 
more than 1 year. Use Part I if you held your mutual fund shares 1 year or less. For details on Form 8949, see Reporting 
Capital Gains and Losses in chapter 4, and the Instructions for Form 8949. 
Table 1-1.
Page 4 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Investment Income

of rules or regulations or substantial understate-
ment of tax. For information on the penalty and 
any interest that applies, see Penalties in chap-
ter 2.
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Accrual method
 Below-market loan
 Cash method
 Demand loan
 Forgone interest
 Gift loan
 Interest
 Mutual fund
 Nominee
 Original issue discount
 Private activity bond
 Term loan
 
This section discusses the tax treatment of dif-
ferent types of interest income.
In general, any interest that you receive or 
that is credited to your account and can be with-
drawn is taxable income. (It does not have to be 
entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this 
rule are discussed later.
Form 1099-INT.  Interest income is generally 
reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar 
statement, by banks, savings and loans, and 
other payers of interest. This form shows you 
the interest you received during the year. Keep 
this form for your records. You do not have to 
attach it to your tax return.
Report on your tax return the total interest 
income you receive for the tax year. See the In-
structions for Form 1099-INT to see whether 
you need to adjust any of the amounts reported 
to you.
Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. 
Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you 
must still report all of your interest income. For 
example, you may receive distributive shares of 
interest from partnerships or S corporations. 
This interest is reported to you on Schedule K-1 
(Form 1065), Partner's Share of Income, De-
ductions, Credits, etc., and Schedule K-1 (Form 
1120S), Shareholder's Share of Income, De-
ductions, Credits, etc.
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives 
interest as a nominee for you, that person must 
give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest 
received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes 
amounts belonging to another person, see the 
discussion on Nominee distributions, later.
Incorrect amount.  If you receive a Form 
1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or 
other incorrect information), you should ask the 
issuer for a corrected form. The new Form 
1099-INT you receive will be marked “Correc-
ted.”
Form 1099-OID.  Reportable interest income 
also may be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original 
Issue Discount. For more information about 
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue 
Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest 
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company, including 
those received from a qualified fund of funds in 
any tax year beginning after December 22, 
2010, are not included in your taxable income. 
(However, see Information reporting require­
ment, next.) Exempt-interest dividends should 
be shown in box 10 of Form 1099-DIV. You do 
not reduce your basis for distributions that are 
exempt-interest dividends.
Information reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-
ble, you must show them on your tax return if 
you have to file. This is an information reporting 
requirement and does not change the ex-
empt-interest dividends into taxable income. 
See How To Report Interest Income, later.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends on speci-
fied private activity bonds may be subject to the 
alternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest 
dividends subject to the alternative minimum 
tax are shown in box 11 of Form 1099-DIV. See 
Form 6251 and its instructions for more infor-
mation about this tax. Private activity bonds are 
discussed later.
Interest on VA dividends.  Interest on insur-
ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not taxable. 
This includes interest paid on dividends on con-
verted United States Government Life Insur-
ance policies and on National Service Life In-
surance policies.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. 
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You 
generally do not include it in your income until 
you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Pub. 
590-B for more information.
Taxable Interest — General
Taxable interest includes interest you receive 
from bank accounts, loans you make to others, 
and other sources. The following are some 
sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.  Certain 
distributions commonly called dividends are ac-
tually interest. You must report as interest 
so-called “dividends” on deposits or on share 
accounts in:
Cooperative banks,
Credit unions,
Domestic building and loan associations,
Domestic savings and loan associations,
Federal savings and loan associations, 
and
Mutual savings banks.
The “dividends” will be shown as interest in-
come on Form 1099-INT.
Money market funds.  Money market funds 
are offered by nonbank financial institutions 
such as mutual funds and stock brokerage 
houses, and pay dividends. Generally, amounts 
you receive from money market funds should 
be reported as dividends, not as interest.
Certificates of deposit and other deferred 
interest accounts.  If you open any of these 
accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals 
of 1 year or less during the term of the account. 
You generally must include this interest in your 
income when you actually receive it or are enti-
tled to receive it without paying a substantial 
penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-
ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single 
payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for 
more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount 
(OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early with-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred 
interest account before maturity, you may have 
to pay a penalty. You must report the total 
amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
count during the year, without subtracting the 
penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav­
ings, later, for more information on how to re-
port the interest and deduct the penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate 
of deposit.  The interest you pay on money 
borrowed from a bank or savings institution to 
meet the minimum deposit required for a certifi-
cate of deposit from the institution and the inter-
est you earn on the certificate are two separate 
items. You must report the total interest you 
earn on the certificate in your income. If you 
itemize deductions, you can deduct the interest 
you pay as investment interest, up to the 
amount of your net investment income. See In­
terest Expenses in chapter 3.
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a 
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to 
make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required 
to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-
tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2016, but you 
received only $265, which represented the 
$575 you earned minus $310 interest charged 
on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a 
Form 1099-INT for 2016 showing the $575 in-
terest you earned. The bank also gives you a 
statement showing that you paid $310 interest 
for 2016. You must include the $575 in your in-
come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions, you 
can deduct $310, subject to the net investment 
income limit.
Gift for opening account.  If you receive non-
cash gifts or services for making deposits or for 
opening an account in a savings institution, you 
may have to report the value as interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or 
services valued at more than $10 must be re-
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or 
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 
must be reported as interest. The value is deter-
mined by the cost to the financial institution.
Example. You open a savings account at 
your local bank and deposit $800. The account 
Page 5 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 5

earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-
culator. If no other interest is credited to your 
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT 
you receive will show $35 interest for the year. 
You must report $35 interest income on your tax 
return.
Interest on insurance dividends.  Interest on 
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-
surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to 
your account. However, if you can withdraw it 
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or 
other specified date), the interest is taxable in 
the year that date occurs.
Prepaid insurance premiums.  Any increase 
in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, ad-
vance premiums, or premium deposit funds is 
interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
ums due on insurance policies or made availa-
ble for you to withdraw.
U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, 
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, 
issued by any agency or instrumentality of the 
United States is taxable for federal income tax 
purposes.
Interest on tax refunds.  Interest you receive 
on tax refunds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.  If the con-
demning authority pays you interest to compen-
sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the 
interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.  If a contract for 
the sale or exchange of property provides for 
deferred payments, it also usually provides for 
interest payable with the deferred payments. 
Generally, that interest is taxable when you re-
ceive it. If little or no interest is provided for in a 
deferred payment contract, part of each pay-
ment may be treated as interest. See Unstated 
Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID)  in 
Pub. 537.
Interest on annuity contract.  Accumulated 
interest on an annuity contract you sell before 
its maturity date is taxable.
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is interest 
charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as in-
terest unless state law automatically changes it 
to a payment on the principal.
Interest income on frozen deposits.  Ex-
clude from your gross income interest on frozen 
deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the 
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-
posit because:
The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or
The state in which the institution is located 
has placed limits on withdrawals because 
other financial institutions in the state are 
bankrupt or insolvent.
The amount of interest you must exclude is 
the interest that was credited on the frozen de-
posits minus the sum of:
The net amount you withdrew from these 
deposits during the year, and
The amount you could have withdrawn as 
of the end of the year (not reduced by any 
penalty for premature withdrawals of a time 
deposit).
If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-
come on deposits that were frozen at the end of 
2016, see Frozen deposits, later, for information 
about reporting this interest income exclusion 
on your tax return.
The interest you exclude is treated as credi-
ted to your account in the following year. You 
must include it in income in the year you can 
withdraw it.
Example. $100 of interest was credited on 
your frozen deposit during the year. You with-
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of 
the end of the year. You must include $80 in 
your income and exclude $20 from your income 
for the year. You must include the $20 in your 
income for the year you can withdraw it.
Bonds traded flat.  If you buy a bond at a dis-
count when interest has been defaulted or 
when the interest has accrued but has not been 
paid, the transaction is described as trading a 
bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not 
income and is not taxable as interest if paid 
later. When you receive a payment of that inter-
est, it is a return of capital that reduces the re-
maining cost basis of your bond. Interest that 
accrues after the date of purchase, however, is 
taxable interest income for the year received or 
accrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest 
Dates, later in this chapter.
Below-Market Loans
If you make a below-market gift or demand 
loan, you must report as interest income any 
forgone interest (defined later) from that loan. 
The below-market loan rules and exceptions 
are described in this section. For more informa-
tion, see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue 
Code and its regulations.
If you receive a below-market loan, you may 
be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as 
any interest you actually paid, but not if it is per-
sonal interest.
Loans subject to the rules.  The rules for be-
low-market loans apply to:
Gift loans,
Pay-related loans,
Corporation-shareholder loans,
Tax avoidance loans, and
Certain loans made to qualified continuing 
care facilities under a continuing care con-
tract.
A pay-related loan is any below-market loan 
between an employer and an employee or be-
tween an independent contractor and a person 
for whom the contractor provides services.
A tax avoidance loan is any below-market 
loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one 
of the main purposes of the interest arrange-
ment.
Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-
terest is:
The amount of interest that would be paya-
ble for that period if interest accrued on the 
loan at the applicable federal rate and was 
payable annually on December 31, minus
Any interest actually payable on the loan 
for the period.
Applicable federal rate.  Applicable fed-
eral rates are published by the IRS each month 
in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. The Internal 
Revenue Bulletin is available through IRS.gov. 
You can also find applicable federal rates in the 
Index of Applicable Federal Rates (AFR) Rul-
ings at https://apps.IRS.gov/app/picklist/list/
federalRates.html.
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for 
other ways to get this information.
Rules for below-market loans. The rules that 
apply to a below-market loan depend on 
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, or 
term loan.
Gift and demand loans.  A gift loan is any 
below-market loan where the forgone interest is 
in the nature of a gift.
A demand loan is a loan payable in full at 
any time upon demand by the lender. A de-
mand loan is a below-market loan if no interest 
is charged or if interest is charged at a rate be-
low the applicable federal rate.
A demand loan or gift loan that is a be-
low-market loan is generally treated as an 
arm's-length transaction in which the lender is 
treated as having made:
A loan to the borrower in exchange for a 
note that requires the payment of interest 
at the applicable federal rate, and
An additional payment to the borrower in 
an amount equal to the forgone interest.
The borrower is generally treated as transfer-
ring the additional payment back to the lender 
as interest. The lender must report that amount 
as interest income.
The lender's additional payment to the bor-
rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution 
to capital, pay for services, or other payment, 
depending on the substance of the transaction. 
The borrower may have to report this payment 
as taxable income, depending on its classifica-
tion.
These transfers are considered to occur an-
nually, generally on December 31.
Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is 
not a demand loan. A term loan is a below-mar-
ket loan if the amount of the loan is more than 
the present value of all payments due under the 
loan.
A lender who makes a below-market term 
loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-
ring an additional lump-sum cash payment to 
the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to cap-
ital, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The 
amount of this payment is the amount of the 
loan minus the present value, at the applicable 
federal rate, of all payments due under the loan. 
An equal amount is treated as original issue dis-
count (OID). The lender must report the annual 
part of the OID as interest income. The bor-
rower may be able to deduct the OID as interest 
expense. See Original Issue Discount (OID) , 
later.
Page 6 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 1 Investment Income

Exceptions to the below-market loan rules. 
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are 
discussed here.
Exception for loans of $10,000 or less. 
The rules for below-market loans do not apply 
to any day on which the total outstanding 
amount of loans between the borrower and 
lender is $10,000 or less. This exception ap-
plies only to:
1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift 
loan is not directly used to buy or carry in-
come-producing assets, and
2. Pay-related loans or corporation-share-
holder loans if the avoidance of federal tax 
is not a principal purpose of the interest ar-
rangement.
This exception does not apply to a term loan 
described in (2) earlier that previously has been 
subject to the below-market loan rules. Those 
rules will continue to apply even if the outstand-
ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
Exception for loans to continuing care 
facilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa-
cilities under continuing care contracts are not 
subject to the rules for below-market loans for 
the calendar year if the lender or the lender's 
spouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year. 
For the definitions of qualified continuing care 
facility and continuing care contract, see Inter-
nal Revenue Code section 7872(h).
Exception for loans without significant 
tax effect.  Loans are excluded from the be-
low-market loan rules if their interest arrange-
ments do not have a significant effect on the 
federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender. 
These loans include:
1. Loans made available by the lender to the 
general public on the same terms and 
conditions that are consistent with the 
lender's customary business practice;
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or 
municipal government that are made avail-
able under a program of general applica-
tion to the public;
3. Certain employee-relocation loans;
4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un-
less the interest income would be effec-
tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. 
trade or business and would not be ex-
empt from U.S. tax under an income tax 
treaty;
5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, 
contributions to which are deductible, if 
the total outstanding amount of loans be-
tween the organization and lender is 
$250,000 or less at all times during the tax 
year; and
6. Other loans on which the interest arrange-
ment can be shown to have no significant 
effect on the federal tax liability of the 
lender or the borrower.
For a loan described in (6) above, all the 
facts and circumstances are used to determine 
if the interest arrangement has a significant ef-
fect on the federal tax liability of the lender or 
borrower. Some factors to be considered are:
Whether items of income and deduction 
generated by the loan offset each other;
The amount of these items;
The cost to you of complying with the be-
low-market loan rules, if they were to ap-
ply; and
Any reasons other than taxes for structur-
ing the transaction as a below-market loan.
If you structure a transaction to meet this ex-
ception and one of the principal purposes of 
that structure is the avoidance of federal tax, 
the loan will be considered a tax-avoidance 
loan, and this exception will not apply.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of 
$100,000 or less.  For gift loans between indi-
viduals, if the outstanding loans between the 
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the 
forgone interest to be included in income by the 
lender and deducted by the borrower is limited 
to the amount of the borrower's net investment 
income for the year. If the borrower's net invest-
ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as 
zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the 
avoidance of federal tax is one of the main pur-
poses of the interest arrangement.
Effective dates.  These rules apply to term 
loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demand 
loans outstanding after that date.
U.S. Savings Bonds
This section provides tax information on U.S. 
savings bonds. It explains how to report the in-
terest income on these bonds and how to treat 
transfers of these bonds.
U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-
viduals include Series EE bonds and Series I 
bonds.
For information about U.S. savings 
bonds, go to https://
www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/
indiv.htm. Also go to https://
www.treasurydirect.gov/email.htm and click on 
a topic to find answers to your questions by 
email.
If you prefer, write to:
For Series HH/H:
Series HH and Series H
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 2186
Minneapolis, MN 55480-2186
For Series EE and I paper savings bonds:
Series EE and Series I
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 214
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0214
For Series EE and I electronic bonds:
Series EE and Series I
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 7015
Minneapolis, MN 55480-7015
Accrual method taxpayers.  If you use an ac-
crual method of accounting, you must report in-
terest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it ac-
crues. You cannot postpone reporting interest 
until you receive it or until the bonds mature.
Cash method taxpayers.  If you use the cash 
method of accounting, as most individual tax-
payers do, you generally report the interest on 
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But 
see Reporting options for cash method taxpay­
ers, later.
Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issued 
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by di-
rect deposit to your bank account. If you are a 
cash method taxpayer, you must report interest 
on these bonds as income in the year you re-
ceive it.
Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980 
and last offered in August 2004. Before 1980, 
series H bonds were issued. Series H bonds 
are treated the same as series HH bonds. If you 
are a cash method taxpayer, you must report 
the interest when you receive it.
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30 
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. 
The last series H bonds matured in 2009. The 
last series HH bonds will mature in 2024.
Series EE and series I bonds.  Interest on 
these bonds is payable when you redeem the 
bonds. The difference between the purchase 
price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
est.
Series EE bonds.  Series EE bonds were 
first offered in January 1980 and have a matur-
ity period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series 
E bonds were issued. The original 10-year ma-
turity period of series E bonds has been exten-
ded to 40 years for bonds issued before De-
cember 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued 
after November 1965. Paper series EE bonds 
are issued at a discount. The face value is pay-
able to you at maturity. Electronic series EE 
bonds are issued at their face value. The face 
value plus accrued interest is payable to you at 
Page 7 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 7

maturity. As of January 1, 2012, paper savings 
bonds are no longer sold at financial institu-
tions.
Owners of paper series EE bonds can con-
vert them to electronic bonds. These converted 
bonds do not retain the denomination listed on 
the paper certificate but are posted at their pur-
chase price (with accrued interest).
Series I bonds.  Series I bonds were first 
offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed 
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all 
accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.
Reporting options for cash method tax-
payers. If you use the cash method of report-
ing income, you can report the interest on ser-
ies EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of 
the following ways.
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest 
until the earlier of the year you cash or dis-
pose of the bonds or the year in which 
they mature. (However, see Savings 
bonds traded, later.)
Note. Series EE bonds issued in 1986 
matured in 2016. If you have used method 
1, you generally must report the interest 
on these bonds on your 2016 return. The 
last series E bonds were issued in 1980 
and matured in 2010. If you used method 
1, you generally should have reported the 
interest on these bonds on your 2010 re-
turn.
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase 
in redemption value as interest each year.
You must use the same method for all series 
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own. If you 
do not choose method 2 by reporting the in-
crease in redemption value as interest each 
year, you must use method 1.
If you plan to cash your bonds in the 
same year you will pay for higher edu­
cational expenses, you may want to 
use method 1 because you may be able to ex­
clude the interest from your income. To learn 
how, see Education Savings Bond Program , 
later.
Change from method 1.  If you want to 
change your method of reporting the interest 
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so with-
out permission from the IRS. In the year of 
change, you must report all interest accrued to 
date and not previously reported for all your 
bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest each 
year, you must continue to do so for all series 
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and 
TIP
for any you get later, unless you request per-
mission to change, as explained next.
Change from method 2.  To change from 
method 2 to method 1, you must request per-
mission from the IRS. Permission for the 
change is automatically granted if you send the 
IRS a statement that meets all the following re-
quirements.
1. You have typed or printed the following 
number at the top: “131.”
2. It includes your name and social security 
number under “131.”
3. It includes the year of change (both the 
beginning and ending dates).
4. It identifies the savings bonds for which 
you are requesting this change.
5. It includes your agreement to:
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-
quired during or after the year of 
change when the interest is realized 
upon disposition, redemption, or final 
maturity, whichever is earliest; and
b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
quired before the year of change 
when the interest is realized upon dis-
position, redemption, or final maturity, 
whichever is earliest, with the excep-
tion of the interest reported in prior tax 
years.
You must attach this statement to your tax 
return for the year of change, which you must 
file by the due date (including extensions).
You can have an automatic extension of 6 
months from the due date of your return for the 
year of change (excluding extensions) to file the 
statement with an amended return. On the 
statement, type or print “Filed pursuant to sec-
tion 301.9100–2.” To get this extension, you 
must have filed your original return for the year 
of the change by the due date (including exten-
sions). See also Revenue Procedure 2015-13, 
Section 6.03(4).
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-
quest permission to change from method 2 to 
method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, fol-
low the form instructions for an automatic 
change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in 
the names of co-owners, such as you and your 
child or you and your spouse, interest on the 
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who 
bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used.  If you used 
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the 
tax on the interest. This is true even if you let 
the other co-owner redeem the bond and keep 
all the proceeds. Under these circumstances, 
the co-owner who redeemed the bond will re-
ceive a Form 1099-INT at the time of redemp-
tion and must provide you with another Form 
1099-INT showing the amount of interest from 
the bond taxable to you. The co-owner who re-
deemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee 
distributions, later, for more information about 
how a person who is a nominee reports interest 
income belonging to another person.
Both co-owners' funds used.  If you and 
the other co-owner each contribute part of the 
bond's purchase price, the interest is generally 
taxable to each of you, in proportion to the 
amount each of you paid.
Community property.  If you and your 
spouse live in a community property state and 
hold bonds as community property, one-half of 
the interest is considered received by each of 
you. If you file separate returns, each of you 
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-
est. For more information about community 
property, see Pub. 555.
Table 1-2.  These rules are also shown in 
Table 1-2.
Child as only owner.  Interest on U.S. savings 
bonds bought for and registered only in the 
name of your child is income to your child, even 
if you paid for the bonds and are named as ben-
eficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E, or 
series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is in-
come to your child in the earlier of the year the 
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the 
bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-
port the interest income each year.
Choice to report interest each year.  The 
choice to report the accrued interest each year 
can be made either by your child or by you for 
your child. This choice is made by filing an in-
come tax return that shows all the interest 
earned to date, and by stating on the return that 
your child chooses to report the interest each 
year. Either you or your child should keep a 
copy of this return.
Unless your child is otherwise required to 
file a tax return for any year after making this 
choice, your child does not have to file a return 
only to report the annual accrual of U.S. savings 
bond interest under this choice. However, see 
Tax on unearned income of certain children , 
earlier, under General Information . Neither you 
nor your child can change the way you report 
the interest unless you request permission from 
the IRS, as discussed earlier under Change 
from method 2.
Ownership transferred.  If you bought series 
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your 
own funds and had them reissued in your 
co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, 
you must include in your gross income for the 
year of reissue all interest that you earned on 
these bonds and have not previously reported. 
But, if the bonds were reissued in your name 
alone, you do not have to report the interest ac-
crued at that time.
This same rule applies when bonds (other 
than bonds held as community property) are 
Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
you buy a bond in your name and the name of another 
person as co-owners, using only your own funds
you.
you buy a bond in the name of another person, who is the 
sole owner of the bond
the person for whom you bought the bond.
you and another person buy a bond as co-owners, each 
contributing part of the purchase price
both you and the other co-owner, in proportion to the 
amount each paid for the bond.
you and your spouse, who live in a community property 
state, buy a bond that is community property
you and your spouse. If you file separate returns, both you 
and your spouse generally report one-half of the interest.
Table 1-2.
Page 8 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 1 Investment Income

transferred between spouses or incident to di-
vorce.
Example. You bought series EE bonds en-
tirely with your own funds. You did not choose 
to report the accrued interest each year. Later, 
you transfer the bonds to your former spouse 
under a divorce agreement. You must include 
the deferred accrued interest, from the date of 
the original issue of the bonds to the date of 
transfer, in your income in the year of transfer. 
Your former spouse includes in income the in-
terest on the bonds from the date of transfer to 
the date of redemption.
Purchased jointly.  If you and a co-owner 
each contributed funds to buy series E, series 
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the 
bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, 
you must include in your gross income for the 
year of reissue your share of all the interest 
earned on the bonds that you have not previ-
ously reported. The former co-owner does not 
have to include in gross income at the time of 
reissue his or her share of the interest earned 
that was not reported before the transfer. This 
interest, however, as well as all interest earned 
after the reissue, is income to the former 
co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies 
when the bonds are reissued in the name of 
your former co-owner and a new co-owner. But 
the new co-owner will report only his or her 
share of the interest earned after the transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought 
jointly are reissued to each of you separately in 
the same proportion as your contribution to the 
purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner 
has to report at that time the interest earned be-
fore the bonds were reissued.
Example 1.  You and your spouse each 
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series 
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you 
and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. You later 
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, 
one in your name and one in your spouse's 
name. At that time neither you nor your spouse 
has to report the interest earned to the date of 
reissue.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE 
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The 
bond was issued to you and your spouse as 
co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter-
est on the bond. You later have the bond reis-
sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and 
one in your spouse's name. You must report 
half the interest earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series 
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a 
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must 
include in your income for that year the interest 
earned to the date of transfer if you have not al-
ready reported it. However, if you are consid-
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in 
value both before and after the transfer contin-
ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to 
defer reporting the interest earned each year. 
You must include the total interest in your in-
come in the year you cash or dispose of the 
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, 
whichever is earlier.
The same rules apply to previously unrepor-
ted interest on series EE or series E bonds if the 
transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or ser-
ies H bonds you acquired in a trade for the ser-
ies EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds 
traded, later.
Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 
income on series E, series EE, or series I 
bonds, after the death of the owner (decedent), 
depends on the accounting and income-report-
ing methods previously used by the decedent.
Decedent who reported interest each 
year. If the bonds transferred because of death 
were owned by a person who used an accrual 
method, or who used the cash method and had 
chosen to report the interest each year, the in-
terest earned in the year of death up to the date 
of death must be reported on that person's final 
return. The person who acquires the bonds in-
cludes in income only interest earned after the 
date of death.
Decedent who postponed reporting in-
terest. If the transferred bonds were owned by 
a decedent who had used the cash method and 
had not chosen to report the interest each year, 
and who had bought the bonds entirely with his 
or her own funds, all interest earned before 
death must be reported in one of the following 
ways.
1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-
sentative (executor, administrator, etc.) 
who files the final income tax return of the 
decedent can choose to include on that 
return all interest earned on the bonds be-
fore the decedent's death. The person 
who acquires the bonds then includes in 
income only interest earned after the date 
of death.
2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest 
earned up to the date of death is income in 
respect of the decedent and should not be 
included in the decedent's final return. All 
interest earned both before and after the 
decedent's death (except any part repor-
ted by the estate on its income tax return) 
is income to the person who acquires the 
bonds. If that person uses the cash 
method and does not choose to report the 
interest each year, he or she can postpone 
reporting it until the year the bonds are 
cashed or disposed of or the year they 
mature, whichever is earlier. In the year 
that person reports the interest, he or she 
can claim a deduction for any federal es-
tate tax paid on the part of the interest in-
cluded in the decedent's estate.
For more information on income in respect of a 
decedent, see Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, 
and Administrators.
Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-
payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE 
bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and 
had not chosen to report the interest each year. 
At the date of death, interest of $200 had ac-
crued on the bond, and its value of $700 was in-
cluded in your uncle's estate. Your uncle's ex-
ecutor chose not to include the $200 accrued 
interest in your uncle's final income tax return. 
The $200 is income in respect of the decedent.
You are a cash method taxpayer and do not 
choose to report the interest each year as it is 
earned. If you cash the bond when it reaches 
maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-
est income—the difference between maturity 
value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500. 
For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-
ous itemized deduction not subject to the 
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federal 
estate tax paid because the $200 interest was 
included in your uncle's estate.
Example 2.  If, in Example 1 , the executor 
had chosen to include the $200 accrued inter-
est in your uncle's final return, you would report 
only $300 as interest when you cashed the 
bond at maturity. $300 is the interest earned af-
ter your uncle's death.
Example 3.  If, in Example 1 , you make or 
have made the choice to report the increase in 
redemption value as interest each year, you in-
clude in gross income for the year you acquire 
the bond all of the unreported increase in value 
of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds 
you hold, including the $200 on the bond you in-
herited from your uncle.
Example 4.  When your aunt died, she 
owned series HH bonds that she had acquired 
in a trade for series EE bonds. You were the 
beneficiary of these bonds. Your aunt used the 
cash method and did not choose to report the 
interest on the series EE bonds each year as it 
accrued. Your aunt's executor chose not to in-
clude any interest earned before your aunt's 
death on her final return.
The income in respect of the decedent is the 
sum of the unreported interest on the series EE 
bonds and the interest, if any, payable on the 
series HH bonds but not received as of the date 
of your aunt's death. You must report any inter-
est received during the year as income on your 
return. The part of the interest payable but not 
received before your aunt's death is income in 
respect of the decedent and may qualify for the 
estate tax deduction. For information on when 
to report the interest on the series EE bonds tra-
ded, see Savings bonds traded, later.
Savings bonds distributed from a retire-
ment or profit-sharing plan.  If you acquire a 
U.S. savings bond in a taxable distribution from 
a retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income 
for the year of distribution includes the bond's 
redemption value (its cost plus the interest ac-
crued before the distribution). When you re-
deem the bond (whether in the year of distribu-
tion or later), your interest income includes only 
the interest accrued after the bond was distrib-
uted. To figure the interest reported as a taxa-
ble distribution and your interest income when 
you redeem the bond, see Worksheet for sav­
ings bonds distributed from a retirement or 
profit­sharing plan, later.
Savings bonds traded.  If you postponed re-
porting the interest on your series EE or series 
E bonds, you did not recognize taxable income 
when you traded the bonds for series HH or 
series H bonds, unless you received cash in the 
trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for 
Page 9 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 9

series HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you 
cannot trade any other series of bonds for ser-
ies HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in-
come up to the amount of the interest earned on 
the bonds traded. When your series HH or ser-
ies H bonds mature, or if you dispose of them 
before maturity, you report as interest the differ-
ence between their redemption value and your 
cost. Your cost is the sum of the amount you 
paid for the traded series EE or series E bonds 
plus any amount you had to pay at the time of 
the trade.
Example. You traded series EE bonds (on 
which you postponed reporting the interest) for 
$2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 in cash. 
You reported the $223 as taxable income on 
your tax return. At the time of the trade, the ser-
ies EE bonds had accrued interest of $523 and 
a redemption value of $2,723. You hold the ser-
ies HH bonds until maturity, when you receive 
$2,500. You must report $300 as interest in-
come in the year of maturity. This is the differ-
ence between their redemption value, $2,500, 
and your cost, $2,200 (the amount you paid for 
the series EE bonds). (It is also the difference 
between the accrued interest of $523 on the 
series EE bonds and the $223 cash received on 
the trade.)
Choice to report interest in year of trade. 
You could have chosen to treat all of the previ-
ously unreported accrued interest on series EE 
or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds 
as income in the year of the trade. If you made 
this choice, it is treated as a change from 
method 1. See Change from method 1, earlier.
Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter-
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other 
payer that redeems it must give you a Form 
1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you 
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form 
1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-
ence between the amount you received and the 
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form 
1099-INT may show more interest than you 
have to include on your income tax return. For 
example, this may happen if any of the following 
are true.
You chose to report the increase in the re-
demption value of the bond each year. The 
interest shown on your Form 1099-INT will 
not be reduced by amounts previously in-
cluded in income.
You received the bond from a decedent. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
will not be reduced by any interest repor-
ted by the decedent before death, or on 
the decedent's final return, or by the estate 
on the estate's income tax return.
Ownership of the bond was transferred. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
will not be reduced by interest that accrued 
before the transfer.
You were named as a co-owner, and the 
other co-owner contributed funds to buy 
the bond. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT will not be reduced by the 
amount you received as nominee for the 
other co-owner. (See Co­owners, earlier, 
for more information about the reporting re-
quirements.)
You received the bond in a taxable distri-
bution from a retirement or profit-sharing 
plan. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter-
est portion of the amount taxable as a dis-
tribution from the plan and not taxable as 
interest. (This amount is generally shown 
on Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc., 
for the year of distribution.)
For more information on including the cor-
rect amount of interest on your return, see U.S. 
savings bond interest previously reported  or 
Nominee distributions, later.
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex­
empt from state and local taxes. The 
Form 1099­INT you receive will indi­
cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds 
interest in box 3. Do not include this income on 
your state or local income tax return.
Education Savings Bond Program
You may be able to exclude from income all or 
part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the 
year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-
penses during the same year. This exclusion is 
known as the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram.
You do not qualify for this exclusion if your 
filing status is married filing separately.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your ex-
clusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.  A qualified 
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued 
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be 
issued either in your name (sole owner) or in 
your and your spouse's names (co-owners). 
You must be at least 24 years old before the 
bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought 
by a parent and issued in the name of his or her 
child under age 24 does not qualify for the ex-
clusion by the parent or child.
The issue date of a bond may be ear­
lier than the date the bond is pur­
chased because the issue date as­
signed to a bond is the first day of the month in 
which it is purchased.
Beneficiary. You can designate any indi-
vidual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the 
bond.
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond re-
demption information from the Department of 
Treasury.
Qualified expenses.  Qualified higher educa-
tional expenses are tuition and fees required for 
you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whom 
you claim an exemption) to attend an eligible 
educational institution.
Qualified expenses include any contribution 
you make to a qualified tuition program or to a 
Coverdell education savings account. For 
TIP
CAUTION
!
information about these programs, see Pub. 
970, Tax Benefits for Education.
Qualified expenses do not include expenses 
for room and board or for courses involving 
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a 
degree or certificate granting program.
Eligible educational institutions.  These 
institutions include most public, private, and 
nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational 
schools that are accredited and eligible to par-
ticipate in student aid programs run by the De-
partment of Education.
Reduction for certain benefits.  You must 
reduce your qualified higher educational expen-
ses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships.
2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a qualified tuition 
program.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or 
inheritances) received as educational as-
sistance, such as:
a. Veterans' educational assistance ben-
efits,
b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
c. Employer-provided educational assis-
tance.
5. Any expense used in figuring the Ameri-
can Opportunity and lifetime learning cred-
its.
For information about these benefits, see Pub. 
970.
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-
terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-
ings bonds you redeem during the year are not 
more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-
tional expenses for the year, you may be able to 
exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds are 
more than the expenses, you may be able to 
exclude only part of the interest.
To determine the excludable amount, multi-
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a frac-
tion. The numerator (top part) of the fraction is 
the qualified higher educational expenses you 
paid during the year. The denominator (bottom 
part) of the fraction is the total proceeds you re-
ceived during the year.
Example. In February 2016, Mark and 
Joan, a married couple, cashed qualified series 
EE U.S. savings bonds with a total denomina-
tion of $10,000 that they bought in April 2000 
for $5,000. They received proceeds of $7,828, 
representing principal of $5,000 and interest of 
$2,828. In 2016, they paid $4,000 of their 
daughter's college tuition. They are not claiming 
an education credit for that amount, and their 
daughter does not have any tax-free educa-
tional assistance. They can exclude $1,445 
($2,828 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,828)) of interest in 
2016. They must pay tax on the remaining 
$1,383 ($2,828 − $1,445) interest.
Page 10 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 1 Investment Income

Figuring the interest part of the pro-
ceeds (Form 8815, line 6). To figure the inter-
est to report on Form 8815, line 6, use the 
Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.
If you previously reported any interest 
from savings bonds cashed during 
2016, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-
sheet below instead.
Alternate Line 6 Worksheet
1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, 
line 5 .........................  
2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 paper 
series EE bonds cashed in 2016 .......  
3. Multiply line 2 by 50% (0.50) .........  
4. Enter the face value of all electronic series 
EE bonds (including post-1989 series EE 
bonds converted from paper to electronic 
format) and all series I bonds cashed in 
2016 ..........................  
5. Add lines 3 and 4 .................  
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...........  
7. Enter the amount of interest reported as 
income in previous years ............  
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the result 
here and on Form 8815, line 6 ........  
Modified adjusted gross income limit. 
The interest exclusion is limited if your modified 
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
$116,300 to $146,300 for married taxpay-
ers filing jointly, and
$77,550 to $92,550 for all other taxpayers.
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if 
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the 
upper limit for your filing status.
Modified AGI.  Modified AGI, for purposes 
of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income 
(Form 1040, line 37, or Form 1040A, line 21) 
figured before the interest exclusion, and modi-
fied by adding back any:
1. Foreign earned income exclusion,
2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,
3. Exclusion of income for bona fide resi-
dents of American Samoa,
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received 
under an employer's adoption assistance 
program,
6. Deduction for tuition and fees,
7. Deduction for student loan interest, and
8. Deduction for domestic production activi-
ties.
Use the Line 9 Worksheet in the Form 8815 
instructions to figure your modified AGI. If you 
claim any of the exclusion or deduction items 
listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the 
amount of the exclusion or deduction (except 
items 6, 7, and 8) to the amount on line 5 of the 
worksheet, and enter the total on Form 8815, 
line 9, as your modified AGI.
Royalties included in modified AGI.  Be-
cause the deduction for interest expenses due 
to royalties and other investments is limited to 
your net investment income (see Investment In­
terest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the de-
duction for interest expenses until you have 
figured this exclusion of savings bond interest. 
Therefore, if you had interest expenses due to 
royalties deductible on Schedule E (Form 
1040), Supplemental Income and Loss, you 
must make a special computation of your de-
ductible interest to figure the net royalty income 
included in your modified AGI. You must figure 
deductible interest without regard to this exclu-
sion of bond interest.
You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-
ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the 
special computation. On this form, include in 
your net investment income your total interest 
income for the year from series EE and I U.S. 
savings bonds. Use the deductible interest 
amount from this form only to figure the net roy-
alty income included in your modified AGI. Do 
not attach this form to your tax return.
After you figure this interest exclusion, use a 
separate Form 4952 to figure your actual de-
duction for investment interest expenses and 
attach that form to your return.
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
est exclusion, you must keep a written 
record of the qualified U.S. savings 
bonds you redeem. Your record must include 
the serial number, issue date, face value, and 
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818 to 
record this information. You should also keep 
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher 
educational expenses during the year.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Notes, and Bonds
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct 
debts (obligations) of the U.S. Government.
Taxation of interest.  Interest income from 
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to 
federal income tax but is exempt from all state 
and local income taxes. You should receive 
Form 1099-INT showing the interest (in box 3) 
paid to you for the year.
Payments of principal and interest generally 
will be credited to your designated checking or 
savings account by direct deposit through the 
TreasuryDirect® system.
Treasury bills.  These bills generally have a 
4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week matur-
ity period. They are generally issued at a dis-
count in the amount of $100 and multiples of 
$100. The difference between the discounted 
price you pay for the bills and the face value 
you receive at maturity is interest income. Gen-
erally, you report this interest income when the 
bill is paid at maturity. If you paid a premium for 
a bill (more than face value), you generally re-
port the premium as a section 171 deduction 
when the bill is paid at maturity. See Discount 
on Short­Term Obligations, later.
If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-
ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will 
receive payment for the difference between the 
proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less 
any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the 
new Treasury security. However, you must re-
port the full amount of the interest income on 
RECORDS
each of your Treasury bills at the time it reaches 
maturity.
Treasury notes and bonds.  Treasury notes 
have maturity periods of more than 1 year, 
ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods for 
Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Both 
generally are issued in denominations of $100 
to $1 million and both generally pay interest ev-
ery 6 months. Generally, you report this interest 
for the year paid. When the notes or bonds ma-
ture, you can redeem these securities for face 
value or use the proceeds from the maturing 
note or bond to reinvest in another note or bond 
of the same type and term. If you do nothing, 
the proceeds from the maturing note or bond 
will be deposited in your bank account.
Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-
tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-
tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make 
a competitive bid and a determination is made 
that the purchase price is less than the face 
value, you will receive a refund for the differ-
ence between the purchase price and the face 
value. This amount is considered original issue 
discount. However, the original issue discount 
rules (discussed later) do not apply if the dis-
count is less than one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of 
the face amount, multiplied by the number of full 
years from the date of original issue to maturity. 
See De minimis OID, later. If the purchase price 
is determined to be more than the face amount, 
the difference is a premium. (See Bond Pre­
mium Amortization in chapter 3.)
For other information on these notes or 
bonds, write to:
Treasury Retail Securities Site
P.O. Box 7015
Minneapolis, MN 55480-7015
Or, on the Internet, visit 
www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/
indiv.htm.
Treasury inflation-protected securities 
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a 
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal 
amount adjusted to take into account inflation 
and deflation. For the tax treatment of these se-
curities, see Inflation­Indexed Debt Instruments, 
later.
Retirement, sale, or redemption.  For infor-
mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of 
U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or­
dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non­
taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for information 
about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-
tain other designated issues.
Bonds Sold Between Interest 
Dates
If you sell a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the sales price represents interest 
accrued to the date of sale. You must report 
that part of the sales price as interest income for 
the year of sale.
Page 11 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 11

If you buy a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the purchase price represents in-
terest accrued before the date of purchase. 
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a re-
turn of your capital investment, rather than inter-
est income, by reducing your basis in the bond. 
See Accrued interest on bonds , later in this 
chapter, for information on reporting the pay-
ment.
Insurance
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-
ble. But if you receive the proceeds in install-
ments, you must usually report part of each 
installment payment as interest income.
For more information about insurance pro-
ceeds received in installments, see Pub. 525.
Interest option on insurance. If you leave life 
insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur-
ance company under an agreement to pay in-
terest only, the interest paid to you is taxable.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income 
from a nonqualified plan, not as interest in-
come. See Pub. 939, General Rule for Pen-
sions and Annuities, for information on taxation 
of pension and annuity income from nonquali-
fied plans.
State or Local
Government Obligations
Interest you receive on an obligation issued by 
a state or local government is generally not tax-
able. The issuer should be able to tell you 
whether the interest is taxable. The issuer 
should also give you a periodic (or year-end) 
statement showing the tax treatment of the obli-
gation. If you invested in the obligation through 
a trust, a fund, or other organization, that organ-
ization should give you this information.
Even if interest on the obligation is not 
subject to income tax, you may have to 
report a capital gain or loss when you 
sell it. Estate, gift, or generation­skipping tax 
may apply to other dispositions of the obliga­
tion.
Tax-Exempt Interest
Interest on a bond used to finance government 
operations generally is not taxable if the bond is 
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a 
U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi-
sions. Political subdivisions include:
Port authorities,
Toll road commissions,
Utility services authorities,
Community redevelopment agencies, and
Qualified volunteer fire departments (for 
certain obligations issued after 1980).
There are other requirements for tax-exempt 
bonds. Contact the issuing state or local gov-
ernment agency or see sections 103 and 141 
through 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and 
the related regulations.
CAUTION
!
Obligations that are not bonds. In­
terest on a state or local government 
obligation may be tax exempt even if 
the obligation is not a bond. For example, inter­
est on a debt evidenced only by an ordinary 
written agreement of purchase and sale may be 
tax exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on 
default by the state or political subdivision may 
be tax exempt.
Registration requirement. A bond issued af-
ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-
tered form for the interest to be tax exempt.
Indian tribal government. Bonds issued after 
1982 by an Indian tribal government (including 
tribal economic development bonds issued af-
ter February 17, 2009) are treated as issued by 
a state. Interest on these bonds is generally tax 
exempt if the bonds are part of an issue of 
which substantially all proceeds are to be used 
in the exercise of any essential government 
function. However, the essential government 
function requirement does not apply to tribal 
economic development bonds issued after Feb-
ruary 17, 2009, for tax-exempt treatment. Inter-
est on private activity bonds (other than certain 
bonds for tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxa-
ble.
Original issue discount.  Original issue dis-
count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local gov-
ernment bonds is treated as tax-exempt inter-
est.
For information on the treatment of OID 
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see 
Tax­exempt state and local government bonds , 
later.
Stripped bonds or coupons.  For special 
rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-
tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later.
Information reporting requirement.  If you 
must file a tax return, you are required to show 
any tax-exempt interest you received on your 
return. This is an information reporting require-
ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-
est to taxable interest. See Reporting tax­ex­
empt interest, later in this chapter.
Taxable Interest
Interest on some state or local obligations is 
taxable.
Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on fed-
erally guaranteed state or local obligations is-
sued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule 
does not apply to interest on obligations guar-
anteed by the following U.S. government agen-
cies.
Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-
tee was under the Northwest Power Act as 
in effect on July 18, 1984).
Department of Veterans Affairs.
Federal home loan banks. (The guarantee 
must be made after July 30, 2008, in con-
nection with the original bond issue during 
the period beginning on July 30, 2008, and 
ending on December 31, 2010 (or a re-
newal or extension of a guarantee so 
TIP
made) and the bank must meet safety and 
soundness requirements.)
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-
tion.
Federal Housing Administration.
Federal National Mortgage Association.
Government National Mortgage Corpora-
tion.
Resolution Funding Corporation.
Student Loan Marketing Association.
Tax credit bonds.  Tax credit bonds generally 
do not pay interest. Instead, the bondholder is 
allowed an annual tax credit. The credit com-
pensates the holder for lending money to the is-
suer and functions as interest paid on the bond. 
Use Form 8912, Credit to Holders of Tax Credit 
Bonds, to claim the credit for the following tax 
credit bonds and to figure the amount of the 
credit to report as interest income.
Clean renewable energy bond (CREB).
New clean renewable energy bond 
(NCREB).
Qualified energy conservation bond 
(QECB).
Qualified zone academy bond (QZAB).
Qualified school construction bond 
(QSCB).
Build America bond (BAB).
Mortgage revenue bonds.  The proceeds of 
these bonds are used to finance mortgage 
loans for homebuyers. Generally, interest on 
state or local government home mortgage 
bonds issued after April 24, 1979, is taxable un-
less the bonds are qualified mortgage bonds or 
qualified veterans' mortgage bonds.
Arbitrage bonds.  Interest on arbitrage bonds 
issued by state or local governments after Octo-
ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a 
bond any portion of the proceeds of which is ex-
pected to be used to buy (or to replace funds 
used to buy) higher yielding investments. A 
bond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the is-
suer intentionally uses any part of the proceeds 
of the issue in this manner.
Private activity bonds.  Interest on a private 
activity bond that is not a qualified bond (de-
fined below) is taxable. Generally, a private ac-
tivity bond is part of a state or local government 
bond issue that meets both the following re-
quirements.
1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-
sue is to be used for a private business 
use.
2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-
cipal or interest is:
a. Secured by an interest in property to 
be used for a private business use (or 
payments for this property), or
b. Derived from payments for property 
(or borrowed money) used for a pri-
vate business use.
Also, a bond is generally considered a private 
activity bond if the proceeds to be used to make 
or finance loans to persons other than govern-
ment units is more than 5% of the proceeds or 
$5 million (whichever is less).
Page 12 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 1 Investment Income

Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ-
ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A 
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (in-
cluding an enterprise zone facility bond, a New 
York Liberty bond, a Midwestern disaster area 
bond, a Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, a 
Gulf Opportunity Zone bond treated as an ex-
empt-facility bond, or any recovery zone facility 
bond issued after February 17, 2009, and be-
fore January 1, 2011), qualified student loan 
bond, qualified small issue bond (including a 
tribal manufacturing facility bond), qualified re-
development bond, qualified mortgage bond 
(including a Gulf Opportunity Zone bond, a Mid-
western disaster area bond, or a Hurricane Ike 
disaster area bond treated as a qualified mort-
gage bond), qualified veterans' mortgage bond, 
or qualified 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for 
the benefit of certain tax-exempt organizations).
Interest you receive on these tax-exempt 
bonds, if issued after August 7, 1986, generally 
is a “tax preference item” and may be subject to 
the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 
and its instructions for more information.
The interest on the following bonds is not a 
tax preference item and is not subject to the al-
ternative minimum tax.
Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds.
New York Liberty bonds.
Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds.
Midwestern disaster area bonds.
Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds.
Exempt facility bonds issued after July 30, 
2008.
Qualified mortgage bonds issued after July 
30, 2008.
Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds issued 
after July 30, 2008.
Qualified bonds issued in 2009 or 2010. 
The interest on any qualified bond issued in 
2009 or 2010 is not a tax preference item and is 
not subject to the alternative minimum tax. For 
this purpose, a refunding bond (whether a cur-
rent or advanced refunding) is treated as issued 
on the date the refunded bond was issued (or 
on the date the original bond was issued in the 
case of a series of refundings). However, this 
rule does not apply to any refunding bond is-
sued to refund any qualified bond issued during 
2004 through 2008 or after 2010.
Qualified bonds issued after December 
31, 2010.  A portion of the interest on specified 
private activity bonds issued after December 
31, 2010, may be a tax preference item subject 
to the alternative minimum tax. The tax prefer-
ence status will apply to the portion of the inter-
est that remains after reducing it by deductions 
that would be allowed if the interest were taxa-
ble.
Enterprise zone facility bonds.  Interest 
on certain private activity bonds issued by a 
state or local government to finance a facility 
used in an empowerment zone or enterprise 
community is tax exempt.
New York Liberty bonds.  New York Lib-
erty bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 
2002, to finance the construction and rehabilita-
tion of real property in the designated “Liberty 
Zone” of New York City. Interest on these 
bonds issued before 2014 is tax exempt.
Market discount. Market discount on a tax-ex-
empt bond is not tax-exempt. If you bought the 
bond after April 30, 1993, you can choose to 
accrue the market discount over the period you 
own the bond and include it in your income cur-
rently as taxable interest. See Market Discount 
Bonds, later. If you do not make that choice, or 
if you bought the bond before May 1, 1993, any 
gain from market discount is taxable when you 
dispose of the bond.
For more information on the treatment of 
market discount when you dispose of a tax-ex-
empt bond, see Discounted Debt Instruments , 
later.
Discount on
Debt Instruments
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Market discount
 Market discount bond
 Original issue discount (OID)
 Premium
 
A debt instrument, such as a bond, note, de-
benture, or other evidence of indebtedness, 
that bears no interest or bears interest at a 
lower than current market rate will usually be is-
sued at less than its face amount. This discount 
is, in effect, additional interest income. The fol-
lowing are some types of discounted debt in-
struments.
U.S. Treasury bonds.
Corporate bonds.
Municipal bonds.
Certificates of deposit.
Notes between individuals.
Stripped bonds and coupons.
Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
The discount on these instruments (except mu-
nicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The 
discount on municipal bonds generally is not 
taxable (but see State or Local Government Ob­
ligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also RE­
MICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for infor-
mation about applying the rules discussed in 
this section to the regular interest holder of a 
real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-
nancial asset securitization investment trust, or 
other CDO.
Original Issue
Discount (OID)
OID is a form of interest. You generally include 
OID in your income as it accrues over the term 
of the debt instrument, whether or not you re-
ceive any payments from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when 
the instrument is issued for a price that is less 
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID 
is the difference between the stated redemption 
price at maturity and the issue price.
All debt instruments that pay no interest be-
fore maturity are presumed to be issued at a 
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 
of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally do not apply 
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 
See Discount on Short­Term Obligations, later.
For information about the sale of a debt in-
strument with OID, see Original issue discount 
(OID) on debt instruments, later.
De minimis OID. You can treat the discount as 
zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) 
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
plied by the number of full years from the date 
of original issue to maturity. This small discount 
is known as “de minimis” OID. In the case of a 
debt instrument providing for more than one 
stated principal payment (an installment obliga-
tion), the “de minimis” formula described above 
is modified. See Regulations section 
1.1273-1(d)(3).
Example 1.  You bought a 10-year bond 
with a stated redemption price at maturity of 
$1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20. 
One-fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption 
price) times 10 (the number of full years from 
the date of original issue to maturity) equals 
$25. Because the $20 discount is less than $25, 
the OID is treated as zero. (If you hold the bond 
at maturity, you will recognize $20 ($1,000 − 
$980) of capital gain.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at 
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 dis-
count is more than the $25 figured in Exam­
ple 1, you must include the OID in income as it 
accrues over the term of the bond.
Debt instrument bought after original is-
sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de mini-
mis OID at a premium, the discount is not in-
cludible in income. If you buy a debt instrument 
with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount 
is reported under the market discount rules. 
See Market Discount Bonds , later in this chap-
ter.
Exceptions to reporting OID as current in-
come. The OID rules discussed here do not 
apply to the following debt instruments.
1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see 
Stripped tax­exempt obligations, later.)
2. U.S. savings bonds.
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a 
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year 
from the date of issue).
4. Obligations issued by an individual before 
March 2, 1984.
5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-
ing are true.
a. The lender is not in the business of 
lending money.
b. The amount of the loan, plus the 
amount of any outstanding prior loans 
between the same individuals, is 
$10,000 or less.
Page 13 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 13

c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of 
the principal purposes of the loan.
Form 1099-OID
The issuer of the debt instrument (or your 
broker, if you held the instrument through a 
broker) should give you Form 1099-OID, or a 
similar statement, if the total OID for the calen-
dar year is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will 
show, in box 1, the amount of OID for the part of 
the year that you held the bond. It also will 
show, in box 2, the stated interest you must in-
clude in your income. Box 8 shows OID on a 
U.S. Treasury obligation for the part of the year 
you owned it and is not included in box 1. Box 
10 shows bond premium amortization. A copy 
of Form 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do 
not file your copy with your return. Keep it for 
your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire 
amount in boxes 1, 2, and 8 of Form 1099-OID 
as interest income. But see Refiguring OID 
shown on Form 1099­OID , later in this discus-
sion, and also Original issue discount (OID) ad­
justment, later in this chapter, for more informa-
tion.
Form 1099-OID not received.  If you had OID 
for the year but did not receive a Form 
1099-OID, you may have to figure the correct 
amount of OID to report on your return. See 
Pub. 1212 for details on how to figure the cor-
rect OID.
Nominee. If someone else is the holder of re-
cord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
ment belonging to you and receives a Form 
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give 
you a Form 1099-OID.
If you receive a Form 1099-OID that in-
cludes amounts belonging to another person, 
see Nominee distributions, later.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. 
You may need to refigure the OID shown in 
box 1 or box 8 of Form 1099-OID if either of the 
following apply.
You bought the debt instrument after its 
original issue and paid a premium or an ac-
quisition premium.
The debt instrument is a stripped bond or a 
stripped coupon (including certain zero 
coupon instruments). See Figuring OID, 
later in this chapter.
See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment , 
later in this chapter, for information about re-
porting the correct amount of OID.
Premium. You bought a debt instrument at 
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately af-
ter purchase was greater than the total of all 
amounts payable on the instrument after the 
purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
est.
If you bought an OID debt instrument at a 
premium, you generally do not have to report 
any OID as ordinary income.
Qualified stated interest.  In general, this 
is stated interest unconditionally payable in 
cash or property (other than debt instruments of 
the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.
Acquisition premium.  You bought a debt 
instrument at an acquisition premium if both the 
following are true.
You did not pay a premium.
The instrument's adjusted basis immedi-
ately after purchase (including purchase at 
original issue) was greater than its adjus-
ted issue price. This is the issue price plus 
the OID previously accrued, minus any 
payment previously made on the instru-
ment other than qualified stated interest.
Acquisition premium reduces the amount of 
OID includible in your income. For information 
about figuring the correct amount of OID to in-
clude in your income, see Figuring OID on 
Long­Term Debt Instruments in Pub. 1212.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form 
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument 
or acquired it from another holder during the 
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , 
earlier, for information about the treatment of 
periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of 
Form 1099-OID for that instrument.
Applying the OID Rules
The rules for reporting OID depend on the date 
the long-term debt instrument was issued.
Debt instruments issued after 1954 and be-
fore May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a 
government instrument).  For these instru-
ments, you do not report the OID until the year 
you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If 
a gain results and the instrument is a capital as-
set, the amount of gain equal to the OID is ordi-
nary interest income. The rest is capital gain. If 
there is a loss on the sale of the instrument, the 
entire loss is a capital loss and no reporting of 
OID is required.
In general, the amount of gain that is ordi-
nary interest income equals the following 
amount:
Number of full months 
you held the instrument × OID
 Number of full months from date of
original issue to date of maturity
Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 
(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru-
ment), and before 1985.  If you hold these 
debt instruments as capital assets, you must in-
clude a part of the discount in your gross in-
come each year that you own the instruments.
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID you in-
clude in your gross income.
Debt instruments issued after 1984.  For 
these debt instruments, you report the total OID 
that applies each year regardless of whether 
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID you in-
clude in your gross income.
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)
If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 
year, you must include in income each year a 
part of the total interest due and report it in the 
same manner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
ments with banks, building and loan associa-
tions, etc., including:
Time deposits,
Bonus plans,
Savings certificates,
Deferred income certificates,
Bonus savings certificates, and
Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs.  CDs issued after 1982 generally 
must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are 
CDs not in registered form. They are not issued 
in the depositor's name and are transferable 
from one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the person 
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.
Time deposit open account arrangement. 
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity 
date in which you make deposits on a schedule 
arranged between you and your bank. But there 
is no actual or constructive receipt of interest 
until the fixed maturity date is reached. For in-
stance, you and your bank enter into an ar-
rangement under which you agree to deposit 
$100 each month for a period of 5 years. Inter-
est will be compounded twice a year at 7 12%, 
but payable only at the end of the 5-year period. 
You must include a part of the interest in your 
income as OID each year. Each year the bank 
must give you a Form 1099-OID to show you 
the amount you must include in your income for 
the year.
Redemption before maturity.  If, before the 
maturity date, you redeem a deferred interest 
account for less than its stated redemption price 
at maturity, you can deduct OID that you previ-
ously included in income but did not receive.
Renewable certificates. If you renew a CD at 
maturity, it is treated as a redemption and a pur-
chase of a new certificate. This is true regard-
less of the terms of renewal.
Face-Amount Certificates
These certificates are subject to the OID rules. 
They are a form of endowment contracts issued 
by insurance or investment companies for ei-
ther a lump-sum payment or periodic payments, 
with the face amount becoming payable on the 
maturity date of the certificate.
In general, the difference between the face 
amount and the amount you paid for the con-
tract is OID. You must include a part of the OID 
in your income over the term of the certificate.
The issuer must give you a statement on 
Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must 
include in your income each year.
Page 14 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 1 Investment Income

Inflation-Indexed
Debt Instruments
If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument 
(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you 
must report as OID any increase in the infla-
tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrument 
that occurs while you held the instrument during 
the year. In general, an inflation-indexed debt 
instrument is a debt instrument on which the 
payments are adjusted for inflation and defla-
tion (such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Se-
curities). You should receive Form 1099-OID 
from the payer showing the amount you must 
report as OID and any qualified stated interest 
paid to you during the year. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 1212.
Stripped Bonds and Coupons
If you strip one or more coupons from a bond 
and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and 
coupons are treated as separate debt instru-
ments issued with OID.
The holder of a stripped bond has the right 
to receive the principal (redemption price) pay-
ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the 
right to receive interest on the bond.
Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-
clude:
Zero coupon instruments available through 
the Department of the Treasury's Separate 
Trading of Registered Interest and Princi-
pal of Securities (STRIPS) program and 
government-sponsored enterprises such 
as the Resolution Funding Corporation and 
the Financing Corporation, and
Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-
curities that represent ownership interests 
in those securities, such as obligations 
backed by U.S. Treasury bonds offered 
primarily by brokerage firms.
Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond and 
sell the bond or coupons, include in income the 
interest that accrued while you held the bond 
before the date of sale, to the extent you did not 
previously include this interest in your income. 
For an obligation acquired after October 22, 
1986, you must also include the market dis-
count that accrued before the date of sale of the 
stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did 
not previously include this discount in your in-
come.
Add the interest and market discount that 
you include in income to the basis of the bond 
and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-
tween the items you keep and the items you 
sell, based on the fair market value of the items. 
The difference between the sale price of the 
bond (or coupon) and the allocated basis of the 
bond (or coupon) is your gain or loss from the 
sale.
Treat any item you keep as an OID bond 
originally issued and bought by you on the sale 
date of the other items. If you keep the bond, 
treat the amount of the redemption price of the 
bond that is more than the basis of the bond as 
OID. If you keep the coupons, treat the amount 
payable on the coupons that is more than the 
basis of the coupons as OID.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped 
coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued on 
the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond, 
treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-
tion price at maturity over your purchase price. 
If you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any 
excess of the amount payable on the due date 
of the coupon over your purchase price.
Figuring OID.  The rules for figuring OID on 
stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend 
on the date the debt instruments were pur-
chased, not the date issued.
You must refigure OID shown on the Form 
1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond or 
coupon. For information about figuring the cor-
rect amount of OID on these instruments to in-
clude in your income, see Figuring OID on Strip­
ped Bonds and Coupons  in Pub. 1212. Owners 
of stripped bonds and coupons should not rely 
on the OID shown in Section II of the OID tables 
(available by going to IRS.gov and searching for 
“OID Tables”) because the amounts listed in 
Section II for stripped bonds or coupons are fig-
ured without reference to the date or price at 
which you acquired them.
Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru-
ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt 
instruments is figured under the discount bond 
method. This method is described in Regula-
tions section 1.1275-7(e).
Stripped tax-exempt obligations. You do not 
have to pay tax on OID on any stripped tax-ex-
empt bond or coupon you bought before June 
11, 1987. However, if you acquired it after Octo-
ber 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on it to de-
termine its basis when you dispose of it. See 
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru­
ments, later.
You may have to pay tax on part of the OID 
on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that 
you bought after June 10, 1987. For information 
on figuring the taxable part, see Tax­Exempt 
Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on 
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Pub. 1212.
Market Discount Bonds
A market discount bond is any bond having 
market discount except:
Short-term obligations (those with fixed 
maturity dates of up to 1 year from the date 
of issue),
Tax-exempt obligations you bought before 
May 1, 1993,
U.S. savings bonds, and
Certain installment obligations.
Market discount arises when the value of a 
debt obligation decreases after its issue date. 
Generally, this is due to an increase in interest 
rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar-
ket, it may have market discount.
When you buy a market discount bond, you 
can choose to accrue the market discount over 
the period you own the bond and include it in 
your income currently as interest income. If you 
do not make this choice, the following rules 
generally apply.
You must treat any gain when you dispose 
of the bond as ordinary interest income, up 
to the amount of the accrued market dis-
count. See Discounted Debt Instruments, 
later.
You must treat any partial payment of prin-
cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-
come, up to the amount of the accrued 
market discount. See Partial principal pay­
ments, later in this discussion.
If you borrow money to buy or carry the 
bond, your deduction for interest paid on 
the debt is limited. See Limit on interest 
deduction for market discount bonds, later.
Market discount.  Market discount is the 
amount of the stated redemption price of a 
bond at maturity that is more than your basis in 
the bond immediately after you acquire it. You 
treat market discount as zero if it is less than 
one-fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the stated redemp-
tion price of the bond multiplied by the number 
of full years to maturity (after you acquire the 
bond).
If a market discount bond also has OID, the 
market discount is the sum of the bond's issue 
price and the total OID includible in the gross in-
come of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, the 
total OID that accrued) before you acquired the 
bond, reduced by your basis in the bond imme-
diately after you acquired it.
Bonds acquired at original issue.  Generally, 
a bond you acquired at original issue is not a 
market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in 
a bond is determined by reference to the adjus-
ted basis of another person who acquired the 
bond at original issue, you are also considered 
to have acquired it at original issue.
Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-
nal issue can be a market discount bond if ei-
ther of the following is true.
Your cost basis in the bond is less than the 
bond's issue price.
The bond is issued in exchange for a mar-
ket discount bond under a plan of reorgani-
zation. (This does not apply if the bond is 
issued in exchange for a market discount 
bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the 
terms and interest rates of both bonds are 
the same.)
Accrued market discount.  The accrued mar-
ket discount is figured in one of two ways.
Ratable accrual method. Treat the market 
discount as accruing in equal daily installments 
during the period you hold the bond. Figure the 
daily installments by dividing the market dis-
count by the number of days after the date you 
acquired the bond, up to and including its ma-
turity date. Multiply the daily installments by the 
number of days you held the bond to figure your 
accrued market discount.
Constant yield method.  Instead of using 
the ratable accrual method, you can choose to 
figure the accrued discount using a constant in-
terest rate (the constant yield method). Make 
this choice by attaching to your timely filed re-
turn a statement identifying the bond and stat-
ing that you are making a constant interest rate 
election. The choice takes effect on the date 
you acquired the bond. If you choose to use this 
method for any bond, you cannot change your 
choice for that bond.
Page 15 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 15

For information about using the constant 
yield method, see Constant yield method under 
Debt Instruments Issued After 1984  in Pub. 
1212. To use this method to figure market dis-
count (instead of OID), treat the bond as having 
been issued on the date you acquired it. Treat 
the amount of your basis (immediately after you 
acquired the bond) as the issue price and apply 
the formula shown in Pub. 1212.
Choosing to include market discount in in-
come currently.  You can make this choice if 
you have not revoked a prior choice to include 
market discount in income currently within the 
last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-
taching to your timely filed return a statement in 
which you:
State that you have included market dis-
count in your gross income for the year un-
der section 1278(b) of the Internal Reve-
nue Code, and
Describe the method you used to figure the 
accrued market discount for the year.
Once you make this choice, it will apply to all 
market discount bonds you acquire during the 
tax year and in later tax years. You cannot re-
voke your choice without the consent of the 
IRS. For information on how to revoke your 
choice, see section 30 of Revenue Procedure 
2016-29 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2016-21. 
You can find this revenue procedure at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2016­21_IRB/ar13.html.
Also see Election To Report All Interest as 
OID, later. If you make that election, you must 
use the constant yield method.
Effect on basis.  You increase the basis of 
your bonds by the amount of market discount 
you include in your income.
Partial principal payments.  If you receive a 
partial payment of principal on a market dis-
count bond you acquired after October 22, 
1986, and you did not choose to include the dis-
count in income currently, you must treat the 
payment as ordinary interest income up to the 
amount of the bond's accrued market discount. 
Reduce the amount of accrued market discount 
reportable as interest at disposition by that 
amount.
There are three methods you can use to fig-
ure accrued market discount for this purpose.
1. On the basis of the constant yield method, 
described earlier.
2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for any 
accrual period, if the debt instrument has 
OID.
3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-
est paid in the accrual period, if the debt 
instrument has no OID.
Under method (2) above, figure accrued 
market discount for a period by multiplying the 
total remaining market discount by a fraction. 
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the 
OID for the period, and the denominator (bot-
tom part) is the total remaining OID at the be-
ginning of the period.
Under method (3) above, figure accrued 
market discount for a period by multiplying the 
total remaining market discount by a fraction. 
The numerator is the stated interest paid in the 
accrual period, and the denominator is the total 
stated interest remaining to be paid at the be-
ginning of the accrual period.
Discount on
Short-Term Obligations
When you buy a short-term obligation (one with 
a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from the 
date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-
tion, you can generally choose to include any 
discount and interest payable on the obligation 
in income currently. If you do not make this 
choice, the following rules generally apply.
You must treat any gain when you sell, ex-
change, or redeem the obligation as ordi-
nary income, up to the amount of the rata-
ble share of the discount. See Discounted 
Debt Instruments, later.
If you borrow money to buy or carry the ob-
ligation, your deduction for interest paid on 
the debt is limited. See Limit on interest 
deduction for short­term obligations, later.
Short-term obligations for which no choice 
is available. You must include any discount or 
interest in current income as it accrues for any 
short-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt 
obligation) that is:
Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer;
Held primarily for sale to customers in the 
ordinary course of your trade or business;
Held by a bank, regulated investment com-
pany, or common trust fund;
Held by certain pass-through entities;
Identified as part of a hedging transaction; 
or
A stripped bond or stripped coupon held 
by the person who stripped the bond or 
coupon (or by any other person whose ba-
sis in the obligation is determined by refer-
ence to the basis in the hands of the per-
son who stripped the bond or coupon).
Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your ob-
ligation by the amount of discount you include in 
income currently.
Figuring the accrued discount.  Figure the 
accrued discount by using either the ratable ac-
crual method or the constant yield method dis-
cussed in Accrued market discount, earlier.
Government obligations.  For an obligation 
described above that is a short-term govern-
ment obligation, the amount you include in your 
income for the current year is the accrued ac-
quisition discount, if any, plus any other ac-
crued interest payable on the obligation. The 
acquisition discount is the stated redemption 
price at maturity minus your basis. 
If you choose to use the constant yield 
method to figure accrued acquisition discount, 
treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the 
issue price. If you choose to use this method, 
you cannot change your choice.
Nongovernment obligations.  For an obliga-
tion listed above that is not a government obli-
gation, the amount you include in your income 
for the current year is the accrued OID, if any, 
plus any other accrued interest payable. If you 
choose the constant yield method to figure ac-
crued OID, apply it by using the obligation's is-
sue price.
Choosing to include accrued acquisition 
discount instead of OID.  You can choose to 
report accrued acquisition discount (defined 
earlier under Government obligations ) rather 
than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-
tions. Your choice will apply to the year for 
which it is made and to all later years and can-
not be changed without the consent of the IRS.
You must make your choice by the due date 
of your return, including extensions, for the first 
year for which you are making the choice. At-
tach a statement to your return or amended re-
turn indicating:
Your name, address, and social security 
number;
The choice you are making and that it is 
being made under section 1283(c)(2) of 
the Internal Revenue Code;
The period for which the choice is being 
made and the obligation to which it ap-
plies; and
Any other information necessary to show 
you are entitled to make this choice.
Choosing to include accrued discount and 
other interest in current income.  If you ac-
quire short-term discount obligations that are 
not subject to the rules for current inclusion in 
income of the accrued discount or other inter-
est, you can choose to have those rules apply. 
This choice applies to all short-term obligations 
you acquire during the year and in all later 
years. You cannot change this choice without 
the consent of the IRS.
The procedures to use in making this choice 
are the same as those described for choosing 
to include acquisition discount instead of OID 
on nongovernment obligations in current in-
come. However, you should indicate that you 
are making the choice under section 1282(b)(2) 
of the Internal Revenue Code.
Also see the following discussion. If you 
make the election to report all interest currently 
as OID, you must use the constant yield 
method.
Election To Report
All Interest as OID
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a 
debt instrument acquired during the tax year as 
OID and include it in income currently. For pur-
poses of this election, interest includes stated 
interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis 
OID, market discount, de minimis market dis-
count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any 
amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre-
mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3.
When To Report
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Accrual method
Page 16 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 1 Investment Income

 Cash method
 
When to report your interest income depends 
on whether you use the cash method or an ac-
crual method to report income.
Cash method.  Most individual taxpayers use 
the cash method. If you use this method, you 
generally report your interest income in the year 
in which you actually or constructively receive it. 
However, there are special rules for reporting 
the discount on certain debt instruments. See 
U.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In­
struments, earlier.
Example. On September 1, 2014, you 
loaned another individual $2,000 at 4% com-
pounded annually. You are not in the business 
of lending money. The note stated that principal 
and interest would be due on August 31, 2016. 
In 2016, you received $2,163.20 ($2,000 princi-
pal and $163.20 interest). If you use the cash 
method, you must include in income on your 
2016 return the $163.20 interest you received in 
that year.
Constructive receipt.  You constructively 
receive income when it is credited to your ac-
count or made available to you. You do not 
need to have physical possession of it. For ex-
ample, you are considered to receive interest, 
dividends, or other earnings on any deposit or 
account in a bank, savings and loan, or similar 
financial institution, or interest on life insurance 
policy dividends left to accumulate, when they 
are credited to your account and subject to your 
withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet 
entered in your passbook.
You constructively receive income on the 
deposit or account even if you must:
Make withdrawals in multiples of even 
amounts,
Give a notice to withdraw before making 
the withdrawal,
Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
draw the earnings, or
Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless 
the interest you are to receive on an early 
withdrawal or redemption is substantially 
less than the interest payable at maturity.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method, you report your interest income when 
you earn it, whether or not you have received it. 
Interest is earned over the term of the debt in-
strument.
Example. If, in the previous example, you 
use an accrual method, you must include the in-
terest in your income as you earn it. You would 
report the interest as follows: 2014, $26.67; 
2015, $81.06; and 2016, $55.47.
Coupon bonds. Generally, interest on coupon 
bonds is taxable in the year the coupon be-
comes due and payable. It does not matter 
when you mail the coupon for payment.
How To Report
Interest Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Nominee
 Original issue discount (OID)
 
Generally, you report all your taxable interest in-
come on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, 
line 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your taxa-
ble interest income is more than $1,500. In-
stead, you must use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if 
you must use Form 1040, as described later, or 
if any of the statements listed under Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040), later, are true.
Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Form 
1040A and any of the following are true.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than 
$1,500.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion un-
der the Education Savings Bond Program 
(discussed earlier).
3. You received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 
property as a home.
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 
savings bond interest that includes 
amounts you reported in a previous tax 
year.
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that 
actually belongs to someone else.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on frozen deposits.
7. You are reporting OID in an amount less 
than the amount shown on Form 
1099-OID.
8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates.
9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 
and choose to reduce interest income 
from the bonds by any amortizable bond 
premium (discussed in chapter 3 under 
Bond Premium Amortization).
List each payer's name and the amount of inter-
est income received from each payer on line 1. 
If you received a Form 1099-INT or Form 
1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-
age firm as the payer.
You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use 
Form 1040, as described next.
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead 
of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
1. You forfeited interest income because of 
the early withdrawal of a time deposit;
2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987, 
you choose to reduce interest income from 
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
mium, and you are deducting the excess 
of bond premium amortization for the ac-
crual period over the qualified stated inter-
est for the period (discussed in chapter 3 
under Bond Premium Amortization); or
3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, 
1986.
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040).  You 
must complete Schedule B (Form 1040A or 
1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 and any of 
the following apply.
1. Your taxable interest income is more than 
$1,500.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion un-
der the Education Savings Bond Program 
(discussed earlier).
3. You received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 
property as a home.
4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 
savings bond interest that includes 
amounts you reported in a previous tax 
year.
5. You received, as a nominee, interest that 
actually belongs to someone else.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on frozen deposits.
7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates.
8. You are reporting OID in an amount less 
than the amount shown on Form 
1099-OID.
9. Statement (2) in the preceding list is true.
In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the 
amount received from each. If you received a 
Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
Reporting tax-exempt interest.  Total your 
tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued 
OID on certain state and municipal bonds, in-
cluding zero coupon municipal bonds) reported 
on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and exempt-interest 
dividends from a mutual fund or other regulated 
investment company reported on Form 
1099-DIV, box 10. Add these amounts to any 
other tax-exempt interest you received. Report 
the total on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form 
1040.
If you file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and the 
amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do not 
add tax-exempt interest in the total on Form 
1040EZ, line 2.
Form 1099-INT, box 9, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 11, show the tax-exempt interest subject to 
the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251. 
These amounts are already included in the 
amounts on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and Form 
1099-DIV, box 10. Do not add the amounts in 
Form 1099-INT, box 9, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 11, to, or subtract them from, the amounts 
on Form 1099-INT, box 8, and Form 1099-DIV, 
box 10.
Page 17 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 17

Do not report interest from an individual 
retirement arrangement (IRA) as 
tax­exempt interest.
Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income, 
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and 
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form 
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable 
interest income you received. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 1099-INT if you have interest 
from a security acquired at a premium. You 
must report all your taxable interest income 
even if you do not receive a Form 1099-INT. 
Contact your financial institution if you do not 
receive a Form 1099-INT by February 15. Your 
identifying number may be truncated on any pa-
per Form 1099-INT you receive.
If you forfeited interest income because of 
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
ductible amount will be shown on Form 
1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with­
drawal of savings, later.
Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the interest 
income you received from U.S. savings bonds, 
Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and Treasury 
bonds. Generally, add the amount shown in 
box 3 to any other taxable interest income you 
received. If part of the amount shown in box 3 
was previously included in your interest income, 
see U.S. savings bond interest previously re­
ported, later. If you redeemed U.S. savings 
bonds you bought after 1989 and you paid 
qualified educational expenses, see Interest ex­
cluded under the Education Savings Bond Pro­
gram, later.
Box 4 of Form 1099-INT will contain an 
amount if you were subject to backup withhold-
ing. Include the amount from box 4 on Form 
1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 40; or on 
Form 1040, line 64.
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment 
expenses you may be able to deduct as an 
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses in-
vestment expenses.
If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form 
1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be 
able to take a credit for the amount shown in 
box 6 unless you deduct this amount on line 8 
of Schedule A (Form 1040). To take the credit, 
you may have to file Form 1116, Foreign Tax 
Credit. For more information, see Pub. 514, 
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals.
For a covered security, if you made an elec-
tion under section 1278(b) to include market 
discount in income as it accrues and you noti-
fied your payer of the election, box 10 shows 
the market discount that accrued on the debt in-
strument during the year while held by you. Re-
port this amount on your income tax return as 
directed in the instructions for Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A.
For a covered security, box 11 shows the 
amount of premium amortization for the year, 
unless you notified the payer in writing in ac-
cordance with Regulations section 1.6045-1(n)
(5) that you did not want to amortize bond pre-
mium under section 171. If an amount is repor-
ted in this box, see the instructions for Sched-
ule B (Form 1040). If an amount is not reported 
in this box for a covered security acquired at a 
premium, the payer has reported a net amount 
of interest in boxes 1, 3, 8, or 9, whichever is 
CAUTION
!
applicable. If the amount in this box is greater 
than the amount of interest paid on the covered 
security, see Regulations section 1.171-2(a)(4).
Form 1099-OID.  The taxable OID on a dis-
counted obligation for the part of the year you 
owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID. 
Include this amount in your total taxable interest 
income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form 
1099­OID, earlier. Your identifying number may 
be truncated on any paper Form 1099-OID you 
receive.
You must report all taxable OID even if you 
do not receive a Form 1099-OID.
Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable 
interest on the obligation other than OID. Add 
this amount to the OID shown in box 1 and in-
clude the result in your total taxable income.
If you forfeited interest or principal on the 
obligation because of an early withdrawal, the 
deductible amount will be shown in box 3. See 
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.
Box 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an 
amount if you were subject to backup withhold-
ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form 
1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 40; or on 
Form 1040, line 64.
Box 9 of Form 1099-OID shows investment 
expenses you may be able to deduct as an 
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses in-
vestment expenses.
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for 
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show 
interest you do not have to report. See Form 
1099­INT for U.S. savings bond interest, earlier.
On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part 
I, line 1, report all the interest shown on your 
Form 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal 
of all interest listed on line 1.
2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and 
enter amounts previously reported or inter-
est accrued before you received the bond.
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal 
and enter the result on line 2.
Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-
ings bonds for you when you were a child. The 
bonds were issued in your name, and the inter-
est on the bonds was reported each year as it 
accrued. See Choice to report interest each 
year, earlier.
In March 2016, you redeemed one of the 
bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond 
was originally issued in March 1997. When you 
redeemed the bond, you received $1,026.00 for 
it.
The Form 1099-INT you received shows in-
terest income of $526.00. However, since the 
interest on your savings bonds was reported 
yearly, you need only include the $6.40 interest 
that accrued from January 2016 to March 2016.
You received no other taxable interest for 
2016. You file Form 1040A.
On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part 
I, line 1, enter your interest income as shown on 
Form 1099-INT — $526.00. (If you had other 
taxable interest income, you would enter it next 
and then enter a subtotal, as described earlier, 
before going to the next step.) Several lines 
above line 2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest 
Previously Reported” and enter $519.60 
($526.00 − $6.40). Subtract $519.60 from 
$526.00 and enter $6.40 on line 2. Enter $6.40 
on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 4, 
and on Form 1040A, line 8a.
Example 2. Your uncle died and left you a 
$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bond 
when it reaches maturity.
Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500 
of the amount you receive upon redemption is 
interest income. Your uncle's executor included 
in your uncle's final return $200 of the interest 
that had accrued at the time of your uncle's 
death. You have to include only $300 in your in-
come.
The bank where you redeem the bond gives 
you a Form 1099-INT showing interest income 
of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT 
showing taxable interest income of $300 from 
your savings account.
You file Form 1040 and complete Sched-
ule B (Form 1040A or 1040). On line 1 of 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), you list the 
$500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your 
Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put 
a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter 
“U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Repor-
ted” and enter the $200 interest included in your 
uncle's final return. Subtract the $200 from the 
subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You then 
complete the rest of the form.
Worksheet for savings bonds distrib-
uted from a retirement or profit-sharing 
plan. If you cashed a savings bond acquired in 
a taxable distribution from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan (as discussed under U.S. 
Savings Bonds , earlier), your interest income 
does not include the interest accrued before the 
distribution and taxed as a distribution from the 
plan.
Use the worksheet below to figure the 
amount you subtract from the interest 
shown on Form 1099-INT.
A. Enter the amount of cash received upon 
redemption of the bond .............  
B. Enter the value of the bond at the time of 
distribution by the plan .............  
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the 
amount on line A. This is the amount of 
interest accrued on the bond since it was 
distributed by the plan .............  
D. Enter the amount of interest shown on 
your Form 1099-INT ...............  
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the 
amount on line D. This is the amount you 
include in “U.S. Savings Bond Interest 
Previously Reported” ..............
Your employer should tell you the value of 
each bond on the date it was distributed.
Example. You received a distribution of 
series EE U.S. savings bonds in December 
2013 from your company's profit-sharing plan.
In March 2016, you redeemed a $100 series 
EE bond that was part of the distribution you 
Page 18 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 1 Investment Income

received in 2013. You received $80.56 for the 
bond the company bought in May 1999. The 
value of the bond at the time of distribution in 
2013 was $78.12. (This is the amount you inclu-
ded on your 2013 return.) The bank gave you a 
Form 1099-INT that shows $30.56 interest (the 
total interest from the date the bond was pur-
chased to the date of redemption). Since a part 
of the interest was included in your income in 
2013, you need to include in your 2016 income 
only the interest that accrued after the bond 
was distributed to you.
On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), 
line 1, include all the interest shown on your 
Form 1099-INT as well as any other taxable in-
terest income you received. Several lines above 
line 2, put a subtotal of all interest listed on 
line 1. Below this subtotal enter “U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and enter 
the amount figured on the worksheet below.
A. Enter the amount of cash received upon 
redemption of the bond ........... $80.56
B. Enter the value of the bond at the time of 
distribution by the plan ............ $78.12
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the 
amount on line A. This is the amount of 
interest accrued on the bond since it 
was distributed by the plan ......... $2.44
D. Enter the amount of interest shown on 
your Form 1099-INT .............. $30.56
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the 
amount on line D. This is the amount you 
include in “U.S. Savings Bond Interest 
Previously Reported” ............. $28.12 
Subtract $28.12 from the subtotal and enter the 
result on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), 
line 2. You then complete the rest of the form.
Interest excluded under the Education Sav-
ings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure 
your interest exclusion when you redeem quali-
fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher ed-
ucational expenses during the same year.
For more information on the exclusion and 
qualified higher educational expenses, see the 
earlier discussion under Education Savings 
Bond Program.
You must show your total interest from quali-
fied savings bonds you cashed during 2016 on 
Form 8815, line 6, and on Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040). After completing Form 8815, 
enter the result from line 14 (Form 8815) on 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 3.
Interest on seller-financed mortgage.  If an 
individual buys his or her home from you in a 
sale that you finance, you must report the 
amount of interest received on Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Include on line 1 
the buyer's name, address, and SSN. If you do 
not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The 
buyer may have to pay a $50 penalty if he or 
she does not give you this information.
You must also give your name, address, and 
SSN (or employer identification number) to the 
buyer. If you do not, you may have to pay a $50 
penalty.
Frozen deposits.  Even if you receive a Form 
1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could 
not withdraw at the end of 2016, you must ex-
clude these amounts from your gross income. 
(See Interest income on frozen deposits , ear-
lier.) Do not include this income on line 8a of 
Form 1040A or 1040. On Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040), Part I, include the full amount 
of interest shown on your Form 1099-INT on 
line 1. Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal 
of all interest income. Below this subtotal, enter 
“Frozen Deposits” and show the amount of in-
terest that you are excluding. Subtract this 
amount from the subtotal and enter the result on 
line 2.
Accrued interest on bonds.  If you received a 
Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest 
paid on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates, include the full amount shown 
as interest on the Form 1099-INT on Sched-
ule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, 
below a subtotal of all interest income listed, en-
ter “Accrued Interest” and the amount of ac-
crued interest you paid to the seller. That 
amount is taxable to the seller, not you. Sub-
tract that amount from the interest income sub-
total. Enter the result on line 2 and also on 
line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040.
For more information, see Bonds Sold Be­
tween Interest Dates, earlier.
Nominee distributions.  If you received a 
Form 1099-INT that includes an amount you re-
ceived as a nominee for the real owner, report 
the full amount shown as interest on the Form 
1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040). Then, below a subtotal of all in-
terest income listed, enter “Nominee Distribu-
tion” and the amount that actually belongs to 
someone else. Subtract that amount from the 
interest income subtotal. Enter the result on 
line 2 and also on line 8a of Form 1040A or 
1040.
File Form 1099-INT with the IRS.  If you 
received interest as a nominee in 2016, you 
must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest with 
the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with a 
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal 
of U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal 
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2017 
(March 31, 2017, if you file Form 1099-INT elec-
tronically). Give the actual owner of the interest 
Copy B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31, 
2017. On Form 1099-INT, you should be listed 
as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099-INT for 
each other owner and show that person as the 
“Recipient.” However, you do not have to file 
Form 1099-INT to show payments for your 
spouse. For more information about the report-
ing requirements and the penalties for failure to 
file (or furnish) certain information returns, see 
the General Instructions for Certain Information 
Returns.
Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as 
a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a 
Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show the 
proper distributions of the OID.
Example. You and your sister have a joint 
savings account that paid $1,500 interest for 
2016. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in 
this account, and you and she have agreed to 
share the yearly interest income in proportion to 
the amount each of you has invested. Because 
your SSN was given to the bank, you received a 
Form 1099-INT for 2016 that includes the inter-
est income earned belonging to your sister. 
This amount is $450, or 30% of the total interest 
of $1,500.
You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT 
by January 31, 2017, showing $450 of interest 
income she earned for 2016. You must also 
send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT, 
along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue 
Service Center by February 28, 2017 (March 
31, 2017, if you file Form 1099-INT electroni-
cally). Show your own name, address, and SSN 
as that of the “Payer” on the Form 1099-INT. 
Show your sister's name, address, and SSN in 
the blocks provided for identification of the “Re-
cipient.”
When you prepare your own federal income 
tax return, report the total amount of interest in-
come, $1,500, on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 
1040), Part I, line 1, and identify the name of the 
bank that paid this interest. Show the amount 
belonging to your sister, $450, as a subtraction 
from a subtotal of all interest on Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040) and identify this subtrac-
tion as a “Nominee Distribution.” (Your sister 
will report the $450 of interest income on her 
own tax return, if she has to file a return, and 
identify you as the payer of that amount.)
Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. If 
you are reporting OID in an amount less than 
the amount shown on Form 1099-OID or other 
written statement (such as for a REMIC regular 
interest), include the full amount of OID shown 
on your Form 1099-OID or other statement on 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, 
line 1. Show OID you do not have to report be-
low a subtotal of the interest and OID listed. 
Identify the amount as “OID Adjustment” and 
subtract it from the subtotal.
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings.  If 
you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit 
or other deferred interest account before matur-
ity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form 
1099-INT or similar statement given to you by 
the financial institution will show the total 
amount of interest in box 1 and will show the 
penalty separately in box 2. You must include in 
income all interest shown in box 1. You can de-
duct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. Deduct 
the entire penalty even if it is more than your in-
terest income.
Dividends and
Other Distributions
Dividends are distributions of money, stock, or 
other property paid to you by a corporation or 
by a mutual fund. You also may receive divi-
dends through a partnership, an estate, a trust, 
or an association that is taxed as a corporation. 
However, some amounts you receive called 
dividends are actually interest income. See Div­
idends that are actually interest, earlier.
The most common kinds of distributions are:
Ordinary dividends,
Capital gain distributions, and
Nondividend distributions.
Most distributions are paid in cash (check). 
However, distributions can consist of more 
stock, stock rights, other property, or services.
Page 19 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 19

Form 1099-DIV.  Most corporations use Form 
1099-DIV to show you the distributions you re-
ceived from them during the year. Keep this 
form with your records. You do not have to at-
tach it to your tax return. Your identifying num-
ber may be truncated on any paper Form 
1099-DIV you receive.
Dividends not reported on Form 
1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Form 
1099-DIV, you must still report all your taxable 
dividend income. For example, you may receive 
distributive shares of dividends from partner-
ships or S corporations. These dividends are 
reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) 
and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-
tions as a nominee for you, that person will give 
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-
tions received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includes 
amounts belonging to another person, see 
Nominees under How To Report Dividend In­
come, later, for more information.
Form 1099-MISC.  Certain substitute pay-
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest 
received by a broker on your behalf must be re-
ported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellane-
ous Income, or a similar statement. See also 
Reporting Substitute Payments, later.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.  If 
you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incor-
rect amount (or other incorrect information), you 
should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The 
new Form 1099 you receive will be marked 
“Corrected.”
Dividends on stock sold.  If stock is sold, ex-
changed, or otherwise disposed of after a divi-
dend is declared but before it is paid, the owner 
of record (usually the payee shown on the divi-
dend check) must include the dividend in in-
come.
Dividends received in January.  If a mutual 
fund (or other regulated investment company) 
or real estate investment trust (REIT) declares a 
dividend (including any exempt-interest divi-
dend or capital gain distribution) in October, 
November, or December, payable to sharehold-
ers of record on a date in one of those months 
but actually pays the dividend during January of 
the next calendar year, you are considered to 
have received the dividend on December 31. 
You report the dividend in the year it was de-
clared.
Ordinary Dividends
Ordinary dividends are the most common type 
of distribution from a corporation or a mutual 
fund. They are paid out of earnings and profits 
and are ordinary income to you. This means 
they are not capital gains. You can assume that 
any dividend you receive on common or prefer-
red stock is an ordinary dividend unless the 
paying corporation or mutual fund tells you oth-
erwise. Ordinary dividends will be shown in 
box 1a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive.
Qualified Dividends
Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 
subject to the same 0%, 15%, or 20% maximum 
tax rate that applies to net capital gain. They 
should be shown in box 1b of the Form 
1099-DIV you receive.
The maximum rate of tax on qualified divi-
dends is:
0% on any amount that otherwise would be 
taxed at a 10% or 15% rate.
15% on any amount that otherwise would 
be taxed at rates greater than 15% but less 
than 39.6%.
20% on any amount that otherwise would 
be taxed at a 39.6% rate.
To qualify for the maximum rate, all of the 
following requirements must be met.
The dividends must have been paid by a 
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora­
tion, later.)
The dividends are not of the type listed 
later under Dividends that are not qualified 
dividends.
You meet the holding period (discussed 
next).
Holding period. You must have held the stock 
for more than 60 days during the 121-day pe-
riod that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend 
date. The ex-dividend date is the first date fol-
lowing the declaration of a dividend on which 
the buyer of a stock is not entitled to receive the 
next dividend payment. When counting the 
number of days you held the stock, include the 
day you disposed of the stock, but not the day 
you acquired it. See the examples below.
Exception for preferred stock.  In the 
case of preferred stock, you must have held the 
stock more than 90 days during the 181-day pe-
riod that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend 
date if the dividends are due to periods totaling 
more than 366 days. If the preferred dividends 
are due to periods totaling less than 367 days, 
the holding period in the preceding paragraph 
applies.
Example 1.  You bought 5,000 shares of 
XYZ Corp. common stock on July 5, 2016. XYZ 
Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per 
share. The ex-dividend date was July 12, 2016. 
Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows 
$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in 
box 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold 
the 5,000 shares on August 8, 2016. You held 
your shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of 
the 121-day period (from July 6, 2016, through 
August 8, 2016). The 121-day period began on 
May 13, 2016 (60 days before the ex-dividend 
date), and ended on September 10, 2016. You 
have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-
cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 
days.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 except that you bought the stock on 
July 11, 2016 (the day before the ex-dividend 
date), and you sold the stock on September 13, 
2016. You held the stock for 63 days (from July 
12, 2016, through September 13, 2016). The 
$500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of 
your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends 
because you held the stock for 61 days of the 
121-day period (from July 12, 2015, through 
September 13, 2016).
Example 3.  You bought 10,000 shares of 
ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 5, 
2016. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of 
10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was 
July 12, 2016. The ABC Mutual Fund advises 
you that the portion of the dividend eligible to be 
treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents 
per share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mu-
tual Fund shows total ordinary dividends of 
$1,000 and qualified dividends of $200. How-
ever, you sold the 10,000 shares on August 8, 
2016. You have no qualified dividends from 
ABC Mutual Fund because you held the ABC 
Mutual Fund stock for less than 61 days.
Holding period reduced where risk of 
loss is diminished.  When determining 
whether you met the minimum holding period 
discussed earlier, you cannot count any day 
during which you meet any of the following con-
ditions.
1. You had an option to sell, were under a 
contractual obligation to sell, or had made 
(and not closed) a short sale of substan-
tially identical stock or securities.
2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to 
buy substantially identical stock or securi-
ties.
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding 
one or more other positions in substan-
tially similar or related property.
For information about how to apply condition 
(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.
Qualified foreign corporation.  A foreign cor-
poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it 
meets any of the following conditions.
1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S. 
possession.
2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits 
of a comprehensive income tax treaty with 
the United States that the Department of 
the Treasury determines is satisfactory for 
this purpose and that includes an ex-
change of information program. For a list 
of those treaties, see Table 1-3.
3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2) 
above, but the stock for which the divi-
dend is paid is readily tradable on an es-
tablished securities market in the United 
States. See Readily tradable stock, later.
Exception. A corporation is not a qualified 
foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-
vestment company during its tax year in which 
the dividends are paid or during its previous tax 
year.
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC). 
Dividends paid out of a CFC's earnings and 
profits that were not previously taxed are quali-
fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a quali-
fied foreign corporation and the other require-
ments in this discussion are met. Certain 
dividends paid by a CFC that would be treated 
Page 20 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 1 Investment Income

as a passive foreign investment company but 
for section 1297(d) of the Internal Revenue 
Code may be treated as qualified dividends. 
For more information, see Notice 2004-70, 
which can be found at www.IRS.gov/irb/
2004­44_IRB/ar09.html.
Readily tradable stock.  Any stock or 
American depositary receipt in respect of that 
stock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) 
under Qualified foreign corporation , if it is listed 
on a national securities exchange that is regis-
tered under section 6 of the Securities Ex-
change Act of 1934 or on the Nasdaq Stock 
Market. For a list of the exchanges that meet 
these requirements, see www.sec.gov/
divisions/marketreg/mrexchanges.shtml.
Table 1-3. Income Tax Treaties
Income tax treaties that the United States 
has with the following countries satisfy 
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign 
corporation.
Australia Indonesia Romania
Austria Ireland Russian 
Bangladesh Israel  Federation
Barbados Italy Slovak 
Belgium Jamaica  Republic
Bulgaria Japan Slovenia
Canada Kazakhstan South Africa
China Korea Spain
Cyprus Latvia Sri Lanka
Czech Lithuania Sweden
 Republic Luxembourg Switzerland
Denmark Malta Thailand
Egypt Mexico Trinidad and
Estonia Morocco  Tobago
Finland Netherlands Tunisia
France New Zealand Turkey
Germany Norway Ukraine
Greece Pakistan United 
Hungary Philippines  Kingdom
Iceland Poland Venezuela
India Portugal
Dividends that are not qualified dividends. 
The following dividends are not qualified divi-
dends. They are not qualified dividends even if 
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.
Capital gain distributions.
Dividends paid on deposits with mutual 
savings banks, cooperative banks, credit 
unions, U.S. building and loan associa-
tions, U.S. savings and loan associations, 
federal savings and loan associations, and 
similar financial institutions. (Report these 
amounts as interest income.)
Dividends from a corporation that is a 
tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-
erative during the corporation's tax year in 
which the dividends were paid or during 
the corporation's previous tax year.
Dividends paid by a corporation on em-
ployer securities held on the date of record 
by an employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP) maintained by that corporation.
Dividends on any share of stock to the ex-
tent you are obligated (whether under a 
short sale or otherwise) to make related 
payments for positions in substantially sim-
ilar or related property.
Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if 
you know or have reason to know the pay-
ments are not qualified dividends.
Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, 
box 1b, from a foreign corporation to the 
extent you know or have reason to know 
the payments are not qualified dividends.
Dividends Used To
Buy More Stock
The corporation in which you own stock may 
have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan 
lets you choose to use your dividends to buy 
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the 
corporation instead of receiving the dividends in 
cash. Most mutual funds also permit sharehold-
ers to automatically reinvest distributions in 
more shares in the fund, instead of receiving 
cash. If you use your dividends to buy more 
stock at a price equal to its fair market value, 
you still must report the dividends as income.
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a 
price less than its fair market value, you must 
report as dividend income the fair market value 
of the additional stock on the dividend payment 
date.
You also must report as dividend income 
any service charge subtracted from your cash 
dividends before the dividends are used to buy 
the additional stock. But you may be able to de-
duct the service charge. See Expenses of Pro­
ducing Income in chapter 3.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you 
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at 
a price less than fair market value. If you 
choose to do this, you must report as dividend 
income the difference between the cash you in-
vest and the fair market value of the stock you 
buy. When figuring this amount, use the fair 
market value of the stock on the dividend pay-
ment date.
Money Market Funds
Report amounts you receive from money mar-
ket funds as dividend income. Money market 
funds are a type of mutual fund and should not 
be confused with bank money market accounts 
that pay interest.
Capital Gain Distributions
Capital gain distributions (also called capital 
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to 
your account by mutual funds (or other regula-
ted investment companies) and real estate in-
vestment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in 
box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from 
the mutual fund or REIT.
Report capital gain distributions as 
long-term capital gains, regardless of how long 
you owned your shares in the mutual fund or 
REIT. See Capital gain distributions  under How 
To Report Dividend Income , later in this chap-
ter.
Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds 
and REITs.  Some mutual funds and REITs 
keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax 
on them. You must treat your share of these 
gains as distributions, even though you did not 
actually receive them. However, they are not in-
cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are re-
ported to you in box 1a of Form 2439.
Form 2439 also will show how much, if any, 
of the undistributed capital gains is:
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),
Gain from qualified small business stock 
(section 1202 gain, box 1c), or
Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).
For information about these terms, see Capital 
Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual 
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.
Basis adjustment.  Increase your basis in 
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by 
the difference between the gain you report and 
the credit you claim for the tax paid.
Nondividend Distributions
A nondividend distribution is a distribution that 
is not paid out of the earnings and profits of a 
corporation or a mutual fund. You should re-
ceive a Form 1099-DIV or other statement 
showing you the nondividend distribution. On 
Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution will 
be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a 
statement, you report the distribution as an ordi-
nary dividend.
Basis adjustment.  A nondividend distribution 
reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed 
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered. 
This nontaxable portion also is called a return of 
capital; it is a return of your investment in the 
stock of the company. If you buy stock in a cor-
poration in different lots at different times, and 
you cannot definitely identify the shares subject 
to the nondividend distribution, reduce the basis 
of your earliest purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been re-
duced to zero, report any additional nondivi-
dend distribution you receive as a capital gain. 
Whether you report it as a long-term or 
short-term capital gain depends on how long 
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in 
chapter 4.
Example 1.  You bought stock in 2003 for 
$100. In 2006, you received a nondividend dis-
tribution of $80. You did not include this amount 
in your income, but you reduced the basis of 
your stock to $20. You received a nondividend 
distribution of $30 in 2016. The first $20 of this 
amount reduced your basis to zero. You report 
the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for 
2016. You must report as a long-term capital 
gain any nondividend distribution you receive 
on this stock in later years.
Example 2.  You bought shares in Daugh 
Mutual Fund in 2012 for $12 a share. In 2013, 
you received a nondividend distribution of $5 a 
Page 21 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 21

share. You reduced your basis in each share by 
$5 to an adjusted basis of $7. In 2014, you re-
ceived a nondividend distribution of $1 per 
share and further reduced your basis in each 
share to $6. In 2015, you received a nondivi-
dend distribution of $2 per share. Your basis 
was reduced to $4. In 2016, the nondividend 
distribution from the mutual fund was $5 a 
share. You reduce your basis in each share to 
zero and report $1 of gain. See the Instructions 
for Form 8949 for details and more information.
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see Re-
porting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
chapter 4. Also, see the Instructions for Form 
8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040).
Liquidating Distributions
Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-
dating dividends, are distributions you receive 
during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-
poration. These distributions are, at least in 
part, one form of a return of capital. They may 
be paid in one or more installments. You will re-
ceive Form 1099-DIV from the corporation 
showing you the amount of the liquidating distri-
bution in box 8 or 9.
Any liquidating distribution you receive is not 
taxable to you until you have recovered the ba-
sis of your stock. After the basis of your stock 
has been reduced to zero, you must report the 
liquidating distribution as a capital gain. 
Whether you report the gain as a long-term or 
short-term capital gain depends on how long 
you have held the stock. See Holding Period in 
chapter 4.
Stock acquired at different times.  If you 
acquired stock in the same corporation in more 
than one transaction, you own more than one 
block of stock in the corporation. If you receive 
distributions from the corporation in complete 
liquidation, you must divide the distribution 
among the blocks of stock you own in the fol-
lowing proportion: the number of shares in that 
block over the total number of shares you own. 
Divide distributions in partial liquidation among 
that part of the stock redeemed in the partial liq-
uidation. After the basis of a block of stock is re-
duced to zero, you must report the part of any 
later distribution for that block as a capital gain.
Distributions less than basis.  If the total 
liquidating distributions you receive are less 
than the basis of your stock, you may have a 
capital loss. You can report a capital loss only 
after you have received the final distribution in 
liquidation that results in the redemption or can-
cellation of the stock. Whether you report the 
loss as a long-term or short-term capital loss 
depends on how long you held the stock. See 
Holding Period in chapter 4.
Distributions of Stock
and Stock Rights
Distributions by a corporation of its own stock 
are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock 
rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri-
butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the 
TIP
corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends 
and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you 
do not report them on your return.
Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. 
Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights 
are taxable to you if any of the following apply.
1. You or any other shareholder have the 
choice to receive cash or other property 
instead of stock or stock rights.
2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-
erty to some shareholders and an in-
crease in the percentage interest in the 
corporation's assets or earnings and prof-
its to other shareholders.
3. The distribution is in convertible preferred 
stock and has the same result as in (2).
4. The distribution gives preferred stock to 
some common stock shareholders and 
common stock to other common stock 
shareholders.
5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The 
distribution, however, is not taxable if it is 
an increase in the conversion ratio of con-
vertible preferred stock made solely to 
take into account a stock dividend, stock 
split, or similar event that would otherwise 
result in reducing the conversion right.)
The term “stock” includes rights to acquire 
stock, and the term “shareholder” includes a 
holder of rights or convertible securities.
If you receive taxable stock dividends or 
stock rights, include their fair market value at 
the time of distribution in your income.
Constructive distributions.  You must treat 
certain transactions that increase your propor-
tionate interest in the earnings and profits or as-
sets of a corporation as if they were distribu-
tions of stock or stock rights. These 
constructive distributions are taxable if they 
have the same result as a distribution described 
in (2), (3), (4), or (5) of the above discussion.
This treatment applies to a change in your 
stock's conversion ratio or redemption price, a 
difference between your stock's redemption 
price and issue price, a redemption not treated 
as a sale or exchange of your stock, and any 
other transaction having a similar effect on your 
interest in the corporation.
Preferred stock redeemable at a pre-
mium. If you receive preferred stock having a 
redemption price higher than its issue price, the 
difference (the redemption premium) generally 
is taxable as a constructive distribution of addi-
tional stock on the preferred stock.
For stock issued before October 10, 1990, 
you include the redemption premium in your in-
come ratably over the period during which the 
stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issued af-
ter October 9, 1990, you include the redemption 
premium on the basis of its economic accrual 
over the period during which the stock cannot 
be redeemed, as if it were original issue dis-
count on a debt instrument. See Original Issue 
Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.
The redemption premium is not a construc-
tive distribution, and is not taxable as a result, in 
the following situations.
1. The stock was issued before October 10, 
1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-
deemable solely at the option of the is-
suer), and the redemption premium is 
“reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc-
tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-
demption premium that is not “reasonable” 
is a constructive distribution.) The re-
demption premium is reasonable if it is not 
more than 10% of the issue price on stock 
not redeemable for 5 years from the issue 
date or is in the nature of a penalty for 
making a premature redemption.
2. The stock was issued after October 9, 
1990 (after December 19, 1995, if re-
deemable solely at the option of the is-
suer), and the redemption premium is de 
minimis. The redemption premium is de 
minimis if it is less than one-fourth of 1% 
(0.0025) of the redemption price multiplied 
by the number of full years from the date 
of issue to the date redeemable.
3. The stock was issued after October 9, 
1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-
fied time or is redeemable at your option, 
but the redemption is unlikely because it is 
subject to a contingency outside your con-
trol (not including the possibility of default, 
insolvency, etc.).
4. The stock was issued after December 19, 
1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-
tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-
mium is in the nature of a penalty for pre-
mature redemption or redemption is not 
more likely than not to occur. The redemp-
tion will be treated under a “safe harbor” 
as not more likely than not to occur if all of 
the following are true.
a. You and the issuer are not related un-
der the rules discussed in chapter 4 
under Losses on Sales or Trades of 
Property, substituting “20%” for 
“50%.”
b. There are no plans, arrangements, or 
agreements that effectively require or 
are intended to compel the issuer to 
redeem the stock.
c. The redemption would not reduce the 
stock's yield.
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair mar-
ket value when distributed. If you receive stock 
or stock rights that are not taxable to you, see 
Stocks and Bonds, later, for information on how 
to figure their basis.
Fractional shares.  You may not own enough 
stock in a corporation to receive a full share of 
stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-
dend. However, with the approval of the share-
holders, the corporation may set up a plan in 
which fractional shares are not issued but in-
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are 
given to the shareholders. Any cash you receive 
for fractional shares under such a plan is 
treated as an amount realized on the sale of the 
fractional shares. Report this transaction on 
Form 8949. Enter your gain or loss, the differ-
ence between the cash you receive and the ba-
sis of the fractional shares sold, in column (h) of 
Page 22 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 1 Investment Income

Schedule D (Form 1040) in Part I or Part II, 
whichever is appropriate.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949 with the correct box checked.
For more information on Form 8949 and 
Schedule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capital 
Gains and Losses in chapter 4. Also see the In-
structions for Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Example. You own one share of common 
stock that you bought on January 3, 2007, for 
$100. The corporation declared a common 
stock dividend of 5% on June 30, 2016. The fair 
market value of the stock at the time the stock 
dividend was declared was $200. You were 
paid $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend 
under a plan described in the discussion above. 
You figure your gain or loss as follows.
Fair market value of old stock .... $200.00 
Fair market value of stock dividend
(cash received) ................ + 10.00 
Fair market value of old stock and 
stock dividend ................. $210.00 
Basis (cost) of old stock
after the stock dividend
(($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ......... $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .......... + 4.76 
Total ......................... $100.00 
Cash received .................  $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend .... − 4.76 
Gain  $5.24 
Because you had held the share of stock for 
more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend 
was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is 
a long-term capital gain.
Scrip dividends.  A corporation that de-
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip 
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share. 
The certificate is generally nontaxable when 
you receive it. If you choose to have the corpo-
ration sell the certificate for you and give you 
the proceeds, your gain or loss is the difference 
between the proceeds and the part of your ba-
sis in the corporation's stock allocated to the 
certificate.
However, if you receive a scrip certificate 
that you can choose to redeem for cash instead 
of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
ceive it. You must include its fair market value in 
income on the date you receive it.
Other Distributions
You may receive any of the following distribu-
tions during the year.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest 
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company, including 
those received from a qualified fund of funds in 
any tax year beginning after December 22, 
2010, are not included in your taxable income. 
(However, see Information reporting require­
CAUTION
!
ment, next.) Exempt-interest dividends should 
be shown in box 10 of Form 1099-DIV.
Information reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-
ble, you must show them on your tax return if 
you have to file a return. This is an information 
reporting requirement and does not change the 
exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. 
See Reporting tax­exempt interest, earlier.
Alternative minimum tax treatment.  Ex-
empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri-
vate activity bonds may be subject to the alter-
native minimum tax. The exempt-interest 
dividends subject to the alternative minimum 
tax should be shown in box 11 of Form 
1099-DIV. See Form 6251 and its instructions 
for more information.
Dividends on insurance policies.  Insurance 
policy dividends the insurer keeps and uses to 
pay your premiums are not taxable. However, 
you must report as taxable interest income the 
interest that is paid or credited on dividends left 
with the insurance company.
If dividends on an insurance contract (other 
than a modified endowment contract) are dis-
tributed to you, they are a partial return of the 
premiums you paid. Do not include them in your 
gross income until they are more than the total 
of all net premiums you paid for the contract. 
(For information on the treatment of a distribu-
tion from a modified endowment contract, see 
Distribution Before Annuity Starting Date From 
a Nonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi­
odic Payments in Pub. 575.) Report any taxable 
distributions on insurance policies on Form 
1040, line 21.
Dividends on veterans' insurance.  Divi-
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli-
cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on divi-
dends left with the Department of Veterans 
Affairs is not taxable.
Patronage dividends.  Generally, patronage 
dividends you receive in money from a cooper-
ative organization are included in your income.
Do not include in your income patronage 
dividends you receive on:
Property bought for your personal use, or
Capital assets or depreciable property 
bought for use in your business. But you 
must reduce the basis (cost) of the items 
bought. If the dividend is more than the ad-
justed basis of the assets, you must report 
the excess as income.
These rules are the same whether the coop-
erative paying the dividend is a taxable or 
tax-exempt cooperative.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.  Do not 
report these amounts as dividends. Instead, in-
clude these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; 
Form 1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3.
How To Report
Dividend Income
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Nominee
 Restricted stock
 
Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or 
Form 1040A to report your dividend income. 
Report the total of your ordinary dividends on 
line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report 
qualified dividends on line 9b.
If you receive capital gain distributions, you 
may be able to use Form 1040A or you may 
have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri­
butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-
butions required to be reported as capital gains, 
you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form 
1040EZ if you receive any dividend income 
other than Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on which 
you received $10 or more in dividends and 
other distributions, you should receive a Form 
1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Form 
1099-DIV, you must report all your dividend in-
come.
See Form 1099-DIV and its instructions for 
more information on how to report dividend in-
come.
Form 1040A or Form 1040.  You must com-
plete Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II, 
and attach it to your Form 1040A or 1040, if:
Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, 
box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
You received, as a nominee, dividends 
that actually belong to someone else.
If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500, 
you also must complete Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040), Part III.
List on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), 
Part II, line 5, each payer's name and the ordi-
nary dividends you received. If your securities 
are held by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), 
list the name of the brokerage firm shown on 
Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is 
held by a nominee who is the owner of record, 
and the nominee credited or paid you dividends 
on the stock, show the name of the nominee 
and the dividends you received or for which you 
were credited.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed 
on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a nomi-
nee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this total 
on line 9a of Form 1040A or 1040.
Dividends received on restricted stock.  Re-
stricted stock is stock you get from your em-
ployer for services you perform and that is non-
transferable and subject to a substantial risk of 
forfeiture. You do not have to include the value 
of the stock in your income when you receive it. 
However, if you get dividends on restricted 
stock, you must include them in your income as 
wages, not dividends. See Restricted Property 
Page 23 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 23

in Pub. 525 for information on restricted stock 
dividends.
Your employer should include these divi-
dends in the wages shown on your Form W-2, 
Wage and Tax Statement. If you also get a 
Form 1099-DIV for these dividends, list them on 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 5, with 
the other dividends you received. Enter a subto-
tal of all your dividend income several lines 
above line 6. Below the subtotal, enter “Divi-
dends on restricted stock reported as wages on 
Form 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,” and enter 
the dividends included in your wages on line 7 
of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Subtract this 
amount from the subtotal and enter the result on 
line 6.
Election. You can choose to include the 
value of restricted stock in gross income as pay 
for services. If you make this choice, report the 
dividends on the stock like any other dividends. 
List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040), along with your other dividends 
(if the amount of ordinary dividends received 
from all sources is more than $1,500). If you re-
ceive both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 
showing these dividends, do not include the 
dividends in your wages reported on line 7 of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Attach a statement 
to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A explaining 
why the amount shown on line 7 of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A is different from the 
amount shown on your Form W-2.
Independent contractor.  If you received 
restricted stock for services as an independent 
contractor, the rules in the previous discussion 
apply. Generally, you must treat dividends you 
receive on the stock as income from self-em-
ployment.
Qualified dividends.  Report qualified divi-
dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b of 
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in 
box 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not 
add the amount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, 
the amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the 
following on line 9b.
Qualified dividends you received as a 
nominee. See Nominees, later.
Dividends on stock for which you did not 
meet the holding period. See Holding pe­
riod, earlier, under Qualified Dividends.
Dividends on any share of stock to the ex-
tent you are obligated (whether under a 
short sale or otherwise) to make related 
payments for positions in substantially sim-
ilar or related property.
Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if 
you know or have reason to know the pay-
ments are not qualified dividends.
Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, 
box 1b, from a foreign corporation to the 
extent you know or have reason to know 
the payments are not qualified dividends.
If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the 
Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-
ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 
1040) instructions, whichever applies. Enter 
qualified dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
Investment interest deducted.  If you 
claim a deduction for investment interest, you 
may have to reduce the amount of your quali-
fied dividends that are eligible for the 0%, 15%, 
or 20% tax rate. Reduce it by the qualified divi-
dends you choose to include in investment in-
come when figuring the limit on your investment 
interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or 
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-
mation about the limit on investment interest, 
see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
Capital gain distributions.  If you received 
capital gain distributions, you report them di-
rectly on Form 1040A, line 10; Form 1040, 
line 13; or on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, 
depending on your situation. Distributions of net 
realized short-term capital gains are not treated 
as capital gains. Instead, they are included on 
Form 1099-DIV as ordinary dividends. Report 
them on your tax return as ordinary dividends.
Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).  There are certain situa-
tions where you may not have to file Form 8949 
and/or Schedule D (Form 1040).
Exception 1. You do not have to file Form 
8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) if you have no 
capital losses and your only capital gains are 
capital gain distributions from Form(s) 
1099-DIV, box 2a. (If any Form(s) 1099-DIV you 
receive have an amount in box 2b (unrecap-
tured section 1250 gain), box 2c (section 1202 
gain), or box 2d (collectibles (28%) gain), you 
do not qualify for this exception.) If you qualify 
for this exception, report your capital gain distri-
butions directly on line 13 of Form 1040 (and 
check the box on line 13). Also use the Quali-
fied Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet 
in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your tax. 
You can report your capital gain distributions on 
line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form 
1040, if you do not have to file Form 1040.
Exception 2.  You must file Schedule D 
(Form 1040), but generally do not have to file 
Form 8949, if Exception 1  does not apply and 
your only capital gains and losses are:
Capital gain distributions;
A capital loss carryover;
A gain from Form 2439, Form 6252, Install-
ment Sale Income, or Part I of Form 4797, 
Sales of Business Property;
A gain or loss from Form 4684, Casualties 
and Thefts, Form 6781, Gains and Losses 
From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad-
dles, or Form 8824;
A gain or loss from a partnership, S corpo-
ration, estate, or trust; or
Gains and losses from transactions for 
which you received a Form 1099-B that 
shows basis was reported to the IRS and 
for which you do not need to make any ad-
justments in column (g) of Form 8949 or 
enter any codes in column (f) of Form 
8949.
Undistributed capital gains. To report un-
distributed capital gains, you must complete 
Schedule D (Form 1040) and attach it to your 
return. Report these gains on Schedule D 
(Form 1040), line 11, column (h), and attach 
Copy B of Form 2439 to your return. Report the 
tax paid by the mutual fund on these gains on 
Form 1040, line 73, and check box a on that 
line.
The mutual fund (or other regulated invest-
ment company) or real estate investment trust 
(REIT) making the distribution should tell you 
how much of it is:
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (Form 
1099-DIV, box 2b), or
Section 1202 gain (Form 1099-DIV, 
box 2c).
For information about these terms, see Capital 
Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section 
1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D in-
structions the part reported to you as unrecap-
tured section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on 
qualified small business stock (section 1202 
gain), follow the reporting instructions under 
Section 1202 Exclusion in chapter 4.
Nondividend distributions.  Report nondivi-
dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) 
only after your basis in the stock has been re-
duced to zero. After the basis of your stock has 
been reduced to zero, you must show this ex-
cess amount in Form 8949, Part I, if you held 
the stock 1 year or less. Show it in Form 8949, 
Part II, if you held the stock for more than 1 
year. Enter the name of the company in column 
(a) of Form 8949. Report the amount of the ex-
cess distribution in column (d) and your zero 
basis in column (e) of Form 8949.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949 with the correct box checked.
For more information on Form 8949 and 
Schedule D (Form 1040), see Reporting Capital 
Gains and Losses in chapter 4. Also see the In-
structions for Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends 
as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your 
name but actually belong to someone else), in-
clude them on line 5 of Schedule B (Form 
1040A or 1040). Several lines above line 6, put 
a subtotal of all dividend income listed on line 5. 
Below this subtotal, enter “Nominee Distribu-
tion” and show the amount received as a nomi-
nee. Subtract the total of your nominee distribu-
tions from the subtotal. Enter the result on 
line 6.
If you received a capital gain distribution or 
were allocated an undistributed capital gain as 
a nominee, report only the amount that belongs 
to you on Form 1040A, line 10; Form 1040, 
line 13; or Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, 
whichever is appropriate. Attach a statement to 
your return showing the full amount you re-
ceived or were allocated and the amount you 
received or were allocated as a nominee.
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS.  If you 
received dividends as a nominee in 2016, you 
must file a Form 1099-DIV (or Form 2439) for 
those dividends with the IRS. Send the Form 
1099-DIV with a Form 1096 to your Internal 
Revenue Service Center by February 28, 2017 
(March 31, 2017, if you file Form 1099-DIV 
electronically). Give the actual owner of the divi-
dends Copy B of the Form 1099-DIV by 
CAUTION
!
Page 24 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 1 Investment Income

January 31, 2017. On Form 1099-DIV, you 
should be listed as the “Payer.” The other 
owner should be listed as the “Recipient.” You 
do not, however, have to file a Form 1099-DIV 
to show payments for your spouse. For more in-
formation about the reporting requirements and 
the penalties for failure to file (or furnish) certain 
information returns, see the General Instruc-
tions for Certain Information Returns and the In-
structions for Form 2439.
Liquidating distributions. If you receive a liq-
uidating distribution on stock, the corporation 
will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the liqui-
dating distribution in boxes 8 and 9.
Stripped
Preferred Stock
If the dividend rights are stripped from certain 
preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-
ferred stock may have to include amounts in in-
come equal to the amounts that would have 
been included if the stock were a bond with 
OID.
Stripped preferred stock defined.  Stripped 
preferred stock is any stock that meets both of 
the following tests.
1. There has been a separation in ownership 
between the stock and any dividend on 
the stock that has not become payable.
2. The stock:
a. Is limited and preferred as to divi-
dends,
b. Does not participate in corporate 
growth to any significant extent, and
c. Has a fixed redemption price.
Treatment of buyer.  If you buy stripped pre-
ferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-
clude certain amounts in your gross income 
while you hold the stock. These amounts are or-
dinary income. They are equal to the amounts 
you would have included in gross income if the 
stock were a bond that:
1. Was issued on the purchase date of the 
stock, and
2. Has OID equal to:
a. The redemption price for the stock, 
minus
b. The price at which you bought the 
stock.
Report these amounts as other income on Form 
1040, line 21. For information about OID, see 
Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.
This treatment also applies to you if you ac-
quire the stock in such a way (for example, by 
gift) that your basis in the stock is determined 
by using a buyer's basis.
Treatment of person stripping stock.  If you 
strip the rights to one or more dividends from 
stripped preferred stock, you are treated as 
having purchased the stock. You are treated as 
making the purchase on the date you disposed 
of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the 
stripped preferred stock is treated as your pur-
chase price. The rules described in Treatment 
of buyer, earlier, apply to you.
REMICs, FASITs,
and Other CDOs
Holders of interests in real estate mortgage in-
vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset 
securitization investment trusts (FASITs), and 
other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) 
must follow special rules for reporting income 
and any expenses from these investment prod-
ucts.
REMICs
A REMIC is an entity formed for the purpose of 
holding a fixed pool of mortgages secured by 
interests in real property. A REMIC issues regu-
lar and residual interests to investors. For tax 
purposes, a REMIC is generally treated as a 
partnership with the residual interest holders 
treated as the partners. The regular interests 
are treated as debt instruments.
REMIC income or loss is not income or loss 
from a passive activity.
For more information about the qualifica-
tions and tax treatment that apply to a REMIC 
and the interests of investors in a REMIC, see 
sections 860A through 860G of the Internal 
Revenue Code, and the regulations under 
those sections.
Regular Interest
A REMIC can have several classes (also known 
as “tranches”) of regular interests. A regular in-
terest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-
ceive a specified principal amount (or other sim-
ilar amount).
A REMIC regular interest is treated as a 
debt instrument for income tax purposes. Ac-
cordingly, the OID, market discount, and in-
come reporting rules that apply to bonds and 
other debt instruments as described earlier in 
this publication under Discount on Debt Instru­
ments apply, with certain modifications dis-
cussed below.
Generally, you report your income from a 
regular interest on line 8a of Form 1040A or 
1040. For more information on how to report in-
terest and OID, see How To Report Interest In­
come, earlier.
Holders must use accrual method.  Holders 
of regular interests must use an accrual method 
of accounting to report OID and interest in-
come. Because income under an accrual 
method is not determined by the receipt of 
cash, you may have to include OID or interest 
income in your taxable income even if you have 
not received any cash payments.
Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID.  You should 
receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form 
1099-OID from the REMIC. See the General In-
structions for Certain Information Returns for in-
formation on when you should receive your 
copy of Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID and 
a written statement providing additional infor-
mation. The statement should contain enough 
information to enable you to figure your accrual 
of market discount or amortizable bond pre-
mium.
Form 1099-INT shows interest income that 
accrued to you for the period you held the regu-
lar interest.
Form 1099-OID shows OID and interest, if 
any, that accrued to you for the period you held 
the regular interest. You will not need to make 
any adjustments to the amounts reported even 
if you held the regular interest for only a part of 
the calendar year. However, if you bought the 
regular interest at a premium or acquisition pre-
mium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form 
1099­OID, earlier.
You may not get a Form 1099.  Corpora-
tions and other persons specified in Regula-
tions section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 
1099. These persons and fiscal year taxpayers 
may obtain tax information by contacting the 
REMIC or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold 
their interest directly from the REMIC or issuer 
of the CDO. Pub. 938, Real Estate Mortgage In-
vestment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-
mation, explains how to request this informa-
tion.
Pub. 938 is available only on the Inter-
net at www.irs.gov/formspubs/.
If you hold a regular interest or CDO through 
a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-
quest the information from the nominee.
Allocated investment expenses.  Regular in-
terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to 
deduct the REMIC's investment expenses, but 
only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A 
single-class REMIC is one that generally would 
be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had 
not elected REMIC status.
The single-class REMIC will report your 
share of its investment expenses in box 5 of 
Form 1099-INT or box 9 of Form 1099-OID.
You may be able to take a deduction for 
these expenses subject to a 2% limit that also 
applies to certain other miscellaneous itemized 
deductions. See Expenses of Producing In­
come in chapter 3 for more information.
Redemption of regular interests at maturity. 
Redemption of debt instruments at their matur-
ity is treated as a sale or exchange. You must 
report redemptions on your tax return whether 
or not you realize gain or loss on the transac-
tion. Your basis is your adjusted issue price, 
which includes any OID you previously reported 
in income.
Any amount you receive on the retirement of 
a debt instrument is treated as if you had sold or 
exchanged that instrument. A debt instrument is 
retired when it is reacquired or redeemed by the 
issuer and canceled.
Sale or exchange of a regular interest. 
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a 
Page 25 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 25

REMIC regular interest may be ordinary in-
come. The ordinary income part, if any, is:
The amount that would have been inclu-
ded in your income if the yield to maturity 
on the regular interest had been 110% of 
the applicable federal rate at the beginning 
of your holding period, minus
The amount you included in your income.
Residual Interest
A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that 
is not a regular interest. It is designated as a re-
sidual interest by the REMIC.
If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, 
you must take into account on a quarterly basis 
your daily portion of the taxable income or net 
loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax 
year you hold the residual interest. You must re-
port these amounts as ordinary income or loss.
Basis in the residual interest.  Your basis in 
the residual interest is increased by taxable in-
come you take into account. Your basis is de-
creased (but not below zero) by the cash or the 
fair market value of any property distributed to 
you, and by any net loss you have taken into 
account. If you sell your residual interest, you 
must adjust your basis to reflect your share of 
the REMIC's taxable income or net loss imme-
diately before the sale. See Wash Sales , in 
chapter 4, for more information about selling a 
residual interest.
Treatment of distributions. You must include 
in your gross income the part of any distribution 
that is more than your adjusted basis. Treat the 
distribution as a gain from the sale or exchange 
of your residual interest.
Schedule Q (Form 1066).  If you hold a RE-
MIC residual interest, you should receive 
Schedule Q (Form 1066), Quarterly Notice to 
Residual Interest Holder of REMIC Taxable In-
come or Net Loss Allocation, and instructions 
from the REMIC each quarter. Schedule Q 
(Form 1066) will indicate your share of the RE-
MIC's quarterly taxable income (or loss). Do not 
attach Schedule Q (Form 1066) to your tax re-
turn. Keep it for your records.
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to re-
port your total share of the REMIC's taxable in-
come (or loss) for each quarter included in your 
tax year.
For more information about reporting your 
income (or loss) from a residual interest in a 
REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and 
Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit, you may be able to 
claim a miscellaneous itemized deduction for 
certain ordinary and necessary expenses you 
paid or incurred in connection with your invest-
ment in a REMIC. These expenses may include 
certain expense items incurred by the REMIC 
and passed through to you. The REMIC will re-
port these expenses to you on Schedule Q 
(Form 1066), line 3b. See Expenses of Produc­
ing Income in chapter 3 for information on how 
to report these expenses.
Collateralized Debt 
Obligations (CDOs)
A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt 
instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest, 
that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other 
evidence of debt and that has principal pay-
ments subject to acceleration. (Note: While RE-
MIC regular interests are collateralized debt ob-
ligations, they have unique rules that do not 
apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, 
also known as “pay-through bonds,” are com-
monly divided into different classes (also called 
“tranches”).
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-
gages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or 
credit card receivables.
For more information about the qualifica-
tions and the tax treatment that apply to an is-
suer of a CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code and the regulations under 
that section.
The OID, market discount, and income-re-
porting rules that apply to bonds and other debt 
instruments, as described earlier in this chapter 
under Discount on Debt Instruments, also apply 
to a CDO.
You must include interest income from your 
CDO in your gross income under your regular 
method of accounting. Also include any OID ac-
crued on your CDO during the tax year.
Generally, you report your income from a 
CDO on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040. For 
more information about reporting these 
amounts on your return, see How To Report In­
terest Income, earlier.
Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID.  You should 
receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form 
1099-OID. See the General Instructions for Cer-
tain Information Returns for information on 
when you should receive your copy of Form 
1099-INT or Form 1099-OID and a written 
statement providing additional information. The 
statement should contain enough information 
about the CDO to enable you to figure your ac-
crual of market discount or amortizable bond 
premium.
Form 1099-INT shows the interest income 
paid to you for the period you held the CDO.
Form 1099-OID shows the OID accrued to 
you and the interest, if any, paid to you for the 
period you held the CDO. You should not need 
to make any adjustments to the amounts repor-
ted even if you held the CDO for only a part of 
the calendar year. However, if you bought the 
CDO at a premium or acquisition premium, see 
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099­OID , ear-
lier.
If you did not receive a Form 1099, see You 
may not get a Form 1099, earlier.
FASITs
A financial asset securitization investment trust 
(FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-
tions such as credit card receivables, home 
equity loans, and automobile loans.
A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a 
debt instrument. The rules described under Col­
lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs) , earlier, 
apply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except 
that a holder of a regular interest in a FASIT 
must use an accrual method of accounting to 
report OID and interest income.
For more information about FASITs, see 
sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
enue Code.
Beginning January 1, 2005, the special 
rules for FASITs are repealed. How­
ever, the special rules still apply to any 
FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to the 
extent that regular interests issued by the FA­
SIT before that date continue to remain out­
standing in accordance with the original terms 
of issuance.
S Corporations
In general, an S corporation does not pay a tax 
on its income. Instead, its income and expen-
ses are passed through to the shareholders, 
who then report these items on their own in-
come tax returns.
If you are an S corporation shareholder, 
your share of the corporation's current year in-
come or loss and other tax items are taxed to 
you whether or not you receive any amount. 
Generally, those items increase or decrease the 
basis of your S corporation stock as appropri-
ate. For more information on basis adjustments 
for S corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds, 
later.
Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-
cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-
turn of capital and reduce your basis in the 
stock of the corporation. The part of any distri-
bution that is more than your basis is treated as 
a gain from the sale or exchange of property. 
The corporation's distributions may be in the 
form of cash or property.
S corporation distributions are not treated as 
dividends except in certain cases in which the 
corporation has accumulated earnings and 
profits from years before it became an S corpo-
ration.
Reporting S corporation income, deduc-
tions, and credits.  The S corporation should 
send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) 
showing your share of the S corporation's in-
come, credits, and deductions for the tax year. 
You must report your distributive share of the S 
corporation's income, gain, loss, deductions, or 
credits on the appropriate lines and schedules 
of your Form 1040.
For more information about your treatment 
of S corporation tax items, see Shareholder's 
Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).
Limit on losses and deductions.  The de-
duction for your share of losses and deductions 
shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limited 
to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debt 
the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduc-
tion not allowed because of this limit is carried 
CAUTION
!
Page 26 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26  Chapter 1 Investment Income

over and treated as a loss or deduction in the 
next tax year.
Passive activity losses.  Rules apply that 
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) and its instructions 
will explain the limits and tell you where on your 
return to report your share of S corporation 
items from passive activities.
Form 8582.  If you have a passive activity 
loss from an S corporation, you must complete 
Form 8582 to figure the allowable loss to enter 
on your return. See Pub. 925 for more informa-
tion.
Investment Clubs
An investment club is formed when a group of 
friends, neighbors, business associates, or oth-
ers pool their money to invest in stock or other 
securities. The club may or may not have a writ-
ten agreement, a charter, or bylaws.
Usually the group operates informally with 
members pledging to pay a regular amount into 
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committee 
that gathers information on securities, selects 
the most promising securities, and recom-
mends that the club invest in them. Other clubs 
rotate these responsibilities among all their 
members. Most clubs require all members to 
vote for or against all investments, sales, 
trades, and other transactions.
Identifying number. Each club must have an 
employer identification number (EIN) to use 
when filing its return. The club's EIN also may 
have to be given to the payer of dividends or 
other income from investments recorded in the 
club's name. To obtain an EIN, apply online at 
www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small­Businesses­ &­
Self­Employed/Apply­for­an­Employer­
Identification­Number­(EIN)­Online or file Form 
SS-4, Application for Employer Identification 
Number. See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , 
for more information about how to get this form.
Investments in name of member.  When 
an investment is recorded in the name of one 
club member, this member must give his or her 
SSN to the payer of investment income. (When 
an investment is held in the names of two or 
more club members, the SSN of only one mem-
ber must be given to the payer.) This member is 
considered the record owner for the actual 
owner, the investment club. This member is a 
“nominee” and must file an information return 
with the IRS. For example, the nominee mem-
ber must file Form 1099-DIV for dividend in-
come, showing the club as the owner of the div-
idend, his or her SSN, and the EIN of the club.
Tax Treatment of the Club
Generally, an investment club is treated as a 
partnership for federal tax purposes unless it 
chooses otherwise. In some situations, how-
ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust.
Clubs formed before 1997.  Before 1997, the 
rules for determining how an investment club is 
treated were different from those explained in 
the following discussions. An investment club 
that existed before 1997 is treated for later 
years the same way it was treated before 1997, 
unless it chooses to be treated a different way 
under the new rules. To make that choice, the 
club must file Form 8832, Entity Classification 
Election.
Club as a Partnership
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a 
trust, it will be treated as a partnership.
Filing requirement. If your investment club is 
treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065, 
U.S. Return of Partnership Income. However, 
as a partner in the club, you must report on your 
individual return your share of the club's in-
come, gains, losses, deductions, and credits for 
the club's tax year. (Its tax year generally must 
be the same tax year as that of the partners 
owning a majority interest.) You must report 
these items whether or not you actually receive 
any distribution from the partnership.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065).  You should re-
ceive a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) from 
the partnership. The amounts shown on Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1065) are your share of the part-
nership's income, deductions, and credits. Re-
port each amount on the appropriate lines and 
schedules of your income tax return.
The club's expenses for producing or col-
lecting income, for managing investment prop-
erty, or for determining any tax are listed sepa-
rately on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). Each 
individual partner who itemizes deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040) can deduct his or her 
share of those expenses. The expenses are lis-
ted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, along 
with other miscellaneous deductions subject to 
the 2% limit. See Expenses of Producing In­
come in chapter 3 for more information on the 
2% limit.
For more information about reporting your 
income from a partnership, see the Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1065) instructions. Also see Pub. 
541, Partnerships.
Passive activity losses.  Rules apply that 
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions 
will tell you where on your return to report your 
share of partnership items from passive activi-
ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a 
partnership, you must complete Form 8582 to 
figure the amount of the allowable loss to enter 
on your tax return.
No social security coverage for investment 
club earnings.  If an investment club partner-
ship's activities are limited to investing in sav-
ings certificates, stock, or securities, and col-
lecting interest or dividends for its members' 
accounts, a member's share of income is not 
earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-
untarily pay the self-employment tax to increase 
your social security coverage and ultimate ben-
efits.
Club as a Corporation
An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed 
as a corporation if:
It is formed under a federal or state law 
that refers to it as incorporated or as a cor-
poration, body corporate, or body politic,
It is formed under a state law that refers to 
it as a joint-stock company or joint-stock 
association, or
It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.
Choosing to be taxed as a corporation.  To 
choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club 
cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust , later) or 
otherwise subject to special treatment under the 
tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to make 
the choice.
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as a 
corporation, it must file Form 1120, U.S. Corpo-
ration Income Tax Return. In that case, you do 
not report any of its income or expenses on 
your individual return. All ordinary income and 
expenses and capital gains and losses must be 
reported on the Form 1120. Any distribution the 
club makes that qualifies as a dividend must be 
reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distributions 
to the shareholder are $10 or more for the year.
You must report any distributions you re-
ceive from the club on your individual return. 
You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIV 
from the club showing the distributions you re-
ceived.
Some corporations can choose not to be 
taxed and have earnings taxed to the share-
holders. See S Corporations, earlier.
For more information about corporations, 
see Pub. 542, Corporations.
Club as a Trust
In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as a 
trust. In general, a trust is an arrangement 
through which trustees take title to property for 
the purpose of protecting or conserving it for the 
beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied in 
chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is 
treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose 
is to vest in trustees responsibility for protecting 
and conserving property for beneficiaries who 
cannot share in that responsibility and so are 
not associates in a joint enterprise for the con-
duct of business for profit. If you need more in-
formation about trusts, see Regulations section 
301.7701-4.
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as a 
trust, it must file Form 1041, U.S. Income Tax 
Return for Estates and Trusts. You should re-
ceive a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from 
the trust. Report the amounts shown on Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1041) on the appropriate lines 
and schedules of your income tax return.
Page 27 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Investment Income  Page 27

2.
Tax Shelters and 
Other 
Reportable
Transactions
Introduction
Investments that yield tax benefits are some-
times called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con-
gress has concluded that the loss of revenue is 
an acceptable side effect of special tax provi-
sions designed to encourage taxpayers to 
make certain types of investments. In many ca-
ses, however, losses from tax shelters produce 
little or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits 
are exaggerated beyond those intended. Those 
cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in-
vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub-
ject to restrictions, including the requirement 
that it be disclosed, as discussed later.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Abusive Tax Shelters,
Rules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters,
Investor Reporting,
Penalties, and
Whether To Invest.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Accounting Periods and Methods
Examination of Returns, Appeal 
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Determining the Value of Donated 
Property
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form (and Instructions)
Disclosure Statement
Regulation Disclosure Statement
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Reportable Transaction Disclosure 
Statement
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for infor-
mation about getting these publications and 
forms.
Abusive Tax Shelters
Abusive tax shelters are marketing schemes in-
volving artificial transactions with little or no 
  538
  556
  561
  925
  8275 
  8275-R 
  8283
  8886 
economic reality. They often make use of unre-
alistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses in 
connection with nonrecourse loans, mismatch-
ing of income and deductions, financing techni-
ques that do not conform to standard commer-
cial business practices, or mischaracterization 
of the substance of the transaction. Despite ap-
pearances to the contrary, the taxpayer gener-
ally risks little.
Abusive tax shelters commonly involve 
package deals designed from the start to gener-
ate losses, deductions, or credits that will be far 
more than present or future investment. Or, they 
may promise investors from the start that future 
inflated appraisals will enable them, for exam-
ple, to reap charitable contribution deductions 
based on those appraisals. (But see the ap-
praisal requirements discussed under Rules To 
Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) They are 
commonly marketed in terms of the ratio of tax 
deductions allegedly available to each dollar in-
vested. This ratio (or “write-off”) is frequently 
said to be several times greater than 
one-to-one.
Because there are many abusive tax shel-
ters, it is not possible to list all the factors you 
should consider in determining whether an of-
fering is an abusive tax shelter. However, you 
should ask the following questions, which might 
provide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.
Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-
nomic benefits?
Is this a transaction you would seriously 
consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you 
hoped to make a profit?
Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, are 
they insured for less than their purchase 
price?
Is there a nontax justification for the way 
profits and losses are allocated to part-
ners?
Do the facts and supporting documents 
make economic sense? In that connection, 
are there sales and resales of the tax shel-
ter property at ever increasing prices?
Does the investment plan involve a gim-
mick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
nomic reality of the transaction?
Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-
ments after the close of the year? Are you 
instructed to backdate checks covering 
your investment?
Is your debt a real debt or are you assured 
by the promoter that you will never have to 
pay it?
Does this transaction involve laundering 
United States source income through for-
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-
ven and owned by United States share-
holders?
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax Shelters
Congress has enacted a series of income tax 
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive tax 
shelters. These provisions include the following.
Disclosure of reportable transactions. 
You must disclose information for each reporta-
ble transaction in which you participate. See 
Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement , 
later.
Material advisors with respect to any report-
able transaction must disclose information 
about the transaction on Form 8918, Material 
Advisor Disclosure Statement. To determine 
whether you are a material advisor to a transac-
tion, see the Instructions for Form 8918.
Material advisors will receive a reportable 
transaction number for the disclosed reportable 
transaction. They must provide this number to 
all persons to whom they acted as a material 
advisor. They must provide the number at the 
time the transaction is entered into. If they do 
not have the number at that time, they must pro-
vide it within 60 days from the date the number 
is mailed to them. For information on penalties 
for failure to disclose and failure to maintain 
lists, see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707, 
6707A, and 6708.
Requirement to maintain list.  Material 
advisors must maintain a list of persons to 
whom they provide material aid, assistance, or 
advice on any reportable transaction. The list 
must be available for inspection by the IRS, and 
the information required to be included on the 
list generally must be kept for 7 years. See Reg-
ulations section 301.6112-1 for more informa-
tion (including what information is required to be 
included on the list).
Confidentiality privilege.  The confiden-
tiality privilege between you and a federally au-
thorized tax practitioner does not apply to writ-
ten communications made after October 21, 
2004, regarding the promotion of your direct or 
indirect participation in any tax shelter.
Appraisal requirement for donated prop-
erty.  If you claim a deduction of more than 
$5,000 for an item or group of similar items of 
donated property, you generally must get a 
qualified appraisal from a qualified appraiser 
and complete and attach section B of Form 
8283 to your return. If you claim a deduction of 
more than $500,000 for the donated property, 
you generally must attach the qualified ap-
praisal to your return. If you file electronically, 
see Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax 
Transmittal for an IRS e­file Return, and its in-
structions. For more information about apprais-
als, including exceptions, see Pub. 561.
Passive activity loss and credit limits. 
The passive activity loss and credit rules limit 
the amount of losses and credits that can be 
claimed from passive activities and limit the 
amount that can offset nonpassive income, 
such as certain portfolio income from invest-
ments. For more detailed information about de-
termining and reporting income, losses, and 
credits from passive activities, see Pub. 925.
Interest on penalties.  If you are assessed 
an accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty (as 
discussed under Penalties, later), interest will 
be imposed on the amount of the penalty from 
the due date of the return (including any exten-
sions) to the date you pay the penalty.
Accounting method restriction.  Tax 
shelters generally cannot use the cash method 
of accounting.
Uniform capitalization rules.  The uni-
form capitalization rules generally apply to pro-
ducing property or acquiring it for resale. Under 
Page 28 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28  Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

those rules, the direct cost and part of the indi-
rect cost of the property must be capitalized or 
included in inventory. For more information, see 
Pub. 538.
Denial of deduction for interest on an 
underpayment due to a reportable transac-
tion. You cannot deduct any interest you paid 
or accrued on any part of an underpayment of 
tax due to an understatement arising from a re-
portable transaction (discussed later) if the rele-
vant facts affecting the tax treatment of the item 
are not adequately disclosed. This rule applies 
to reportable transactions entered into in tax 
years beginning after October 22, 2004.
Authority for Disallowance of Tax 
Benefits
The IRS has published guidance concluding 
that the claimed tax benefits of various abusive 
tax shelters should be disallowed. The guid-
ance is the conclusion of the IRS on how the 
law is applied to a particular set of facts. Guid-
ance is published in the Internal Revenue Bulle-
tin for taxpayers' information and also for use by 
IRS officials. So, if your return is examined and 
an abusive tax shelter is identified and chal-
lenged, published guidance dealing with that 
type of shelter, which disallows certain claimed 
tax shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for 
the examining official's challenge of the tax ben-
efits you claimed. In such a case, the examiner 
will not compromise even if you or your repre-
sentative believes you have authority for the po-
sitions taken on your tax return.
The courts have generally been un­
sympathetic to taxpayers involved in 
abusive tax shelter schemes and have 
ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the ca­
ses in which these shelters have been chal­
lenged.
Investor Reporting
You may be required to file a reportable trans-
action disclosure statement.
Reportable Transaction Disclosure 
Statement
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each 
reportable transaction (discussed later) in which 
you participated. Generally, you must attach 
Form 8886 to your return for each tax year in 
which you participated in the transaction. Under 
certain circumstances, a transaction must be 
disclosed within 90 days of the transaction be-
ing identified as a listed transaction or a trans-
action of interest (discussed later). In addition, 
for the first year Form 8886 is attached to your 
return, you must send a copy of the form to:
Internal Revenue Service
OTSA Mail Stop 4915
1973 North Rulon White Blvd.
Ogden, UT 84201
If you file your return electronically, the copy 
sent to OTSA must show exactly the same in-
formation, word for word, provided with the 
electronically filed return and it must be 
CAUTION
!
provided on the official IRS Form 8886 or an ex-
act copy of the form. If you use a computer-gen-
erated or substitute Form 8886, it must be an 
exact copy of the official IRS form.
If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail 
to include any required information on the form, 
you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty for 
failure to disclose a reportable transaction , 
later.
The following discussion briefly describes 
reportable transactions. For more details, see 
the Instructions for Form 8886.
Reportable transaction.  A reportable trans-
action is any of the following.
A listed transaction.
A confidential transaction.
A transaction with contractual protection.
A loss transaction.
A transaction of interest entered into after 
November 1, 2006.
Note. Transactions with a brief asset hold-
ing period were removed from the definition of 
reportable transaction for transactions entered 
into after August 2, 2007.
Listed transaction.  A listed transaction is 
the same as, or substantially similar to, one of 
the types of transactions the IRS has deter-
mined to be a tax-avoidance transaction. These 
transactions have been identified in notices, 
regulations, and other published guidance is-
sued by the IRS. For a list of existing guidance, 
see Notice 2009-59 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 
2009-31, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2009­31_IRB/ar07.html. See Updates on re­
portable transactions , later, for updates on lis-
ted transactions.
Confidential transaction.  A confidential 
transaction is offered to you under conditions of 
confidentiality and for which you have paid an 
advisor a minimum fee. A transaction is offered 
under conditions of confidentiality if the advisor 
who is paid the fee places a limit on your disclo-
sure of the tax treatment or tax structure of the 
transaction and the limit protects the confiden-
tiality of the advisor's tax strategies. The trans-
action is treated as confidential even if the con-
ditions of confidentiality are not legally binding 
on you.
Transaction with contractual protection. 
Generally, a transaction with contractual protec-
tion is one in which you or a related party has 
the right to a full or partial refund of fees if all or 
part of the intended tax consequences of the 
transaction are not sustained, or a transaction 
for which the fees are contingent on your realiz-
ing the tax benefits from the transaction. For in-
formation on exceptions, see Revenue Proce-
dure 2007-20 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 
2007-7, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2007­07_IRB/ar15.html.
Loss transaction.  For individuals, a loss 
transaction is one that results in a deductible 
loss if the gross amount of the loss is at least $2 
million in a single tax year or $4 million in any 
combination of tax years. A loss from a foreign 
currency transaction under Internal Revenue 
Code section 988 is a loss transaction if the 
gross amount of the loss is at least $50,000 in a 
single tax year, whether or not the loss flows 
through from an S corporation or partnership.
Certain losses (such as losses from casual-
ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepted 
from this category and do not have to be repor-
ted on Form 8886. For information on other ex-
ceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2013-11 in 
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2013-2, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2013­02_IRB/ar09.html. See 
Updates on reportable transactions , later, for 
updates on loss transactions.
Transaction of interest.  A transaction of 
interest is a transaction entered into after No-
vember 1, 2006, that is the same as, or sub-
stantially similar to, one of the types of transac-
tions that the IRS has identified by notice, 
regulation, or other form of published guidance 
as a transaction of interest. The IRS has identi-
fied the following transactions of interest.
“Toggling” grantor trusts as described in 
Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007­36_IRB/
ar20.html.
Certain transactions involving contributions 
of a successor member interest in a limited 
liability company as described in Notice 
2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2007­36_IRB/ar19.html.
Certain transactions involving the sale or 
other disposition of all interests in a chari-
table remainder trust and claiming little or 
no taxable gain as described in Notice 
2008-99, 2008-47 I.R.B. 1194, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2008­47_IRB/ar11.html.
Certain transactions involving a U.S. tax-
payer owning controlled foreign corpora-
tions (CFCs) that hold stock of a lower-tier 
CFC through a domestic partnership to 
avoid reporting income as described in No-
tice 2009-7, 2009-3 I.R.B. 312, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2009­03_IRB/ar10.html.
Certain transactions denominated as an 
option, notional principal contract, forward 
contract, or other derivative contract (“bas-
ket contracts”) to receive a return based on 
the performance of a basket of referenced 
assets in an attempt to deliver income rec-
ognition and/or convert short-term capital 
gain and ordinary income to long-term cap-
ital gain as described in Notice 2015-74, 
2015-46 I.R.B. 663, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2015­46_IRB/ar10.html.
Transactions in which a taxpayer attempts 
to reduce aggregate taxable income of the 
taxpayer or related parties using contracts 
that the parties treat as insurance con-
tracts and a related company the parties 
treat as a captive insurance company 
(“section 831(b) micro-captive”) as descri-
bed in Notice 2016-66, 2016-47 I.R.B. 745, 
available at www.irs.gov/irb/2016­47_IRB/
ar07.html, as modified by Notice 2017-8, 
2017-3 I.R.B. 423, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2017­03_IRB/ar12.html.
Updates on reportable transactions.  For 
updates on listed transactions, loss transac-
tions, and transactions of interest, go to 
www.irs.gov/Businesses/Corporations/Abusive­
Tax­Shelters­and­Transactions.
Page 29 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions  Page 29

Penalties
Investing in an abusive tax shelter may lead to 
substantial expenses. First, the promoter gener-
ally charges a substantial fee. If your return is 
examined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is de-
termined, you will be faced with payment of 
more tax, interest on the underpayment, possi-
bly a 20%, 30%, or even 40% accuracy-related 
penalty, or a 75% civil fraud penalty. You may 
also be subject to the penalty for failure to pay 
tax. These penalties are explained in the follow-
ing paragraphs.
Accuracy-related penalties.  An accuracy-re-
lated penalty of 20% can be imposed for under-
payments of tax due to:
Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-
tions,
Substantial understatement of tax,
Substantial valuation misstatement (in-
creased to 40% for gross valuation mis-
statement),
Transaction lacking economic substance 
(increased to 40% for undisclosed transac-
tion lacking economic substance), or
Undisclosed foreign financial asset under-
statement (40% in all cases).
Except for a transaction lacking economic sub-
stance, this penalty will not be imposed if you 
can show you had reasonable cause for any un-
derstatement of tax and that you acted in good 
faith. Your failure to disclose a reportable trans-
action is a strong indication that you failed to act 
in good faith.
If you are charged an accuracy-related pen-
alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of 
the penalty from the due date of the return (in-
cluding extensions) to the date you pay the 
penalty.
The 20% penalties do not apply to any un-
derpayment attributable to a reportable transac-
tion understatement subject to an accuracy-re-
lated penalty (discussed later).
Negligence or disregard of rules or reg-
ulations. The penalty for negligence or disre-
gard of rules or regulations is imposed only on 
the part of the underpayment due to negligence 
or disregard of rules or regulations. The penalty 
will not be charged if you can show you had 
reasonable cause for understating your tax and 
that you acted in good faith.
Negligence includes any failure to make a 
reasonable attempt to comply with the provi-
sions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in-
cludes any failure to keep adequate books and 
records. A return position that has a reasonable 
basis is not negligence.
Disregard includes any careless, reckless, 
or intentional disregard of rules or regulations.
The penalty for disregard of rules and regu-
lations can be avoided if all the following are 
true.
You keep adequate books and records.
You have a reasonable basis for your posi-
tion on the tax issue.
You make an adequate disclosure of your 
position.
Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure and at-
tach it to your return. To disclose a position con-
trary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Use 
Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transaction 
(discussed earlier).
Substantial understatement of tax.  An 
understatement is considered to be substantial 
if it is more than the greater of:
10% of the tax required to be shown on the 
return, or
$5,000.
An “understatement” is the amount of tax re-
quired to be shown on your return for a tax year 
minus the amount of tax shown on the return, 
reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen-
erally means a decrease in the tax shown on 
your original return as the result of your filing an 
amended return or claim for refund.
For items other than tax shelters, you can 
file Form 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose 
items that could cause a substantial understate-
ment of income tax. In that way, you can avoid 
the substantial understatement penalty if you 
have a reasonable basis for your position on the 
tax issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a 
tax return does not reduce the amount of the 
understatement.
Also, the understatement penalty will not be 
imposed if you can show there was reasonable 
cause for the underpayment caused by the un-
derstatement and that you acted in good faith. 
An important factor in establishing reasonable 
cause and good faith will be the extent of your 
effort to determine your proper tax liability under 
the law.
Substantial valuation misstatement.  In 
general, you are liable for a 20% penalty for a 
substantial valuation misstatement if all the fol-
lowing are true.
The value or adjusted basis of any prop-
erty claimed on the return is 150% or more 
of the correct amount.
You underpaid your tax by more than 
$5,000 because of the misstatement.
You cannot establish that you had reason-
able cause for the underpayment and that 
you acted in good faith.
You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a 
gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate 
the value or the adjusted basis of property by 
200% or more of the amount determined to be 
correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%, 
instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid 
because of the gross valuation misstatement. 
The penalty rate is also 40% if the property's 
correct value or adjusted basis is zero.
Transaction lacking economic sub-
stance. The economic substance doctrine only 
applies to an individual that entered into a trans-
action in connection with a trade or business or 
an activity engaged in for the production of in-
come. For transactions entered into after March 
30, 2010, a transaction has economic sub-
stance for you as an individual taxpayer only if:
The transaction changes your economic 
position in a meaningful way (apart from 
federal income tax effects), or
You have a substantial purpose (apart 
from federal income tax effects) for enter-
ing into the transaction.
For purposes of determining whether eco-
nomic substance exists, a transaction's profit 
potential will only be taken into account if the 
present value of the reasonably expected 
pre-tax profit from the transaction is substantial 
compared to the present value of the expected 
net tax benefits that would be allowed if the 
transaction were respected.
If any part of your underpayment is due to 
any disallowance of claimed tax benefits by rea-
son of a transaction lacking economic sub-
stance or failing to meet the requirements of 
any similar rule of law, that part of your under-
payment will be subject to the 20% accuracy-re-
lated penalty even if you had a reasonable 
cause and acted in good faith concerning that 
part.
Additionally, the penalty increases to 40% if 
you do not adequately disclose on your return 
or in a statement attached to your return the rel-
evant facts affecting the tax treatment of a 
transaction that lacks economic substance. Rel-
evant facts include any facts affecting the tax 
treatment of the transaction.
Any excessive amount of an erroneous 
claim for an income tax refund or credit 
(other than a refund or credit related to 
the earned income credit) that results from a 
transaction found to be lacking economic sub­
stance will not be treated as having a reasona­
ble basis and could be subject to a 20% pen­
alty.
Undisclosed foreign financial asset un-
derstatement. For tax years beginning after 
March 18, 2010, you may be liable for a 40% 
penalty for an understatement of your tax liabil-
ity due to an undisclosed foreign financial asset. 
An undisclosed foreign financial asset is any 
asset for which an information return, required 
to be provided under Internal Revenue Code 
section 6038, 6038B, 6038D, 6046A, or 6048 
for any taxable year, is not provided. The pen-
alty applies to any part of an underpayment re-
lated to the following undisclosed foreign finan-
cial assets.
Any foreign business you control, reporta-
ble on Form 5471, Information Return of 
U.S. Persons With Respect To Certain 
Foreign Corporations, or Form 8865, Re-
turn of U.S. Persons With Respect to Cer-
tain Foreign Partnerships.
Certain transfers of property to a foreign 
corporation or partnership, reportable on 
Form 926, Return by a U.S. Transferor of 
Property to a Foreign Corporation, or cer-
tain distributions to a foreign person, re-
portable on Form 8865.
Your ownership interest in an otherwise 
undisclosed foreign financial asset, report-
able on Form 8275 or 8275-R. See Instruc-
tions for Form 8275 or Form 8275-R.
Instead of, or in addition to, Form 8275 
or 8275­R, you may have to file Form 
8938, Statement of Specified Foreign 
Financial Assets, with your tax return. See the 
Instructions for Form 8938 for details.
Your acquisition, disposition, or substantial 
change in ownership interest in a foreign 
partnership, reportable on Form 8865.
Creation or transfer of money or property 
to certain foreign trusts, reportable on 
Form 3520, Annual Return To Report 
Transactions With Foreign Trusts and Re-
ceipt of Certain Foreign Gifts.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 30 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30  Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The person 
who prepares an appraisal of the value of prop-
erty may have to pay a penalty if:
He or she knows, or reasonably should 
have known, that the appraisal would be 
used in connection with a return or claim 
for refund; and
The claimed value of the property on a re-
turn or claim for refund based on that ap-
praisal results in a substantial valuation 
misstatement or a gross valuation mis-
statement as discussed earlier.
For details on the penalty amount and excep-
tions, see Pub. 561.
Penalty for failure to disclose a reportable 
transaction. If you fail to include any required 
information regarding a reportable transaction 
(discussed earlier) on a return or statement, you 
may have to pay a penalty of 75% of the de-
crease in tax shown on your return as a result of 
such transaction (or that would have resulted if 
the transaction were respected for federal tax 
purposes). For an individual, the minimum pen-
alty is $5,000 and the maximum is $10,000 (or 
$100,000 for a listed transaction). This penalty 
is in addition to any other penalty that may be 
imposed.
The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty 
for failing to disclose a reportable transaction 
under certain limited circumstances but cannot 
rescind the penalty for failing to disclose a listed 
transaction. For information on rescission, see 
Revenue Procedure 2007-21 in Internal Reve-
nue Bulletin 2007-9 available at www.irs.gov/
irb/2007­09_IRB/ar12.html.
Accuracy-related penalty for a reportable 
transaction understatement.  If you have a 
reportable transaction understatement, you 
may have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of the 
amount of that understatement. This applies to 
any item due to a listed transaction or other re-
portable transaction with a significant purpose 
of avoiding or evading federal income tax. The 
penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of 
any reportable transaction understatement if the 
transaction was not properly disclosed. You 
may not have to pay the 20% penalty if you 
meet the strengthened reasonable cause and 
good faith exception. The reasonable cause 
and good faith exception does not apply to any 
part of a reportable transaction understatement 
attributable to one or more transactions that 
lack economic substance.
This penalty does not apply to the part of an 
understatement on which the fraud penalty, 
gross valuation misstatement penalty, or pen-
alty for nondisclosure of noneconomic sub-
stance transactions is imposed.
Civil fraud penalty.  If any underpayment of 
tax on your return is due to fraud, a penalty of 
75% of the underpayment will be added to your 
tax.
Joint return.  The fraud penalty on a joint 
return applies to a spouse only if some part of 
the underpayment is due to the fraud of that 
spouse.
Failure to pay tax.  If a deficiency is assessed 
and is not paid within 10 days of the demand for 
payment, an investor can be penalized with up 
to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay con-
tinues.
Whether To Invest
In light of the adverse tax consequences and 
the substantial amount of penalties and interest 
that will result if the claimed tax benefits are dis-
allowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-
ments carefully and seek competent legal and 
financial advice.
3.
Investment 
Expenses
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 At-risk rules
 Passive activity
 Portfolio income
 
Topics
This chapter discusses:
Limits on Deductions,
Interest Expenses,
Bond Premium Amortization,
Expenses of Producing Income,
Nondeductible Expenses,
How To Report Investment Expenses, and
When To Report Investment Expenses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Business Expenses
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Tax Rules for Children and 
Dependents
Form (and Instructions)
Itemized 
Deductions
Investment Interest Expense 
Deduction
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for infor-
mation about getting these publications and 
forms.
Limits on Deductions
Your deductions for investment expenses may 
be limited by:
The at-risk rules,
  535
  925
  929
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  4952
The passive activity loss limits,
The limit on investment interest, or
The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous 
itemized deductions.
The at-risk rules and passive activity rules 
are explained briefly in this section. The limit on 
investment interest is explained later in this 
chapter under Interest Expenses . The 2% limit 
is explained later in this chapter under Expen­
ses of Producing Income.
At-risk rules.  Special at-risk rules apply to 
most income-producing activities. These rules 
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the 
amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, 
this is the cash and the adjusted basis of prop-
erty you contribute to the activity. It also in-
cludes money you borrow for use in the activity 
if you are personally liable for repayment or if 
you use property not used in the activity as se-
curity for the loan. For more information, see 
Pub. 925.
Passive activity losses and credits.  The 
amount of losses and tax credits you can claim 
from passive activities is limited. Generally, you 
are allowed to deduct passive activity losses 
only up to the amount of your passive activity in-
come. Also, you can use credits from passive 
activities only against tax on the income from 
passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-
tain activities, such as rental real estate activi-
ties.
Passive activity. A passive activity gener-
ally is any activity involving the conduct of any 
trade or business in which you do not materially 
participate and any rental activity. However, if 
you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-
ity is not a passive activity if both of the follow-
ing are true.
More than one-half of the personal serv-
ices you perform during the year in all 
trades or businesses are performed in real 
property trades or businesses in which you 
materially participate.
You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
ices during the year in real property trades 
or businesses in which you materially par-
ticipate.
The term “trade or business” generally means 
any activity that involves the conduct of a trade 
or business, is conducted in anticipation of 
starting a trade or business, or involves certain 
research or experimental expenditures. How-
ever, it does not include rental activities or cer-
tain activities treated as incidental to holding 
property for investment.
You are considered to materially participate 
in an activity if you are involved on a regular, 
continuous, and substantial basis in the opera-
tions of the activity.
Other income (nonpassive income).  
Generally, you can use losses from passive ac-
tivities only to offset income from passive activi-
ties. You cannot use passive activity losses to 
offset your other income, such as your wages or 
your portfolio income. Portfolio income includes 
gross income from interest, dividends, annui-
ties, or royalties that is not derived in the ordi-
nary course of a trade or business. It also in-
cludes gains or losses (not derived in the 
ordinary course of a trade or business) from the 
Page 31 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses  Page 31

sale or trade of property (other than an interest 
in a passive activity) producing portfolio income 
or held for investment. This includes capital 
gain distributions from mutual funds (and other 
regulated investment companies) and real es-
tate investment trusts.
You cannot use passive activity losses to 
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
Expenses. Do not include in the computa-
tion of your passive activity income or loss:
Expenses (other than interest) that are 
clearly and directly allocable to your portfo-
lio income, or
Interest expense properly allocable to port-
folio income.
However, this interest and other expenses may 
be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-
plained in the rest of this chapter.
Additional information. For more informa-
tion about determining and reporting income 
and losses from passive activities, see Pub. 
925.
Interest Expenses
This section discusses interest expenses you 
may be able to deduct as an investor.
For information on business interest, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 535.
You cannot deduct personal interest expen-
ses other than qualified home mortgage inter-
est, as explained in Pub. 936, Home Mortgage 
Interest Deduction, and interest on certain stu-
dent loans, as explained in Pub. 970.
Investment Interest
If you borrow money to buy property you hold 
for investment, the interest you pay is invest-
ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-
est subject to the limit discussed later. How-
ever, you cannot deduct interest you incurred to 
produce tax-exempt income. See Tax­exempt 
income, later. You also cannot deduct interest 
expenses on straddles discussed under Interest 
expense and carrying charges on straddles , 
later.
Investment interest does not include any 
qualified home mortgage interest or any interest 
taken into account in computing income or loss 
from a passive activity.
Investment property. Property held for invest-
ment includes property that produces interest, 
dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived in 
the ordinary course of a trade or business. It 
also includes property that produces gain or 
loss (not derived in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business) from the sale or trade of 
property producing these types of income or 
held for investment (other than an interest in a 
passive activity). Investment property also in-
cludes an interest in a trade or business activity 
in which you did not materially participate (other 
than a passive activity).
Partners, shareholders, and beneficia-
ries. To determine your investment interest, 
combine your share of investment interest from 
a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust 
with your other investment interest.
Allocation of Interest Expense
If you borrow money for business or personal 
purposes as well as for investment, you must al-
locate the debt among those purposes. Only 
the interest expense on the part of the debt 
used for investment purposes is treated as in-
vestment interest. The allocation is not affected 
by the use of property that secures the debt.
Example 1.  You borrow $10,000 and use 
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 
to buy items for your home. Since 80% of the 
debt is used for, and allocated to, investment 
purposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is in-
vestment interest. The other 20% is nondeducti-
ble personal interest.
Debt proceeds received in cash.  If you re-
ceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are 
generally not treated as investment property.
Debt proceeds deposited in account.  If you 
deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de-
posit is treated as investment property, regard-
less of whether the account bears interest. But, 
if you withdraw the funds and use them for an-
other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to 
determine the amount considered to be for in-
vestment purposes.
Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you 
borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi-
ately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not 
buy the household items until June 1. You had 
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no 
other transactions on the bank account until 
June. You did not sell the stock, and you made 
no principal payments on the debt. You paid in-
terest from another account. The $8,000 is 
treated as being used for an investment pur-
pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for 
an investment purpose for the 3-month period. 
Your total interest expense for 3 months on this 
debt is investment interest. In June, when you 
spend the $2,000 for household items, you 
must begin to allocate 80% of the debt and the 
interest expense to investment purposes and 
20% to personal purposes.
Amounts paid within 30 days.  If you re-
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can 
treat any payment (up to the amount of the pro-
ceeds) made from any account you own, or 
from cash, as made from those proceeds. This 
applies to any payment made within 30 days 
before or after the proceeds are received in 
cash or deposited in your account.
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, 
you can treat the payment as made on the date 
you received the cash instead of the date you 
actually made the payment.
Payments on debt may require new alloca-
tion. As you repay a debt used for more than 
one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. 
You must first reduce the amount allocated to 
personal purposes by the repayment. You then 
reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is 
for investment purposes.
Example 3.  If, in Example 2 , you repay 
$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is 
applied against the amount allocated to per-
sonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
cated as $8,000 for investment purposes and 
$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next re-
allocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷ $9,500) 
of the debt and the interest expense is allocated 
to investment.
Pass-through entities.  If you use borrowed 
funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S 
corporation, then the interest on those funds 
must be allocated based on the assets of the 
entity. If you contribute to the capital of the en-
tity, you can make the allocation using any rea-
sonable method.
Additional allocation rules.  For more infor-
mation about allocating interest expense, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 535.
When To Deduct
Investment Interest
If you use the cash method of accounting, you 
must pay the interest before you can deduct it. 
If you use an accrual method of accounting, 
you can deduct interest over the period it ac-
crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an ex-
ception, see Unpaid expenses owed to related 
party, later in this chapter.
Example. You borrowed $1,000 on August 
22, 2016, payable in 90 days at 4% interest. On 
November 21, 2016, you paid this with a new 
note for $1,010, due on February 20, 2017. If 
you use the cash method of accounting, you 
cannot deduct any part of the $10 interest on 
your return for 2016 because you did not ac-
tually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you 
may be able to deduct a portion of the interest 
on the loans through December 31, 2016, on 
your return for 2016.
Interest paid in advance.  Generally, if you 
pay interest in advance for a period that goes 
beyond the end of the tax year, you must 
spread the interest over the tax years to which it 
belongs under the OID rules discussed in chap-
ter 1. You can deduct in each year only the in-
terest for that year.
Interest on margin accounts.  If you are a 
cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interest 
on margin accounts to buy taxable securities as 
investment interest in the year you paid it. You 
are considered to have paid interest on these 
accounts only when you actually pay the broker 
or when payment becomes available to the 
broker through your account. Payment may be-
come available to the broker through your ac-
count when the broker collects dividends or in-
terest for your account, or sells securities held 
for you or received from you.
You cannot deduct any interest on money 
borrowed for personal reasons.
Limit on interest deduction for market dis-
count bonds. The amount you can deduct for 
interest expense you paid or accrued during the 
year to buy or carry a market discount bond 
may be limited. This limit does not apply if you 
Page 32 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32  Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

accrue the market discount and include it in 
your income currently.
Under this limit, the interest is deductible 
only to the extent it is more than:
1. The total interest and OID includible in 
gross income for the bond for the year, 
plus
2. The market discount for the number of 
days you held the bond during the year.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules 
for figuring accrued market discount in chap-
ter 1 under Market Discount Bonds.
Interest not deducted due to limit.  In the 
year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct 
any interest expense you were not allowed to 
deduct in earlier years because of the limit.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interest 
expense before the year of disposition. You 
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-
pense in any year before the year you dispose 
of the bond, up to your net interest income from 
the bond during the year. The rest of the disal-
lowed interest expense remains deductible in 
the year you dispose of the bond.
Net interest income. This is the interest in-
come (including OID) from the bond that you in-
clude in income for the year, minus the interest 
expense paid or accrued during the year to pur-
chase or carry the bond.
Limit on interest deduction for short-term 
obligations. If the current income inclusion 
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount on 
Short­Term Obligations do not apply to you, the 
amount you can deduct for interest expense 
you paid or accrued during the year to buy or 
carry a short-term obligation is limited.
The interest is deductible only to the extent it 
is more than:
The amount of acquisition discount or OID 
on the obligation for the tax year, plus
The amount of any interest payable on the 
obligation for the year that is not included 
in income because of your accounting 
method (other than interest taken into ac-
count in determining the amount of acquis-
ition discount or OID).
The method of determining acquisition discount 
and OID for short-term obligations is discussed 
in chapter 1 under Discount on Short­Term Ob­
ligations.
Interest not deducted due to limit.  In the 
year you dispose of the obligation, or, if you 
choose, in another year in which you have net 
interest income from the obligation, you can de-
duct any interest expense you were not allowed 
to deduct for an earlier year because of the 
limit. Follow the same rules provided in the ear-
lier discussion under Limit on interest deduction 
for market discount bonds, earlier.
Limit on Deduction
Generally, your deduction for investment inter-
est expense is limited to your net investment in-
come.
You can carry over the amount of invest-
ment interest you could not deduct because of 
this limit to the next tax year. The interest car-
ried over is treated as investment interest paid 
or accrued in that next year.
You can carry over disallowed investment 
interest to the next tax year even if it is more 
than your taxable income in the year the interest 
was paid or accrued.
Net Investment Income
Determine the amount of your net investment 
income by subtracting your investment expen-
ses (other than interest expense) from your in-
vestment income.
Investment income.  This generally includes 
your gross income from property held for invest-
ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, 
and royalties). Investment income does not in-
clude Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also 
does not include qualified dividends or net capi-
tal gain unless you choose to include them.
Choosing to include qualified dividends. 
Investment income generally does not include 
qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1. 
However, you can choose to include all or part 
of your qualified dividends in investment in-
come.
You make this choice by completing Form 
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any of your qualified 
dividends in investment income, you must re-
duce your qualified dividends that are eligible 
for the lower capital gains tax rates by the same 
amount.
Choosing to include net capital gain.  In-
vestment income generally does not include net 
capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
erty (including capital gain distributions from 
mutual funds). However, you can choose to in-
clude all or part of your net capital gain in in-
vestment income.
You make this choice by completing Form 
4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any of your net cap-
ital gain in investment income, you must reduce 
your net capital gain that is eligible for the lower 
capital gains tax rates by the same amount.
For more information about the capital gains 
rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Before making either choice, consider 
the overall effect on your tax liability. 
Compare your tax if you make one or 
both of these choices with your tax if you do not.
Investment income of child reported on pa-
rent's return. Investment income includes the 
part of your child's interest and dividend income 
you choose to report on your return. If the child 
does not have qualified dividends, Alaska Per-
manent Fund dividends, or capital gain distribu-
tions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814. 
Include it on line 4a of Form 4952.
Example. Your 8-year-old son has interest 
income of $2,200, which you choose to report 
on your own return. You enter $2,200 on Form 
8814, lines 1a and 4, and $100 on lines 6 and 
12 and complete Part II. Also enter $100 on 
Form 1040, line 21. Your investment income in-
cludes this $100.
TIP
Child's qualified dividends.  If part of the 
amount you report is your child's qualified divi-
dends, that part (which is reported on Form 
1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-
vestment income. However, you can choose to 
include all or part of it in investment income, as 
explained under Choosing to include qualified 
dividends, earlier.
Your investment income also includes the 
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, 
the reduced amount figured next under Child's 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends. If part of the amount you report is your 
child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that 
part does not count as investment income. To 
figure the amount of your child's income that 
you can consider your investment income, start 
with the amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply 
that amount by a percentage that is equal to the 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by 
the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract 
the result from the amount on Form 8814, 
line 12.
Example. Your 10-year-old child has taxa-
ble interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-
manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose 
to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 
on Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, and 
$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $3,900 on 
Form 8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, 
line 21. You figure the amount of your child's in-
come that you can consider your investment in-
come as follows.
$3,900 − ($3,900 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) = 
$2,600
You include the result, $2,600, on Form 4952, 
line 4a.
Child's capital gain distributions.  If part 
of the amount you report is your child's capital 
gain distributions, that part (which is reported 
on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, or Form 
1040, line 13) generally does not count as in-
vestment income. However, you can choose to 
include all or part of it in investment income, as 
explained in Choosing to include net capital 
gain, earlier.
Your investment income also includes the 
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, 
the reduced amount figured under Child's 
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).
Investment expenses.  Investment expenses 
are your allowed deductions (other than interest 
expense) directly connected with the production 
of investment income. Investment expenses 
that are included as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) are al-
lowable deductions after applying the 2% limit 
that applies to miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions. Use the smaller of:
The investment expenses included on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23; or
The amount on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 27.
See Expenses of Producing Income , later, for a 
discussion of the 2% limit.
Page 33 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses  Page 33

Losses from passive activities.  Income or 
expenses that you used in computing income or 
loss from a passive activity are not included in 
determining your investment income or invest-
ment expenses (including investment interest 
expense). See Pub. 925 for information about 
passive activities.
Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership 
that operates a business. However, he does not 
materially participate in the partnership's busi-
ness. Ted's interest in the partnership is consid-
ered a passive activity.
Ted's investment income from interest and 
dividends (other than qualified dividends) is 
$10,000. His investment expenses (other than 
interest) are $3,200 after taking into account the 
2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions. 
His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted 
also has income from the partnership of $2,000.
Ted figures his net investment income and 
the limit on his investment interest expense de-
duction in the following way.
Total investment income .............. $10,000
Minus: Investment expenses (other than 
interest) ......................... 3,200
Net investment income ............... $6,800
Deductible investment interest expense for 
the year ......................... $6,800
The $2,000 of income from the passive ac-
tivity is not used in determining Ted's net invest-
ment income. His investment interest deduction 
for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount of 
his net investment income.
Form 4952
Use Form 4952 to figure your deduction for in-
vestment interest. See Form 4952 for more in-
formation.
Exception to use of Form 4952.  You do not 
have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your 
return if you meet all of the following tests.
Your investment interest expense is not 
more than your investment income from in-
terest and ordinary dividends minus any 
qualified dividends.
You do not have any other deductible in-
vestment expenses.
You have no carryover of investment inter-
est expense from 2015.
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct 
all of your investment interest.
Bond Premium 
Amortization
If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the 
bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to 
amortize the premium. This generally means 
that each year, over the life of the bond, you 
use a part of the premium to reduce the amount 
of interest includible in your income. If you 
make this choice, you must reduce your basis in 
the bond by the amortization for the year.
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you 
must amortize the premium. This amortized 
amount is not deductible in determining taxable 
income. However, each year you must reduce 
your basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest 
otherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by 
the amortization for the year.
For a tax-exempt covered security acquired 
at a premium, box 13 shows the amount of 
bond premium amortization allocable to the in-
terest paid during the tax year. If a net amount 
of interest appears in box 8 or 9, whichever is 
applicable, box 13 will be blank.
Bond premium. Bond premium is the amount 
by which your basis in the bond right after you 
get it is more than the total of all amounts paya-
ble on the bond after you get it (other than pay-
ments of qualified stated interest). For example, 
a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 generally 
would have a $50 premium if you buy it for 
$1,050.
Special rules to determine amounts pay-
able on a bond. For special rules that apply to 
determine the amounts payable on a variable 
rate bond, an inflation-indexed debt instrument, 
a bond that provides for certain alternative pay-
ment schedules (for example, a bond callable 
prior to the stated maturity date of the bond), or 
a bond that provides for remote or incidental 
contingencies, see Regulations section 
1.171-3.
Basis. In general, your basis for figuring 
bond premium amortization is the same as your 
basis for figuring any loss on the sale of the 
bond. However, you may need to use a different 
basis for:
Convertible bonds,
Bonds you got in a trade, and
Bonds whose basis has to be determined 
using the basis of the person who transfer-
red the bond to you.
See Regulations section 1.171-1(e).
Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone 
who holds them mainly for sale to customers in 
the ordinary course of a trade or business or 
who would properly include bonds in inventory 
at the close of the tax year) cannot claim a de-
duction for amortizable bond premium.
See section 75 of the Internal Revenue 
Code for the treatment of bond premium by a 
dealer in tax-exempt bonds.
How To Figure
Amortization
For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, 
you must amortize bond premium using a con-
stant yield method on the basis of the bond's 
yield to maturity, determined by using the 
bond's basis and compounding at the close of 
each accrual period.
Constant yield method.  Figure the bond pre-
mium amortization for each accrual period as 
follows.
Step 1: Determine your yield.  Your yield 
is the discount rate that, when used in figuring 
the present value of all remaining payments to 
be made on the bond (including payments of 
qualified stated interest), produces an amount 
equal to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield 
as of the date you got the bond. It must be con-
stant over the term of the bond and must be fig-
ured to at least two decimal places when ex-
pressed as a percentage.
If you do not know the yield, consult your 
broker or tax advisor. Databases available to 
them are likely to show the yield at the date of 
purchase.
Step 2: Determine the accrual periods. 
You can choose the accrual periods to use. 
They may be of any length and may vary in 
length over the term of the bond, but each ac-
crual period can be no longer than 1 year and 
each scheduled payment of principal or interest 
must occur either on the first or the final day of 
an accrual period. The computation is simplest 
if accrual periods are the same as the intervals 
between interest payment dates.
Step 3: Determine the bond premium for 
the accrual period.  To do this, multiply your 
adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of 
the accrual period by your yield. Then subtract 
the result from the qualified stated interest for 
the period.
Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-
ning of the first accrual period is the same as 
your basis. After that, it is your basis decreased 
by the amount of bond premium amortized for 
earlier periods and the amount of any payment 
previously made on the bond other than a pay-
ment of qualified stated interest.
Example. On February 1, 2015, you bought 
a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a 
stated principal amount of $100,000, payable at 
maturity on February 1, 2022, making your pre-
mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The 
bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000 
on February 1 of each year. Your yield is 
8.07439% compounded annually. You choose 
to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-
ary 1 of each year. To find your bond premium 
amortization for the accrual period ending on 
February 1, 2016, you multiply the adjusted ac-
quisition price at the beginning of the period 
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract 
the result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated 
interest for the period ($10,000), you find that 
your bond premium amortization for the period 
is $1,118.17.
Special rules to figure amortization.  For 
special rules to figure the bond premium amorti-
zation on a variable rate bond, an inflation-in-
dexed debt instrument, a bond that provides for 
certain alternative payment schedules (for ex-
ample, a bond callable prior to the stated matur-
ity date of the bond), or a bond that provides for 
remote or incidental contingencies, see Regula-
tions section 1.171-3.
Bonds Issued Before
September 28, 1985
For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-
mium using any reasonable method. Reasona-
ble methods include:
The straight-line method, and
The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.
Page 34 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34  Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Straight-line method. Under this method, the 
amount of your bond premium amortization is 
the same each month. Divide the number of 
months you held the bond during the year by 
the number of months from the beginning of the 
tax year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to 
the date of maturity or earlier call date. Then 
multiply the result by the bond premium (re-
duced by any bond premium amortization 
claimed in earlier years). This gives you your 
bond premium amortization for the year.
Revenue Ruling 82-10 method.  Under this 
method, the amount of your bond premium am-
ortization increases each month over the life of 
the bond. This method is explained in Revenue 
Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46.
Choosing To Amortize
You choose to amortize the premium on taxable 
bonds by reporting the amortization for the year 
on your income tax return for the first tax year 
you want the choice to apply. You should attach 
a statement to your return that you are making 
this choice under section 171. See How To Re­
port Amortization, next.
This choice is binding for the year you make 
it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable 
bonds you own in the year you make the choice 
and also to those you acquire in later years.
You can change your decision to amortize 
bond premium only with the written approval of 
the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115. 
For more information on requesting approval, 
see section 5 of Revenue Procedure 2016-29 in 
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2016-21. You can find 
Revenue Procedure 2016-29 at www.irs.gov/
irb/2016­21_IRB/ar13.html.
How To Report
Amortization
Subtract the bond premium amortization from 
your interest income from these bonds.
Report the bond's interest on Schedule B 
(Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Under your last 
entry on line 1, put a subtotal of all interest listed 
on line 1. Below this subtotal, print “ABP Adjust-
ment,” and the total interest you received. Sub-
tract this amount from the subtotal, and enter 
the result on line 2.
Bond premium amortization more than in-
terest. If the amount of your bond premium 
amortization for an accrual period is more than 
the qualified stated interest for the period, you 
can deduct the difference as a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 28.
But your deduction is limited to the amount 
by which your total interest inclusions on the 
bond in prior accrual periods is more than your 
total bond premium deductions on the bond in 
prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct 
because of this limit can be carried forward to 
the next accrual period.
Pre-1998 election to amortize bond pre-
mium. Generally, if you first elected to amor-
tize bond premium before 1998, the above 
treatment of the premium does not apply to 
bonds you acquired before 1988.
Bonds acquired before October 23, 
1986. The amortization of the premium on 
these bonds is a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction not subject to the 2%-of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit.
Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, 
but before 1988.  The amortization of the pre-
mium on these bonds is investment interest ex-
pense subject to the investment interest limit, 
unless you choose to treat it as an offset to in-
terest income on the bond.
Expenses of
Producing Income
You deduct investment expenses (other than in-
terest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To be de-
ductible, these expenses must be ordinary and 
necessary expenses paid or incurred:
To produce or collect income, or
To manage property held for producing in-
come.
The expenses must be directly related to the in-
come or income-producing property, and the in-
come must be taxable to you.
The deduction for most income-producing 
expenses is subject to a 2% limit that also ap-
plies to certain other miscellaneous itemized 
deductions. The amount deductible is limited to 
the total of these miscellaneous deductions that 
is more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.
For information on how to report expenses 
of producing income, see How To Report In­
vestment Expenses, later.
Attorney or accounting fees.  You can de-
duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-
sary to produce or collect taxable income. How-
ever, in some cases, attorney or accounting 
fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis 
of Investment Property in chapter 4.
Automatic investment service and dividend 
reinvestment plans.  A bank may offer its 
checking account customers an automatic in-
vestment service so that, for a charge, each 
customer can choose to invest a part of the 
checking account each month in common 
stock. Or a bank that is a dividend disbursing 
agent for a number of publicly owned corpora-
tions may set up an automatic dividend rein-
vestment service. Through that service, cash 
dividends are reinvested in more shares of 
stock after the bank deducts a service charge.
A corporation in which you own stock also 
may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This 
plan lets you choose to use your dividends to 
buy more shares of stock in the corporation in-
stead of receiving the dividends in cash.
You can deduct the monthly service charge 
you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic 
investment service. If you participate in a divi-
dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any 
service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
dends before the dividends are used to buy 
more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in the 
year you pay them.
Clerical help and office rent. You can deduct 
office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, 
you incurred in connection with your invest-
ments and collecting the taxable income on 
your investments.
Cost of replacing missing securities.  To re-
place your taxable securities that are mislaid, 
lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to post 
an indemnity bond. You can deduct the pre-
mium you pay to buy the indemnity bond and 
the related incidental expenses.
You may, however, get a refund of part of 
the bond premium if the missing securities are 
recovered within a specified time. Under certain 
types of insurance policies, you can recover 
some of the expenses.
If you receive the refund in the tax year you 
pay the amounts, you can deduct only the dif-
ference between the expenses paid and the 
amount refunded. If the refund is made in a later 
tax year, you must include the refund in income 
in the year you received it, but only to the extent 
that the expenses decreased your tax in the 
year you deducted them.
Fees to collect income.  You can deduct fees 
you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar 
agent to collect investment income, such as 
your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your 
dividends on shares of stock.
Fees to buy or sell.  You cannot deduct a 
fee you pay to a broker to acquire investment 
property, such as stocks or bonds. You must 
add the fee to the cost of the property. See Ba­
sis of Investment Property in chapter 4.
You cannot deduct any broker's fees, com-
missions, or option premiums you pay (or that 
were netted out) in connection with the sale of 
investment property. They can be used only to 
figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting 
Capital Gains and Losses , in chapter 4, for 
more information about the treatment of these 
sale expenses.
Investment counsel and advice. You can de-
duct fees you pay for counsel and advice about 
investments that produce taxable income. This 
includes amounts you pay for investment advi-
sory services.
Safe deposit box rent.  You can deduct rent 
you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the 
box to store taxable income-producing stocks, 
bonds, or other investment-related papers and 
documents. If you also use the box to store 
tax-exempt securities or personal items, you 
can deduct only part of the rent. See Tax­ex­
empt income, later, to figure what part you can 
deduct.
State and local transfer taxes.  You cannot 
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you 
pay when you buy or sell securities. If you pay 
these transfer taxes when you buy securities, 
you must treat them as part of the cost of the 
property. If you pay these transfer taxes when 
you sell securities, you must treat them as a re-
duction in the amount realized.
Page 35 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses  Page 35

Trustee's commissions for revocable trust.
If you set up a revocable trust and have its in-
come distributed to you, you can deduct the 
commission you pay the trustee for managing 
the trust to the extent it is to produce or collect 
taxable income or to manage property. How-
ever, you cannot deduct any part of the com-
mission used for producing or collecting tax-ex-
empt income or for managing property that 
produces tax-exempt income.
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the 
commissions for several years in advance, you 
must deduct a part of the commission each 
year. You cannot deduct the entire amount in 
the year you pay it.
Investment expenses from pass-through 
entities. If you hold an interest in a partner-
ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage in-
vestment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly of-
fered mutual fund, you can deduct your share of 
that entity's investment expenses. A partnership 
or S corporation will show your share of these 
expenses on your Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). A nonpublicly of-
fered mutual fund will indicate your share of 
these expenses in box 5 of Form 1099-DIV. 
Publicly offered mutual funds are discussed 
later.
If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-
penses relating to your residual interest invest-
ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 
1066), line 3b. Any expenses relating to your 
regular interest investment will appear in box 5 
of Form 1099-INT or box 9 of Form 1099-OID.
Report your share of these investment ex-
penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to 
the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other 
investment expenses.
Including mutual fund or REMIC expen-
ses in income.  Your share of the investment 
expenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered 
mutual fund, as described above, are consid-
ered to be indirect deductions through that 
pass-through entity. You must include in your 
gross income an amount equal to the expenses 
allocated to you, whether or not you are able to 
claim a deduction for those expenses. If you are 
a shareholder in a nonpublicly offered mutual 
fund, you must include on your return the full 
amount of ordinary dividends or other distribu-
tions of stock, as shown in box 1a of Form 
1099-DIV. If you are a residual interest holder in 
a REMIC, you must report as ordinary income 
on Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts 
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b 
and 3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest 
holder, you must include the amount of any ex-
pense allocation you received on Form 1040, 
line 8a.
Publicly offered mutual funds.  Most mutual 
funds are publicly offered. These mutual funds, 
generally, are traded on an established securi-
ties exchange. These funds do not pass invest-
ment expenses through to you. Instead, the div-
idend income they report to you in box 1a of 
Form 1099-DIV is already reduced by your 
share of investment expenses. As a result, you 
cannot deduct the expenses on your return.
Include the amount from box 1a of Form 
1099-DIV in your income.
A publicly offered mutual fund is one 
that:
1. Is continuously offered pursuant to a pub­
lic offering,
2. Is regularly traded on an established se­
curities market, and
3. Is held by or for no fewer than 500 persons 
at any time during the year.
Contact your mutual fund if you are not sure 
whether it is publicly offered.
Nondeductible 
Expenses
Some expenses that you incur as an investor 
are not deductible.
Stockholders' meetings.  You cannot deduct 
transportation and other expenses you pay to 
attend stockholders' meetings of companies in 
which you have no interest other than owning 
stock. This is true even if your purpose in at-
tending is to get information that would be use-
ful in making further investments.
Investment-related seminar. You cannot de-
duct expenses for attending a convention, sem-
inar, or similar meeting for investment purpo-
ses.
Single-premium life insurance, endowment, 
and annuity contracts. You cannot deduct in-
terest on money you borrow to buy or carry a 
single-premium life insurance, endowment, or 
annuity contract.
Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-
mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain or 
continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct 
any interest on the loan that is collateralized by 
the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-
est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-
rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the 
lesser of the amount of the annuity contract 
used as collateral or the amount of the loan.
Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you can-
not deduct interest on money you borrow to buy 
or carry a life insurance, endowment, or annuity 
contract if you plan to systematically borrow 
part or all of the increases in the cash value of 
the contract. This rule applies to the interest on 
the total amount borrowed to buy or carry the 
contract, not just the interest on the borrowed 
increases in the cash value.
Tax-exempt income.  You cannot deduct ex-
penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-
come. Nor can you deduct interest on money 
you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities or 
shares in a mutual fund or other regulated in-
vestment company that distributes only ex-
empt-interest dividends.
Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing 
a deduction for interest expenses on tax-ex-
empt securities applies to amounts you pay in 
connection with personal property used in a 
short sale or amounts paid by others for the use 
TIP
of any collateral in connection with the short 
sale. However, it does not apply to the expen-
ses you incur if you deposit cash as collateral 
for the property used in the short sale and the 
cash does not earn a material return during the 
period of the sale. Short sales are discussed in 
Short Sales in chapter 4.
Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxa-
ble income. You may have expenses that are 
for both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you 
cannot specifically identify what part of the ex-
penses is for each type of income, you can di-
vide the expenses, using reasonable propor-
tions based on facts and circumstances. You 
must attach a statement to your return showing 
how you divided the expenses and stating that 
each deduction claimed is not based on tax-ex-
empt income.
One accepted method for dividing expenses 
is to do it in the same proportion that each type 
of income is to the total income. If the expenses 
relate in part to capital gains and losses, include 
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring this pro-
portion. To find the part of the expenses that is 
for the tax-exempt income, divide your tax-ex-
empt income by the total income and multiply 
your expenses by the result.
Example. You received $6,000 interest; 
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxa-
ble. In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-
penses. You cannot specifically identify the 
amount of each expense item that is for each in-
come item, so you must divide your expenses. 
80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided by 
$6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for the 
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400 
(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct 
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because they 
are for the taxable interest.
State income taxes.  If you itemize your 
deductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-
come taxes on interest income that is exempt 
from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct, 
as either taxes or investment expenses, state 
income taxes on other exempt income.
Interest expense and carrying charges on 
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and car-
rying charges allocable to personal property 
that is part of a straddle. The nondeductible in-
terest and carrying charges are added to the 
basis of the straddle property. However, this 
treatment does not apply if:
All the offsetting positions making up the 
straddle either consist of one or more 
qualified covered call options and the op-
tioned stock, or consist of section 1256 
contracts (and the straddle is not part of a 
larger straddle); or
The straddle is a hedging transaction.
For information about straddles, including defi-
nitions of the terms used in this discussion, see 
Straddles in chapter 4.
Interest includes any amount you pay or in-
cur in connection with personal property used in 
a short sale. However, you must first apply the 
rules discussed in Payments in lieu of divi­
dends, later.
To determine the interest on market dis-
count bonds and short-term obligations that are 
part of a straddle, you must first apply the rules 
Page 36 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36  Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

discussed under Limit on interest deduction for 
market discount bonds and Limit on interest de­
duction for short­term obligations, earlier.
Nondeductible amount.  Figure the non-
deductible interest and carrying charges on 
straddle property as follows.
1. Add:
a. Interest on indebtedness incurred or 
continued to buy or carry the personal 
property, and
b. All other amounts (including charges 
to insure, store, or transport the per-
sonal property) paid or incurred to 
carry the personal property.
2. Subtract from the amount in (1):
a. Interest (including OID) includible in 
gross income for the year on the per-
sonal property,
b. Any income from the personal prop-
erty treated as ordinary income on the 
disposition of short-term government 
obligations or as ordinary income un-
der the market discount and 
short-term bond provisions — see 
Discount on Debt Instruments in 
chapter 1,
c. The dividends includible in gross in-
come for the year from the personal 
property, and
d. Any payment on a loan of the per-
sonal property for use in a short sale 
that is includible in gross income.
Basis adjustment.  Add the nondeductible 
amount to the basis of your straddle property.
How To Report
Investment Expenses
To deduct your investment expenses, you must 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). 
Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
pense on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 14. In-
clude any deductible short sale expenses. (See 
Short Sales  in chapter 4 for information on 
these expenses.) Also attach a completed Form 
4952 if you used that form to figure your invest-
ment interest expense.
Enter the total amount of your other invest-
ment expenses (other than interest expenses) 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23. List the 
type and amount of each expense on the dotted 
lines next to line 23. (If necessary, you can 
show the required information on an attached 
statement.)
For information on how to report amortizable 
bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza­
tion, earlier in this chapter.
When To Report 
Investment Expenses
If you use the cash method to report income 
and expenses, you generally deduct your 
expenses, except for certain prepaid interest, in 
the year you pay them.
If you use an accrual method, you generally 
deduct your expenses when you incur a liability 
for them, rather than when you pay them.
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter­
est, earlier in this chapter.
Unpaid expenses owed to related party.  If 
you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct 
interest and other expenses owed to a related 
cash-basis person until payment is made and 
the amount is includible in the gross income of 
that person. The relationship, for purposes of 
this rule, is determined as of the end of the tax 
year for which the interest or expense would 
otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is de-
nied under this rule, this rule will continue to ap-
ply even if your relationship with the person 
ceases to exist before the amount is includible 
in the gross income of that person.
This rule generally applies to those relation-
ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party 
Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
nerships to partners, partners to partnerships, 
shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-
tions to shareholders.
The postponement of deductions for unpaid 
expenses and interest under the related party 
rule does not apply to OID, regardless of when 
payment is made. This rule also does not apply 
to loans with below-market interest rates or to 
certain payments for the use of property and 
services when the lender or recipient has to in-
clude payments periodically in income, even if a 
payment has not been made.
4.
Sales and 
Trades of 
Investment 
Property
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax treatment of sales 
and trades of investment property.
Investment property.  This is property that 
produces investment income. Examples include 
stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. 
Property used in a trade or business is not in-
vestment property.
Form 1099-B.  If you sold property such as 
stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or certain com-
modities through a broker during the year, the 
broker should send you, for each sale, a Form 
1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
change Transactions. You should receive Form 
1099-B for 2016 by February 15, 2017. It will 
show the gross proceeds from the sale. The 
IRS will also get a copy of Form 1099-B from 
the broker.
Use Form 1099-B received from your broker 
to complete Form 8949. If you sold a covered 
security in 2016, your broker will send you a 
Form 1099-B that shows your basis. This will 
help you complete Form 8949. Generally, a 
covered security is a security you acquired after 
2010, with certain exceptions explained in the 
Instructions for Form 8949.
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see Re-
porting Capital Gains and Losses  in 
this chapter. Also see the Instructions for Form 
8949 and the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 
1040).
Nominees. If someone receives gross pro-
ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will 
give you a Form 1099-B, which will show gross 
proceeds received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099-B that includes 
gross proceeds belonging to another person, 
see Nominees, later under Reporting Capital 
Gains and Losses for more information.
Other property transactions.  Certain trans-
fers of property are discussed in other IRS pub-
lications. These include:
Sale of your main home, discussed in Pub. 
523, Selling Your Home;
Installment sales, covered in Pub. 537;
Various types of transactions involving 
business property, discussed in Pub. 544, 
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets;
Transfers of property at death, covered in 
Pub. 559; and
Disposition of an interest in a passive ac-
tivity, discussed in Pub. 925.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
What Is a Sale or Trade?,
Basis of Investment Property,
Adjusted Basis,
How To Figure Gain or Loss,
Nontaxable Trades,
Transfers Between Spouses,
Related Party Transactions,
Capital Gains and Losses,
Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, and
Special Rules for Traders in Securities.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Capital Gains 
and Losses
Gains and Losses From Section 
1256 Contracts and Straddles
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
TIP
  551
  Schedule D (Form 1040) 
  6781 
  8582 
Page 37 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 37

Like-Kind Exchanges
Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for infor-
mation about getting these publications and 
forms.
What Is a
Sale or Trade?
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Equity option
 Futures contract
 Marked-to-market rule
 Nonequity option
 Options dealer
 Regulated futures contract
 Section 1256 contract
 Short sale
 
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It 
also explains certain transactions and events 
that are treated as sales or trades.
A sale is generally a transfer of property for 
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to 
pay money.
A trade is a transfer of property for other 
property or services, and may be taxed in the 
same way as a sale.
Sale and purchase.  Ordinarily, a transaction 
is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property 
for cash and immediately buy similar property to 
replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
rate transactions. But see Like­Kind Exchanges 
under Nontaxable Trades, later.
Redemption of stock.  A redemption of stock 
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the 
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
demption is a dividend or other distribution on 
stock.
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a 
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend, 
or other distribution depends on the circumstan-
ces in each case. Both direct and indirect own-
ership of stock will be considered. The redemp-
tion is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:
The redemption is not essentially equiva-
lent to a dividend—see Dividends and 
Other Distributions in chapter 1,
There is a substantially disproportionate 
redemption of stock,
There is a complete redemption of all the 
stock of the corporation owned by the 
shareholder, or
The redemption is a distribution in partial 
liquidation of a corporation.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.  A re-
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at 
their maturity generally is treated as a sale or 
trade. See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds  and 
Discounted Debt Instruments, later.
In addition, a significant modification of a 
bond is treated as a trade of the original bond 
  8824 
  8949 
for a new bond. For details, see Regulations 
section 1.1001-3.
Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a 
dominant shareholder who retains ownership of 
more than half of the corporation's voting 
shares is treated as a contribution to capital 
rather than as an immediate loss deductible 
from taxable income. The surrendering share-
holder must reallocate his or her basis in the 
surrendered shares to the shares he or she re-
tains.
Trade of investment property for an annu-
ity. The transfer of investment property to a 
corporation, trust, fund, foundation, or other or-
ganization, in exchange for a fixed annuity con-
tract that will make guaranteed annual pay-
ments to you for life, is a taxable trade. If the 
present value of the annuity is more than your 
basis in the property traded, you have a taxable 
gain in the year of the trade. Figure the present 
value of the annuity according to factors used 
by commercial insurance companies issuing 
annuities.
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer of prop-
erty of a decedent to the executor or administra-
tor of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficiaries, 
is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable 
gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.
Termination of certain rights and obliga-
tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, or 
other termination of a right or obligation (other 
than a securities futures contract) with respect 
to property that is a capital asset (or that would 
be a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated 
as a sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital 
gain or loss.
This rule does not apply to the retirement of 
a debt instrument. See Redemption or retire­
ment of bonds, earlier.
Worthless Securities
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than 
those held for sale by a securities dealer) that 
became completely worthless during the tax 
year are treated as though they were sold on 
the last day of the tax year. This affects whether 
your capital loss is long term or short term. See 
Holding Period, later.
Worthless securities also include securities 
that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To 
abandon a security, you must permanently sur-
render and relinquish all rights in the security 
and receive no consideration in exchange for it. 
All the facts and circumstances determine 
whether the transaction is properly character-
ized as an abandonment or other type of trans-
action, such as an actual sale or exchange, 
contribution to capital, dividend, or gift.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make 
payments on a negotiable promissory note that 
you issued for stock that became worthless, 
you can deduct these payments as losses in the 
years you actually make the payments. Do not 
deduct them in the year the stock became 
worthless.
How to report loss.  Report worthless securi-
ties on Form 8949, Part I or Part II, whichever 
applies.
Report your worthless securities trans­
actions on Form 8949 with the correct 
box checked for these transactions. 
See Form 8949 and the Instructions for Form 
8949.
Filing a claim for refund. If you do not claim a 
loss for a worthless security on your original re-
turn for the year it becomes worthless, you can 
file a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. 
You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return 
for the year the security became worthless. You 
must file it within 7 years from the date your 
original return for that year had to be filed, or 2 
years from the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later. (Claims not due to worthless securities 
or bad debts generally must be filed within 3 
years from the date a return is filed, or 2 years 
from the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) 
For more information about filing a claim, see 
Pub. 556.
Constructive Sales
of Appreciated
Financial Positions
You are treated as having made a constructive 
sale when you enter into certain transactions in-
volving an appreciated financial position (de-
fined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or 
certain debt instruments. You must recognize 
gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair 
market value on the date of the constructive 
sale. This gives you a new holding period for 
the position that begins on the date of the con-
structive sale. Then, when you close the trans-
action, you reduce your gain (or increase your 
loss) by the gain recognized on the constructive 
sale.
Constructive sale. You are treated as having 
made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi-
nancial position if you:
Enter into a short sale of the same or sub-
stantially identical property,
Enter into an offsetting notional principal 
contract relating to the same or substan-
tially identical property,
Enter into a futures or forward contract to 
deliver the same or substantially identical 
property (including a forward contract that 
provides for cash settlement), or
Acquire the same or substantially identical 
property (if the appreciated financial posi-
tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional 
principal contract, or a futures or forward 
contract).
You are also treated as having made a con-
structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-
tion if a person related to you enters into a 
transaction described above with a view toward 
avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For 
this purpose, a related person is any related 
party described under Related Party Transac­
tions, later in this chapter.
Exception for nonmarketable securities. 
You are not treated as having made a 
CAUTION
!
Page 38 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 38  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

constructive sale solely because you entered 
into a contract for sale of any stock, debt instru-
ment, or partnership interest that is not a mar-
ketable security if it settles within 1 year of the 
date you enter into it.
Exception for certain closed transac-
tions. Do not treat a transaction as a construc-
tive sale if all of the following are true.
1. You closed the transaction on or before 
the 30th day after the end of your tax year.
2. You held the appreciated financial position 
throughout the 60-day period beginning on 
the date you closed the transaction.
3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at any 
time during that 60-day period by holding 
certain other positions.
If a closed transaction is reestablished in a 
substantially similar position during the 60-day 
period beginning on the date the first transac-
tion was closed, this exception still applies if the 
reestablished position is closed before the 30th 
day after the end of your tax year in which the 
first transaction was closed and, after that clos-
ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
This exception also applies to successive 
short sales of an entire appreciated financial 
position. For more information, see Revenue 
Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 
2003-3. This bulletin is available at 
www.irs.gov/pub/irs­irbs/irb03­03.pdf.
Appreciated financial position.  This is any 
interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a 
debt instrument (including a futures or forward 
contract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing 
of the interest would result in a gain.
Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-
tion does not include the following.
1. Any position from which all of the appreci-
ation is accounted for under 
marked-to-market rules, including section 
1256 contracts (described later under 
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar­
ket).
2. Any position in a debt instrument if:
a. The position unconditionally entitles 
the holder to receive a specified prin-
cipal amount,
b. The interest payments (or other simi-
lar amounts) with respect to the posi-
tion are payable at a fixed rate or a 
variable rate described in Regulations 
section 1.860G-1(a)(3), and
c. The position is not convertible, either 
directly or indirectly, into stock of the 
issuer (or any related person).
3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-
scribed in (2).
Certain trust instruments treated as 
stock. For the constructive sale rules, an inter-
est in an actively traded trust is treated as stock 
unless substantially all of the value of the prop-
erty held by the trust is debt that qualifies for the 
exception to the definition of an appreciated fi-
nancial position (explained in (2) above).
Sale of appreciated financial position.  A 
transaction treated as a constructive sale of an 
appreciated financial position is not treated as a 
constructive sale of any other appreciated fi-
nancial position, as long as you continue to hold 
the original position. However, if you hold an-
other appreciated financial position and dispose 
of the original position before closing the trans-
action that resulted in the constructive sale, you 
are treated as if, at the same time, you con-
structively sold the other appreciated financial 
position.
Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end of 
the tax year, you generally must treat it as sold 
at its fair market value on the last business day 
of the tax year.
Section 1256 Contract
A section 1256 contract is any:
Regulated futures contract,
Foreign currency contract,
Nonequity option,
Dealer equity option, or
Dealer securities futures contract.
Exceptions. A section 1256 contract does 
not include:
Interest rate swaps,
Currency swaps,
Basis swaps,
Interest rate caps,
Interest rate floors,
Commodity swaps,
Equity swaps,
Equity index swaps,
Credit default swaps, or
Similar agreements.
For more details, including definitions of these 
terms, see section 1256.
Regulated futures contract.  This is a con-
tract that:
Provides that amounts which must be de-
posited to, or can be withdrawn from, your 
margin account depend on daily market 
conditions (a system of marking to mar-
ket), and
Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, a 
qualified board of exchange. A qualified 
board of exchange is a domestic board of 
trade designated as a contract market by 
the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-
sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-
proved by the Secretary of the Treasury, or 
a national securities exchange registered 
with the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion.
Foreign currency contract. This is a contract 
that:
Requires delivery of a foreign currency that 
has positions traded through regulated fu-
tures contracts (or settlement of which de-
pends on the value of that type of foreign 
currency),
Is traded in the interbank market, and
Is entered into at arm's length at a price 
determined by reference to the price in the 
interbank market.
Bank forward contracts with maturity dates 
longer than the maturities ordinarily available for 
regulated futures contracts are considered to 
meet the definition of a foreign currency con-
tract if the above three conditions are satisfied.
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-
rency transactions. These transactions may re-
sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For de-
tails, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 
and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and 
1.988-3.
Nonequity option.  This is any listed option 
(defined later) that is not an equity option. Non-
equity options include debt options, commodity 
futures options, currency options, and 
broad-based stock index options. A 
broad-based stock index is based on the value 
of a group of diversified stocks or securities 
(such as the Standard and Poor's 500 index).
Warrants based on a stock index that are 
economically, substantially identical in all mate-
rial respects to options based on a stock index 
are treated as options based on a stock index.
Cash-settled options.  Cash-settled op-
tions based on a stock index and either traded 
on or subject to the rules of a qualified board of 
exchange are nonequity options if the Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC) deter-
mines that the stock index is broad based.
This rule does not apply to options estab-
lished before the SEC determines that the stock 
index is broad based.
Listed option. This is any option traded on, 
or subject to the rules of, a qualified board or 
exchange (as discussed earlier under Regula­
ted futures contract ). A listed option, however, 
does not include an option that is a right to ac-
quire stock from the issuer.
Dealer equity option. This is any listed option 
that, for an options dealer:
Is an equity option,
Is bought or granted by that dealer in the 
normal course of the dealer's business ac-
tivity of dealing in options, and
Is listed on the qualified board of exchange 
where that dealer is registered.
An “options dealer” is any person registered 
with an appropriate national securities ex-
change as a market maker or specialist in listed 
options.
Equity option. This is any option:
To buy or sell stock, or
That is valued directly or indirectly by refer-
ence to any stock or narrow-based security 
index.
Equity options include options on a group of 
stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock 
index.
Page 39 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 39

Dealer securities futures contract.  For 
any dealer in securities futures contracts or op-
tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-
tures contract (or option on such a contract) 
that:
Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the 
case of an option, is purchased or granted 
by the dealer) in the normal course of the 
dealer's activity of dealing in this type of 
contract (or option); and
Is traded on a qualified board or exchange 
(as defined under Regulated futures con­
tract, earlier).
A securities futures contract that is not a dealer 
securities futures contract is treated as descri-
bed later under Securities Futures Contracts.
Marked-to-Market Rules
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end 
of the tax year will generally be treated as sold 
at its fair market value on the last business day 
of the tax year, and you must recognize any 
gain or loss that results. That gain or loss is 
taken into account in figuring your gain or loss 
when you later dispose of the contract, as 
shown in the Example under 60/40 rule, below.
Hedging exception.  The marked-to-market 
rules do not apply to hedging transactions. See 
Hedging Transactions, later.
60/40 rule.  Under the marked-to-market sys-
tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will be 
treated as a long-term capital gain or loss, and 
40% will be treated as a short-term capital gain 
or loss. This is true regardless of how long you 
actually held the property.
Example. On June 17, 2015, you bought a 
regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
cember 31, 2015 (the last business day of your 
tax year), the fair market value of the contract 
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain on 
your 2015 tax return, treated as 60% long-term 
and 40% short-term capital gain.
On February 3, 2016, you sold the contract 
for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000 
gain on your 2015 return, you recognize a 
$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2016 
tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40% 
short-term capital loss.
Limited partners or entrepreneurs.  The 
60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-
tions or dealer securities futures contracts that 
result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited 
partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later 
under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these 
gains or losses are treated as short term.
Terminations and transfers.  The 
marked-to-market rules also apply if your obli-
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts 
are terminated or transferred during the tax 
year. In this case, use the fair market value of 
each section 1256 contract at the time of termi-
nation or transfer to determine the gain or loss. 
Terminations or transfers may result from any 
offsetting, delivery, exercise, assignment, or 
lapse of your obligation or rights under section 
1256 contracts.
Loss carryback election.  An individual hav-
ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (defined 
later), generally can elect to carry this loss back 
3 years instead of carrying it over to the next 
year. See How To Report , later, for information 
about reporting this election on your return.
The loss carried back to any year under this 
election cannot be more than the net section 
1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, the 
amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax 
year cannot increase or produce a net operat-
ing loss for that year.
The loss is carried to the earliest carryback 
year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount can 
then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. 
In each carryback year, treat 60% of the carry-
back amount as a long-term capital loss and 
40% as a short-term capital loss from section 
1256 contracts.
If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-
tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss 
back, the unabsorbed portion can be carried 
forward, under the capital loss carryover rules, 
to the year following the loss. For more informa-
tion, see Capital Losses, later. Figure your capi-
tal loss carryover as if, for the loss year, you 
had an additional short-term capital gain of 40% 
of the amount of net section 1256 contracts loss 
absorbed in the carryback years and an addi-
tional long-term capital gain of 60% of the ab-
sorbed loss. In the carryover year, treat any 
capital loss carryover from losses on section 
1256 contracts as if it were a loss from section 
1256 contracts for that year.
Net section 1256 contracts loss.  This 
loss is the lesser of:
The net capital loss for your tax year deter-
mined by taking into account only the gains 
and losses from section 1256 contracts, or
The capital loss carryover to the next tax 
year determined without this election.
Net section 1256 contracts gain.  This 
gain is the lesser of:
The capital gain net income for the carry-
back year determined by taking into ac-
count only gains and losses from section 
1256 contracts, or
The capital gain net income for that year.
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for 
any carryback year without regard to the net 
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or 
any later tax year.
Traders in section 1256 contracts.  Gain or 
loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts 
is capital gain or loss subject to the 
marked-to-market rules. However, this does not 
apply to contracts held for purposes of hedging 
property if any loss from the property would be 
an ordinary loss.
Treatment of underlying property.  The 
determination of whether an individual's gain or 
loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain 
or loss is made without regard to the fact that 
the individual is actively engaged in dealing in 
or trading section 1256 contracts related to that 
property.
How To Report
If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign 
currency contracts in 2016 (or had unrealized 
profit or loss on these contracts that were open 
at the end of 2015 or 2016), you should receive 
Form 1099-B from your broker.
Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781 to report 
your gains and losses from all section 1256 
contracts that are open at the end of the year or 
that were closed out during the year. This in-
cludes the amount shown in box 11 of Form 
1099-B. Then enter the net amount of these 
gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040), 
line 4 or line 11, as appropriate. Include a copy 
of Form 6781 with your income tax return.
If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a 
straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it 
may be necessary to show certain adjustments 
on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc-
tions for completing Part I.
Loss carryback election.  To carry back your 
loss under the election procedures described 
earlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica-
tion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which 
you are carrying the loss with an amended 
Form 6781 and an amended Schedule D (Form 
1040) attached. Follow the instructions for com-
pleting Form 6781 for the loss year to make this 
election.
Hedging Transactions
The marked-to-market rules, described earlier, 
do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-
tion is a hedging transaction if both of the fol-
lowing conditions are met.
1. You entered into the transaction in the nor-
mal course of your trade or business pri-
marily to manage the risk of:
a. Price changes or currency fluctua-
tions on ordinary property you hold (or 
will hold); or
b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur-
rency fluctuations, on your current or 
future borrowings or ordinary obliga-
tions.
2. You clearly identified the transaction as 
being a hedging transaction before the 
close of the day on which you entered
into it.
This hedging transaction exception does not 
apply to transactions entered into by or for any 
syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-
poration, or other entity (other than a regular 
corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its 
losses to limited partners or limited entrepre-
neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who 
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as a 
limited partner) and who does not actively par-
ticipate in its management. However, an inter-
est is not considered held by a limited partner or 
entrepreneur if the interest holder actively par-
ticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years) in the 
management of the entity, or is the spouse, 
child (including a legally adopted child), grand-
child, or parent of an individual who actively 
participates in the management of the entity.
Page 40 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 40  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner 
or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a 
hedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedg-
ing loss” is the amount by which the allowable 
deductions in a tax year that resulted from a 
hedging transaction (determined without regard 
to the limit) are more than the income received 
or accrued during the tax year from this transac-
tion.
Any hedging loss allocated to you for the tax 
year is limited to your taxable income for that 
year from the trade or business in which the 
hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-
ing transaction items in determining this taxable 
income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-
lowed because of this limit, you can carry it over 
to the next tax year as a deduction resulting 
from a hedging transaction.
If the hedging transaction relates to property 
other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-
preneur is an individual.
The limit on hedging losses does not apply 
to any hedging loss to the extent that it is more 
than all your unrecognized gains from hedging 
transactions at the end of the tax year that are 
from the trade or business in which the hedging 
transaction occurred. The term “unrecognized 
gain” has the same meaning as defined under 
Loss Deferral Rules, later.
Sale of property used in a hedge.  Once you 
identify personal property as being part of a 
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from 
its sale or exchange as ordinary income, not 
capital gain.
Self-Employment Income
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course 
of a commodity or option dealer's trading in sec-
tion 1256 contracts and property related to 
these contracts are included in net earnings 
from self-employment. See the Instructions for 
Schedule SE (Form 1040). In addition, the rules 
relating to contributions to self-employment re-
tirement plans apply. For information on retire-
ment plan contributions, see Pub. 560 and Pub. 
590-A.
Basis of
Investment Property
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Basis
 Fair market value
 Original issue discount (OID)
 
Basis is a way of measuring your investment in 
property for tax purposes. You must know the 
basis of your property to determine whether you 
have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-
tion.
Investment property you buy normally has 
an original basis equal to its cost. If you get 
property in some way other than buying it, such 
as by gift or inheritance, its fair market value 
may be important in figuring the basis.
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. 
The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt 
obligations, or other property or services.
Unstated interest.  If you buy property on a 
time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-
est, the basis of your property is your stated 
purchase price, minus the amount considered 
to be unstated interest. You generally have un-
stated interest if your interest rate is less than 
the applicable federal rate. For more informa-
tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issue 
Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
Basis Other Than Cost
There are times when you must use a basis 
other than cost. In these cases, you may need 
to know the property's fair market value or the 
adjusted basis of the previous owner.
Fair market value.  This is the price at which 
the property would change hands between a 
buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy 
or sell and both having reasonable knowledge 
of all the relevant facts. Sales of similar prop-
erty, around the same date, may be helpful in 
figuring fair market value.
Property Received for Services
If you receive investment property for services, 
you must include the property's fair market 
value in income. The amount you include in in-
come then becomes your basis in the property. 
If the services were performed for a price that 
was agreed to beforehand, this price will be ac-
cepted as the fair market value of the property if 
there is no evidence to the contrary.
Restricted property.  If you receive, as pay-
ment for services, property that is subject to 
certain restrictions, your basis in the property 
generally is its fair market value when it be-
comes substantially vested. Property becomes 
substantially vested when it is transferable or is 
no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture, 
whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop­
erty in Pub. 525 for more information.
Bargain purchases.  If you buy investment 
property at less than fair market value, as pay-
ment for services, you must include the differ-
ence in income. Your basis in the property is the 
price you pay plus the amount you include in in-
come.
Property Received
in Taxable Trades
If you received investment property in trade for 
other property, the basis of the new property is 
its fair market value at the time of the trade un-
less you received the property in a nontaxable 
trade.
Example. You trade A Company stock for 
B Company stock having a fair market value of 
$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company 
stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable 
gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A 
Company stock is more than $1,200, you have 
a deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your 
B Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the 
B Company stock for $1,300, you will have a 
gain of $100.
Property Received
in Nontaxable Trades
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec-
ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the 
property you received in the trade. See Nontax­
able Trades, later.
The basis of property you received in a non-
taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally 
the same as the adjusted basis of the property 
you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash 
you paid, additional costs you had, and any 
gain recognized. Reduce this amount by any 
cash or unlike property you received, any loss 
recognized, and any liability of yours that was 
assumed or treated as assumed.
Property Received
From Your Spouse
If property is transferred to you from your 
spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is inci-
dent to your divorce), your basis is the same as 
your spouse's or former spouse's adjusted ba-
sis just before the transfer. See Transfers Be­
tween Spouses, later.
Recordkeeping. The transferor must 
give you the records necessary to de-
termine the adjusted basis and holding 
period of the property as of the date of the 
transfer.
Property Received as a Gift
To figure your basis in property that you re-
ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted ba-
sis to the donor just before it was given to you, 
its fair market value at the time it was given to 
you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and 
the date it was given to you.
Fair market value less than donor's adjus-
ted basis. If the fair market value of the prop-
erty at the time of the gift was less than the do-
nor's adjusted basis just before the gift, your 
basis for gain on its sale or other disposition is 
the same as the donor's adjusted basis plus or 
minus any required adjustments to basis during 
the period you hold the property. Your basis for 
loss is its fair market value at the time of the gift 
plus or minus any required adjustments to basis 
during the period you hold the property.
No gain or loss. If you use the basis for fig-
uring a gain and the result is a loss, and then 
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result is 
a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.
Example. You receive a gift of investment 
property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at 
RECORDS
Page 41 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 41

the time of the gift. The fair market value at the 
time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the prop-
erty for $9,500. You have neither gain nor loss. 
Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and 
$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss. 
Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and 
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.
Fair market value equal to or more than do-
nor's adjusted basis.  If the fair market value 
of the property at the time of the gift was equal 
to or more than the donor's adjusted basis just 
before the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its 
sale or other disposition is the donor's adjusted 
basis plus or minus any required adjustments to 
basis during the period you hold the property. 
Also, you may be allowed to add to the donor's 
adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid, de-
pending on the date of the gift.
Gift received before 1977.  If you received 
property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the 
property is the donor's adjusted basis increased 
by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However, 
your basis cannot be more than the fair market 
value of the gift at the time it was given to you.
Example 1. You were given XYZ Company 
stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock 
had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor's 
adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a 
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or 
loss is $20,500, the donor's adjusted basis plus 
the amount of gift tax paid.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except that the gift tax paid was 
$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's ad-
justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to 
the fair market value of the stock at the time of 
the gift.
Gift received after 1976.  If you received 
property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the 
donor's adjusted basis increased by the part of 
the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in 
value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply-
ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The 
numerator (top part) is the net increase in value 
of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) is 
the amount of the gift.
The net increase in value of the gift is the fair 
market value of the gift minus the donor's adjus-
ted basis. The amount of the gift is its value for 
gift tax purposes after reduction by any annual 
exclusion and marital or charitable deduction 
that applies to the gift.
Example. In 2016, you received a gift of 
property from your mother. At the time of the 
gift, the property had a fair market value of 
$101,000 and an adjusted basis to her of 
$40,000. The amount of the gift for gift tax pur-
poses was $87,000 ($101,000 minus the 
$14,000 annual exclusion), and your mother 
paid a gift tax of $20,160. You figure your basis 
in the following way:
Fair market value ................. $101,000 
Minus: Adjusted basis ..............  40,000 
Net increase in value of gift ........... $ 61,000 
Gift tax paid ..................... $ 20,160 
Multiplied by 0.701 ($61,000 ÷ 
$87,000) ....................... 0.701 
Gift tax due to net increase in value ..... $ 14,132 
Plus: Adjusted basis of property to 
your mother ..................... 40,000 
Your basis in the property $ 54,132 
Part sale, part gift.  If you get property in a 
transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, 
your basis is the larger of the amount you paid 
for the property or the transferor's adjusted ba-
sis in the property at the time of the transfer. 
Add to that amount the amount of any gift tax 
paid on the gift, as described in the preceding 
discussion. For figuring loss, your basis is limi-
ted to the property's fair market value at the 
time of the transfer.
Gift tax information.  For information on gift 
tax, see Pub. 559. For information on figuring 
the amount of gift tax to add to your basis, see 
Property Received as a Gift in Pub. 551.
Property Received as Inheritance
Before or after 2010.  If you inherited property 
from a decedent who died before or after 2010, 
or who died in 2010 and the executor of the de-
cedent's estate elected not to file Form 8939, 
Allocation of Increase in Basis for Property Ac-
quired From a Decedent, your basis in that 
property generally is its fair market value (its ap-
praised value on Form 706, United States Es-
tate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Tax 
Return) on:
The date of the decedent's death; or
The later alternate valuation date if the es-
tate qualifies for, and elects to use, alter-
nate valuation.
In certain circumstances, the executor of an 
estate (or other person) required to file Form 
706 after July 15, 2015, will be required to pro-
vide a Schedule A (Form 8971) to you as a ben-
eficiary who receives or is to receive property 
from the estate. If you receive Schedule A 
(Form 8971), use the final estate tax value of 
the property reported on the Schedule A to de-
termine your basis in the property.
If no Form 706 was filed, or the executor 
was not required to provide you Schedule A 
(Form 8971), use the appraised value on the 
date of death for state inheritance or transmis-
sion taxes. For stocks and bonds, if no Form 
706 was filed and there are no state inheritance 
or transmission taxes, see the Form 706 in-
structions for figuring the fair market value of 
the stocks and bonds on the date of the dece-
dent's death.
Appreciated property you gave the dece-
dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-
erty that you inherited is the decedent's adjus-
ted basis in the property immediately before 
death rather than its fair market value. This ap-
plies to appreciated property that you or your 
spouse gave the decedent as a gift during the 
1-year period ending on the date of death. Ap-
preciated property is any property whose fair 
market value on the day you gave it to the dece-
dent was more than its adjusted basis.
More information. See Pub. 551 for more in-
formation on the basis of inherited property, in-
cluding community property, property held by a 
surviving tenant in a joint tenancy or tenancy by 
the entirety, a qualified joint interest, and a farm 
or closely held business.
Inherited in 2010 and executor elected to 
file Form 8939. If you inherited property from a 
decedent who died in 2010 and the executor 
made the election to file Form 8939, see Pub. 
4895 to figure your basis. Pub. 4895 is available 
at https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs­prior/
p4895­­2011.pdf.
Adjusted Basis
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale, 
exchange, or other disposition of property or fig-
ure allowable depreciation, depletion, or amorti-
zation, you usually must make certain adjust-
ments (increases and decreases) to the basis 
of the property. The result of these adjustments 
to the basis is the adjusted basis.
Adjustments to the basis of stocks and 
bonds are explained in the following discussion. 
For information about other adjustments to ba-
sis, see Pub. 551.
Stocks and Bonds
The basis of stocks or bonds you own generally 
is the purchase price plus the costs of pur-
chase, such as commissions and recording or 
transfer fees. If you acquired stock or bonds 
other than by purchase, your basis is usually 
determined by fair market value or the previous 
owner's adjusted basis as discussed earlier un-
der Basis Other Than Cost.
The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer-
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-
ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable 
stock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce 
the basis of your original stock. You must also 
reduce your basis when you receive nondivi-
dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). 
These distributions, up to the amount of your 
basis, are a nontaxable return of capital.
The IRS partners with companies that 
offer Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 
1040) software that can import trades 
from many brokerage firms and accounting soft­
ware to help you keep track of your adjusted 
basis in securities. To find out more, go to 
www.irs.gov/Filing/Filing­Options.
Identifying stock or bonds sold.  If you can 
adequately identify the shares of stock or the 
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other 
basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.
Adequate identification. You will make an 
adequate identification if you show that certifi-
cates representing shares of stock from a lot 
that you bought on a certain date or for a certain 
price were delivered to your broker or other 
agent.
TIP
Page 42 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 42  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Broker holds stock.  If you have left the 
stock certificates with your broker or other 
agent, you will make an adequate identification 
if you:
Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
lar stock to be sold or transferred at the 
time of the sale or transfer, and
Receive a written confirmation of this from 
your broker or other agent within a reason-
able time.
Stock identified this way is the stock sold or 
transferred even if stock certificates from a dif-
ferent lot are delivered to the broker or other 
agent.
Single stock certificate.  If you bought 
stock in different lots at different times and you 
hold a single stock certificate for this stock, you 
will make an adequate identification if you:
Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
lar stock to be sold or transferred when 
you deliver the certificate to your broker or 
other agent, and
Receive a written confirmation of this from 
your broker or other agent within a reason-
able time.
If you sell part of the stock represented by a 
single certificate directly to the buyer instead of 
through a broker, you will make an adequate 
identification if you keep a written record of the 
particular stock that you intend to sell.
Bonds. These methods of identification 
also apply to bonds sold or transferred.
Identification not possible. If you buy and 
sell securities at various times in varying quanti-
ties and you cannot adequately identify the 
shares you sell, the basis of the securities you 
sell is the basis of the securities you acquired 
first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-
cussed later, you cannot use the average price 
per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of 
the shares.
Example. You bought 100 shares of stock 
of XYZ Corporation in 2001 for $10 a share. In 
January 2002 you bought another 200 shares 
for $11 a share. In July 2002 you gave your son 
50 shares. In December 2004 you bought 100 
shares for $9 a share. In April 2016 you sold 
130 shares. You cannot identify the shares you 
disposed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
quired first to figure the basis. The shares of 
stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 
(50 × $10). You figure the basis of the 130 
shares of stock you sold in 2016 as follows:
50 shares (50 × $10) balance of stock 
bought in 2001 .................... $  500 
80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in 
January 2002 ..................... 880 
Total basis of stock sold in 2016 $1,380 
Shares in a mutual fund or REIT.  The basis 
of shares in a mutual fund (or other regulated 
investment company) or a real estate invest-
ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the 
same way as the basis of other stock and usu-
ally includes any commissions or load charges 
paid for the purchase.
Example. You bought 100 shares of Fund 
A for $10 a share. You paid a $50 commission 
to the broker for the purchase. Your cost basis 
for each share is $10.50 ($1,050 ÷ 100).
Commissions and load charges.  The 
fees and charges you pay to acquire or redeem 
shares of a mutual fund are not deductible. You 
can usually add acquisition fees and charges to 
your cost of the shares and thereby increase 
your basis. A fee paid to redeem the shares is 
usually a reduction in the redemption price 
(sales price).
You cannot add your entire acquisition fee 
or load charge to the cost of the mutual fund 
shares acquired if all of the following conditions 
apply. 
1. You get a reinvestment right because of 
the purchase of the shares or the payment 
of the fee or charge.
2. You dispose of the shares within 90 days 
of the purchase date.
3. You acquire new shares in the same mu-
tual fund or another mutual fund, for which 
the fee or charge is reduced or waived be-
cause of the reinvestment right you got 
when you acquired the original shares.
The amount of the original fee or charge in 
excess of the reduction in (3) is added to the 
cost of the original shares. The rest of the origi-
nal fee or charge is added to the cost basis of 
the new shares (unless all three conditions 
above also apply to the purchase of the new 
shares).
Choosing average basis for mutual fund 
shares. You can choose to use the average 
basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the 
identical shares at various times and prices, or 
you acquired the shares after 2011 in connec-
tion with a dividend reinvestment plan, and left 
them on deposit in an account kept by a custo-
dian or agent. The methods you can use to fig-
ure average basis are explained later.
Undistributed capital gains.  If you had to 
include in your income any undistributed capital 
gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase your 
basis in the stock by the difference between the 
amount you included and the amount of tax 
paid for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistrib­
uted capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  in 
chapter 1.
Reinvestment right. This is the right to ac-
quire mutual fund shares in the same or another 
mutual fund without paying a fee or load 
charge, or by paying a reduced fee or load 
charge.
The original cost basis of mutual fund 
shares you acquire by reinvesting your distribu-
tions is the amount of the distributions used to 
purchase each full or fractional share. This rule 
applies even if the distribution is an exempt-in-
terest dividend that you do not report as in-
come.
Table 4-1. This is a worksheet you can 
use to keep track of the adjusted basis 
of your mutual fund shares. Enter the 
cost per share when you acquire new shares 
and any adjustments to their basis when the ad-
justment occurs. This worksheet will help you 
figure the adjusted basis when you sell or re-
deem shares.
Automatic investment service.  If you partici-
pate in an automatic investment service, your 
basis for each share of stock, including frac-
tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent 
is the purchase price plus a share of the brok-
er's commission.
Dividend reinvestment plans.  If you partici-
pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and re-
ceive stock from the corporation at a discount, 
your basis is the full fair market value of the 
stock on the dividend payment date. You must 
include the amount of the discount in your in-
come.
Public utilities. If, before 1986, you exclu-
ded from income the value of stock you had re-
ceived under a qualified public utility reinvest-
ment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.
Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distribu-
tions made by a corporation of its own stock. 
Generally, stock dividends are not taxable to 
you. However, see Distributions of Stock and 
Stock Rights in chapter 1 for some exceptions. 
If the stock dividends are not taxable, you must 
divide your basis for the old stock between the 
old and new stock.
New and old stock identical.  If the new 
stock you received as a nontaxable dividend is 
identical to the old stock on which the dividend 
was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the 
old stock by the number of shares of old and 
new stock. The result is your basis for each 
share of stock.
Example 1. You owned one share of com-
mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpo-
ration distributed two new shares of common 
stock for each share held. You then had three 
shares of common stock. Your basis in each 
share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3).
Example 2. You owned two shares of com-
mon stock. You bought one for $30 and the 
other for $45. The corporation distributed two 
new shares of common stock for each share 
held. You had six shares after the distribu-
tion—three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) 
and three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).
New and old stock not identical.  If the 
new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-
dend is not identical to the old stock on which it 
was declared, the basis of the new stock is cal-
culated differently. Divide the adjusted basis of 
the old stock between the old and the new 
stock in the ratio of the fair market value of each 
lot of stock to the total fair market value of both 
lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.
Example. You bought a share of common 
stock for $100. Later, the corporation distrib-
uted a share of preferred stock for each share 
RECORDS
Page 43 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 43

of common stock held. At the date of distribu-
tion, your common stock had a fair market value 
of $150 and the preferred stock had a fair mar-
ket value of $50. You figure the basis of the old 
and new stock by dividing your $100 basis be-
tween them. The basis of your common stock is 
$75 (($150 ÷ $200) × $100), and the basis of 
the new preferred stock is $25 (($50 ÷ $200) × 
$100).
Stock bought at various times.  Figure 
the basis of stock dividends received on stock 
you bought at various times and at different pri-
ces by allocating to each lot of stock the share 
of the stock dividends due to it.
Taxable stock dividends.  If your stock 
dividend is taxable when you receive it, the ba-
sis of your new stock is its fair market value on 
the date of distribution. The basis of your old 
stock does not change.
Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits in 
the same way as stock dividends if identical 
stock is distributed on the stock held.
Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire 
a corporation's stock. It may be exercised, it 
may be sold if it has a market value, or it may 
expire. Stock rights are rarely taxable when you 
receive them. See Distributions of Stock and 
Stock Rights in chapter 1.
Taxable stock rights.  If you receive stock 
rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights is 
their fair market value at the time of distribution. 
The basis of the old stock does not change.
Nontaxable stock rights.  If you receive 
nontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-
pire, they have no basis.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock 
rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stock 
rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of 
the fair market value of the old stock, you must 
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-
tween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a 
ratio of the fair market value of each to the total 
fair market value of both at the time of distribu-
tion.
If the fair market value of the stock rights 
was less than 15%, their basis is zero. How-
ever, you can choose to divide the basis of the 
old stock between the old stock and the stock 
rights. To make the choice, attach a statement 
to your return for the year in which you received 
the rights, stating that you choose to divide the 
basis of the stock.
Basis of new stock.  If you exercise the 
stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its 
cost plus the basis of the stock rights exercised.
Example. You own 100 shares of ABC 
Company stock, which cost you $22 per share. 
The ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable 
stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more 
shares at $26 per share. At the time the stock 
rights were distributed, the stock had a market 
value of $30, not including the stock rights. 
Each stock right had a market value of $3. The 
market value of the stock rights was less than 
15% of the market value of the stock, but you 
chose to divide the basis of your stock between 
the stock and the rights. You figure the basis of 
the rights and the basis of the old stock as fol-
lows:
100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old stock 
100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of old 
stock 
10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights 
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, new basis 
of old stock 
($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of rights 
If you sell the rights, the basis for figuring 
gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If 
you exercise the rights, the basis of the stock 
you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the 
basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 
per share. The remaining basis of the old stock 
is $21.78 per share.
Investment property received in liquidation.
In general, if you receive investment property as 
a distribution in partial or complete liquidation of 
a corporation and if you recognize gain or loss 
when you acquire the property, your basis in the 
property is its fair market value at the time of the 
distribution.
S corporation stock.  You must increase your 
basis in stock of an S corporation by your pro 
rata share of the following items.
All income items of the S corporation, in-
cluding tax-exempt income, that are 
Table 4-1. Mutual Fund Record
Mutual Fund
Acquired1
Adjustment to Basis Per Share
Adjusted2 
Basis Per 
Share
Sold or Redeemed
Date Number of 
Shares
Cost Per 
Share Date Number 
of Shares
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
Page 44 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 44  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

separately stated and passed through to 
you as a shareholder.
The nonseparately stated income of the S 
corporation.
The amount of the deduction for depletion 
(other than oil and gas depletion) that is 
more than the basis of the property being 
depleted.
You must decrease your basis in stock of an 
S corporation by your pro rata share of the fol-
lowing items.
Distributions by the S corporation that were 
not included in your income.
All loss and deduction items of the S cor-
poration that are separately stated and 
passed through to you.
Any nonseparately stated loss of the S cor-
poration.
Any expense of the S corporation that is 
not deductible in figuring its taxable in-
come and not properly chargeable to a 
capital account.
The amount of your deduction for depletion 
of oil and gas wells to the extent the de-
duction is not more than your share of the 
adjusted basis of the wells.
However, your basis in the stock cannot be re-
duced below zero.
Specialized small business investment 
company stock or partnership interest.  If 
you bought this stock or interest as replacement 
property for publicly traded securities you sold 
at a gain, you must reduce the basis of the 
stock or interest by the amount of any post-
poned gain on that sale. See Rollover of Gain 
From Publicly Traded Securities, later.
Qualified small business stock.  If you 
bought this stock as replacement property for 
other qualified small business stock you sold at 
a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-
placement stock by the amount of any post-
poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on 
Qualified Small Business Stock, later.
Short sales.  If you cannot deduct payments 
you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on 
stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay 
to the lender is a capital expense, and you must 
add it to the basis of the stock used to close the 
short sale.
See Payments in lieu of dividends , later, for 
information about deducting payments in lieu of 
dividends.
Premiums on bonds.  If you buy a bond at a 
premium, the premium is treated as part of your 
basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize the 
premium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-
duce the basis of the bond by the amortized 
part of the premium each year over the life of 
the bond.
Although you cannot deduct the premium on 
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de-
termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You 
must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre-
mium you amortized for the period you held the 
bond. For a tax-exempt covered security ac-
quired at a premium, box 13 shows the amount 
of bond premium amortization allocable to the 
interest paid during the tax year. If a net amount 
of interest appears in box 8 or 9, whichever is 
applicable, box 13 should be blank.
See Bond Premium Amortization  in chap-
ter 3 for more information.
Market discount on bonds.  If you include 
market discount on a bond in income currently, 
increase the basis of your bond by the amount 
of market discount you include in your income. 
See Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for 
more information.
Bonds purchased at par value.  A bond pur-
chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-
mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise 
dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss 
by comparing the bond proceeds to the pur-
chase price of the bond.
Example. You purchased a bond several 
years ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold 
the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain 
of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for 
$9,900, you would have a loss of $100.
Acquisition discount on short-term obliga-
tions. If you include acquisition discount on a 
short-term obligation in your income currently, 
increase the basis of the obligation by the 
amount of acquisition discount you include in 
your income. See Discount on Short­Term Obli­
gations in chapter 1 for more information.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt in-
struments. Increase the basis of a debt instru-
ment by the OID you include in your income. 
See Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.
Discounted tax-exempt obligations.  OID 
on tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxa-
ble. However, when you dispose of a tax-ex-
empt obligation issued after September 3, 
1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, 
you must accrue OID on the obligation to deter-
mine its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is 
added to the basis of the obligation to deter-
mine your gain or loss.
For information on determining OID on a 
long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is­
sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  or 
Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whichever 
applies, in Pub. 1212 under Figuring OID on 
Long­Term Debt Instruments.
If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of 
1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for 
acquisition discount on short-term obligations. 
See Discount on Short­Term Obligations  in 
chapter 1.
Stripped tax-exempt obligation.  If you 
acquired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon 
after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID 
on it to determine its adjusted basis when you 
dispose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or 
coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of 
this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on 
these obligations in the manner described in 
chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.
Increase your basis in the stripped tax-ex-
empt bond or coupon by the taxable and non-
taxable accrued OID. Also increase your basis 
by the interest that accrued (but was not paid 
and was not previously reflected in your basis) 
before the date you sold the bond or coupon. In 
addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 
1987, add to your basis any accrued market 
discount not previously reflected in basis.
How To Figure
Gain or Loss
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of 
property by comparing the amount you realize 
with the adjusted basis of the property.
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or 
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the 
property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you 
transfer is more than the amount you realize, 
the difference is a loss.
Amount realized.  The amount you realize 
from a sale or trade of property is everything 
you receive for the property minus your expen-
ses of sale (such as redemption fees, sales 
commissions, sales charges, or exit fees). 
Amount realized includes the money you re-
ceive plus the fair market value of any property 
or services you receive.
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your 
property and the debt instrument does not pro-
vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated 
interest that you must report as ordinary income 
will reduce the amount realized from the sale. 
For more information, see Pub. 537.
If a buyer of property issues a debt instru-
ment to the seller of the property, the amount 
realized is determined by reference to the issue 
price of the debt instrument, which may or may 
not be the fair market value of the debt instru-
ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g). 
However, if the debt instrument was previously 
issued by a third party (one not part of the sale 
transaction), the fair market value of the debt in-
strument is used to determine the amount real-
ized.
Fair market value. Fair market value is the 
price at which property would change hands 
between a buyer and a seller, neither being 
forced to buy or sell and both having reasona-
ble knowledge of all the relevant facts.
Example. You trade A Company stock with 
an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company 
stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which 
is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 
($10,000 – $7,000). If you also receive a note 
for $6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, 
your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 – 
$7,000).
Debt paid off.  A debt against the property, 
or against you, that is paid off as a part of the 
transaction or that is assumed by the buyer 
must be included in the amount realized. This is 
true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-
ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell 
or trade property that is subject to a nonre-
course loan, the amount you realize generally 
includes the full amount of the note assumed by 
the buyer even if the amount of the note is more 
than the fair market value of the property.
Page 45 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 45

Example. You sell stock that you had 
pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. 
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer 
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 
in cash. The amount realized is $28,000 
($20,000 + $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 
($28,000 – $6,000).
Payment of cash. If you trade property and 
cash for other property, the amount you realize 
is the fair market value of the property you re-
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by subtract-
ing the cash you pay and the adjusted basis of 
the property you trade in from the amount you 
realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a 
gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a 
loss.
No gain or loss.  You may have to use a basis 
for figuring gain that is different from the basis 
used for figuring loss. In this case, you may 
have neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or 
loss in the discussion on the basis of property 
you received as a gift under Basis Other Than 
Cost, earlier.
Special Rules for Mutual 
Funds
To figure your gain or loss when you dispose of 
mutual fund shares, you need to determine 
which shares were sold and the basis of those 
shares. If your shares in a mutual fund were ac-
quired all on the same day and for the same 
price, figuring their basis is not difficult. How-
ever, shares are generally acquired at various 
times, in various quantities, and at various pri-
ces. Therefore, figuring your basis can be more 
difficult. You can choose to use either a cost ba-
sis or an average basis to figure your gain or 
loss.
Cost Basis
You can figure your gain or loss using a cost ba-
sis only if you did not previously use an average 
basis for a sale, exchange, or redemption of 
other shares in the same mutual fund.
To figure cost basis, you can choose one of 
the following methods.
Specific share identification.
First-in first-out (FIFO).
Specific share identification.  If you ade-
quately identify the shares you sold, you can 
use the adjusted basis of those particular 
shares to figure your gain or loss.
You will adequately identify your mutual 
fund shares, even if you bought the shares in 
different lots at various prices and times, if you:
1. Specify to your broker or other agent the 
particular shares to be sold or transferred 
at the time of the sale or transfer, and
2. Receive confirmation in writing from your 
broker or other agent within a reasonable 
time of your specification of the particular 
shares sold or transferred.
You continue to have the burden of proving 
your basis in the specified shares at the time of 
sale or transfer.
First-in first-out (FIFO).  If your shares were 
acquired at different times or at different prices 
and you cannot identify which shares you sold, 
use the basis of the shares you acquired first as 
the basis of the shares sold. In other words, the 
oldest shares you own are considered sold first. 
You should keep a separate record of each pur-
chase and any dispositions of the shares until 
all shares purchased at the same time have 
been disposed of completely.
Table 4-2  illustrates the use of the FIFO 
method to figure the cost basis of shares sold, 
compared with the use of the average basis 
method (discussed next).
Average Basis
You can use the average basis method to de-
termine the basis of shares of stock if the 
shares are identical to each other, you acquired 
them at different times and different prices and 
left them in an account with a custodian or 
agent, and either:
They are shares in a mutual fund (or other 
regulated investment company);
They are shares you hold in connection 
with a dividend reinvestment plan (DRP), 
and all the shares you hold in connection 
with the DRP are treated as covered se-
curities (defined later); or
You acquired them after 2011 in connec-
tion with a DRP.
Average basis is determined by averaging 
the basis of all shares of identical stock in an 
account regardless of how long you have held 
the stock. However, shares of stock in a divi-
dend reinvestment plan are not identical to 
shares of stock with the same CUSIP number 
that are not in a dividend reinvestment plan. 
The basis of each share of identical stock in the 
account is the aggregate basis of all shares of 
that stock in the account divided by the aggre-
gate number of shares.
Transition rule from double-category 
method. You may no longer use the dou-
ble-category method for figuring your average 
basis. If you were using the double-category 
method for stock you acquired before April 1, 
2011, and you sell, exchange or otherwise dis-
pose of that stock on or after April 1, 2011, you 
must figure the average basis of this stock by 
averaging together all identical shares of stock 
in the account on April 1, 2011, regardless of 
the holding period.
Election of average basis method for cov-
ered securities.  To make the election to use 
the average basis method for your covered se-
curities, you must send written notice to the 
custodian or agent who keeps the account. The 
written notice can be made electronically. You 
must also notify your broker that you have made 
the election. Generally, a covered security is a 
security you acquired after 2010, with certain 
exceptions explained in the Instructions for 
Form 8949.
You can make the election to use the aver-
age basis method at any time. The election will 
be effective for sales or other dispositions of 
stocks that occur after you notify the custodian 
or agent of your election. Your election must 
identify each account with that custodian or 
agent and each stock in that account to which 
the election applies. The election can also indi-
cate that it applies to all accounts with a custo-
dian or agent, including accounts you later es-
tablish with the custodian or agent.
Election of average basis method for non-
covered securities.  For noncovered securi-
ties, you elect to use the average basis method 
on your income tax return for the first taxable 
year that the election applies. You make the 
election by showing on your return that you 
used the average basis method in reporting 
gain or loss on the sale or other disposition.
Revoking the average basis method elec-
tion. You can revoke an election to use the 
average basis method for your covered securi-
ties by sending written notice to the custodian 
or agent holding the stock for which you want to 
revoke the election. The election must generally 
be revoked by the earlier of 1 year after you 
make the election or the date of the first sale, 
transfer, or disposition of the stock following the 
election. The revocation applies to all the stock 
you hold in an account that is identical to the 
shares of stock for which you are revoking the 
election. After revoking your election, your basis 
in the shares of stock to which the revocation 
applies is the basis before averaging.
You may be able to find the average 
basis of your shares from information 
provided by the fund.
Average basis method illustrated. Table 4-2 
illustrates the average basis method of shares 
sold, compared with the use of the FIFO 
method to figure cost basis (discussed earlier).
Even though you include all unsold shares 
of identical stock in an account to compute 
average basis, you may have both short-term 
and long-term gains or losses when you sell 
these shares. To determine your holding period, 
the shares disposed of are considered to be 
those acquired first.
Example. You bought 400 identical shares 
in the LJO Mutual Fund: 200 shares on May 11, 
2015, and 200 shares on May 16, 2016. On No-
vember 16, 2016, you sold 300 shares. The ba-
sis of all 300 shares sold is the same, but you 
held 200 shares for more than 1 year, so your 
gain or loss on those shares is long term. You 
held 100 shares for 1 year or less, so your gain 
or loss on those shares is short term.
How to figure the basis of shares sold. 
To figure the basis of shares you sell, use the 
steps in the following worksheet.
TIP
Page 46 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 46  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the 
shares you owned in the fund just before 
the sale. (If you made an earlier sale of 
shares in this fund, add the adjusted 
basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of 
any shares you acquired after that 
sale.) ........................ $ 
2. Enter the total number of shares you 
owned in the fund just before the 
sale .........................  
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the 
amount on line 2. This is your average 
basis per share ................. $
4. Enter the number of shares you sold ...  
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the 
amount on line 4. This is the basis of the 
shares you sold ................ $ 
Example 1.  You bought 300 identical 
shares in the LJP Mutual Fund: 100 shares in 
2012 for $1,000 ($10 per share); 100 shares in 
2013 for $1,200 ($12 per share); and 100 
shares in 2014 for $2,600 ($26 per share). 
Thus, the total cost of your shares was $4,800 
($1,000 + $1,200 + $2,600). On May 9, 2016, 
you sold 150 shares. The basis of the shares 
you sold is $2,400 ($16 per share), figured as 
follows.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the 
shares you owned in the fund just before 
the sale. (If you made an earlier sale of 
shares in this fund, add the adjusted 
basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of 
any shares you acquired after that 
sale.) ........................ $4,800 
2. Enter the total number of shares you 
owned in the fund just before the 
sale ......................... 300 
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the 
amount on line 2. This is your average 
basis per share ................ $  16 
4. Enter the number of shares you 
sold ......................... 150 
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the 
amount on line 4. This is the basis of 
the shares you sold ............. $2,400 
Remaining shares.  The average basis of 
the shares you still hold after a sale of some of 
your shares is the same as the average basis of 
the shares sold. The next time you make a sale, 
your average basis will still be the same, unless 
you have acquired additional shares (or have 
made a subsequent adjustment to basis).
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except that you sold an additional 
50 shares on December 12, 2016. You do not 
need to recompute the average basis of the 150 
shares you owned at that time because you ac-
quired or sold no shares, and had no other ad-
justments to basis, since the last sale. Your ba-
sis is the $16 per share figured earlier.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except that you bought an 
additional 150 identical shares at $14 a share 
on September 12, 2016, and then sold 50 
shares on December 12, 2016. The total adjus-
ted basis of all the shares you owned just be-
fore the sale is $4,500, figured as follows.
1. Basis of remaining shares ($16 x 
150) ........................ $2,400 
2. Cost of shares acquired 9/9/2015 ($14 x 
150) ......................... $2,100 
3. Total adjusted basis of all shares owned 
($2,400 + $2,100) ............... $4,500 
The basis of the shares sold is $750 ($15 a 
share), figured as follows.
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all the 
shares you owned in the fund just before 
the sale. (If you made an earlier sale of 
shares in this fund, add the adjusted 
basis of any shares you still owned after 
the last sale and the adjusted basis of 
any shares you acquired after that 
sale.) ........................ $4,500 
2. Enter the total number of shares you 
owned in the fund just before the 
sale ......................... 300 
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the 
amount on line 2. This is your average 
basis per share ................ $  15 
4. Enter the number of shares you 
sold ......................... 50 
5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the 
amount on line 4. This is the basis of 
the shares you sold ............. $ 750 
Shares received as gift.  If your account 
includes shares that you received by gift, and 
the fair market value of the shares at the time of 
the gift was not more than the donor's basis, 
special rules apply. You cannot choose to use 
the average basis for the account unless you 
state in writing that you will treat the basis of the 
gift shares as the fair market value at the time 
you acquire the shares. You must provide this 
written statement when you make the election 
to use the average basis method, as described 
under Election of average basis method for cov­
ered securities  and Election for average basis 
method for noncovered securities , earlier, or 
when you transfer the gift shares to an account 
for which you have made the average basis 
method election, whichever is later. The state-
ment must be effective for any gift shares identi-
cal to the gift shares to which the average basis 
method election applies that you acquire at any 
time and must remain in effect as long as the 
election remains in effect.
When there is a sale, exchange, or re-
demption of your shares in a fund, 
keep the confirmation statement you 
receive. The statement shows the price you re-
ceived for the shares and other information you 
need to report gain or loss on your return.
Nontaxable Trades
This section discusses trades that generally do 
not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. 
For more information on nontaxable trades, see 
chapter 1 of Pub. 544.
RECORDS
Table 4-2. Example of How To Figure Basis of Shares Sold
This is an example showing two different ways to figure basis. It compares the cost basis using the FIFO method with the 
average basis method.
Date Action Share Price No. of Shares Total Shares 
Owned
2/10/2014 Invest $4,000 $25 160 160
8/11/2014 Invest $4,800 $20 240 400
12/15/2014 Reinvest $300 
dividend $30 10 410
10/3/2016 Sell 210 shares for 
$6,720
$32 210 200
COST BASIS 
(FIFO)
To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/3/2016, use the share price of the first 
210 shares you bought, namely the 160 shares you purchased on 2/10/2014 and 50 of 
those purchased on 8/11/2014.
$4,000 (cost of 160 shares on 2/10/2014)
+ $1,000 (cost of 50 shares on 8/11/2014)
Basis = $5,000
AVERAGE BASIS To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/3/2016, use the average basis of all 
410 shares owned on 10/3/2016.
$9,100 (cost of 410 shares)
÷ 410 (number of shares)
$22.20 (average basis per share)
$22.20
× 210
Basis = $4,662
Page 47 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 47

Like-Kind Exchanges
If you trade business or investment property for 
other business or investment property of a like 
kind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct 
any loss until you sell or dispose of the property 
you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must 
meet all six of the following conditions.
1. The property must be business or invest-
ment property. You must hold both the 
property you trade and the property you 
receive for productive use in your trade or 
business or for investment. Neither prop-
erty may be property used for personal 
purposes, such as your home or family 
car.
2. The property must not be held primarily for 
sale. The property you trade and the prop-
erty you receive must not be property you 
sell to customers, such as merchandise.
3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, 
notes, choses in action, certificates of trust 
or beneficial interest, or other securities or 
evidences of indebtedness or interest, in-
cluding partnership interests. However, 
see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser­
voir, or irrigation company stock, later. 
Also, you can have a nontaxable trade of 
corporate stocks under a different rule, as 
discussed later under Corporate Stocks.
4. There must be a trade of like property. The 
trade of real estate for real estate, or per-
sonal property for similar personal prop-
erty, is a trade of like property. The trade 
of an apartment house for a store building, 
or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a 
trade of like property. The trade of a piece 
of machinery for a store building is not a 
trade of like property. Real property loca-
ted in the United States and real property 
located outside the United States are not 
like property. Also, personal property used 
predominantly within the United States 
and personal property used predominantly 
outside the United States are not like prop-
erty.
5. The property to be received must be iden-
tified in writing within 45 days after the 
date you transfer the property given up in 
the trade. If you received the replacement 
property before the end of the 45-day pe-
riod, you automatically are treated as hav-
ing met the 45-day written notice require-
ment.
6. The property to be received must be re-
ceived by the earlier of:
a. The 180th day after the date on which 
you transfer the property given up in 
the trade, or
b. The due date, including extensions, 
for your tax return for the year in 
which the transfer of the property 
given up occurs.
If you trade property with a related party in a 
like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. 
See Related Party Transactions , later in this 
chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Pub. 544 for 
more information on exchanges of business 
property and special rules for exchanges using 
qualified intermediaries or involving multiple 
properties.
Partly nontaxable exchange.  If you receive 
money or unlike property in addition to the like 
property, and the preceding six conditions are 
met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You 
are taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to 
the amount of the money and the fair market 
value of the unlike property you receive. You 
cannot deduct a loss.
Like property and unlike property trans-
ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-
tion to the like property, you must recognize 
gain or loss on the unlike property you give up. 
The gain or loss is the difference between the 
adjusted basis of the unlike property and its fair 
market value.
Like property and money transferred.  If 
conditions (1)–(6) are met, you have a nontaxa-
ble trade even if you pay money in addition to 
the like property.
Basis of property received.  You figure your 
basis in property received in a nontaxable or 
partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba­
sis Other Than Cost, earlier.
Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, or 
irrigation company stock.  For purposes of 
item (3) above, stock does not include shares in 
a mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company 
if all of the following conditions are met at the 
time of the trade.
The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation 
company is an organization described in 
section 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve-
nue Code (determined without regard to 
the percentage of its income that is collec-
ted from its members for the purpose of 
meeting losses and expenses).
The shares in the company have been rec-
ognized by the highest court of the state in 
which the company was organized or by 
applicable state statute as constituting or 
representing real property or an interest in 
real property.
The trade occurred after May 22, 2008.
How to report.  You must report the trade of 
like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-
ognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on 
Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797, 
whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, see 
chapter 4 of Pub. 544.
Corporate Stocks
The following trades of corporate stocks gener-
ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deducti-
ble loss.
Corporate reorganizations.  In some instan-
ces, a company will give you common stock for 
preferred stock, preferred stock for common 
stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in 
another corporation. If this is a result of a 
merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled 
corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-
porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-
zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.
Example 1. On April 14, 2016, KP1 Corpo-
ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You 
held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of 
$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re-
ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange for 
your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain or 
loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70 
shares of the new stock is still $3,500.
Example 2. On July 21, 2016, RGB Corpo-
ration divests itself of SFH Corporation. You 
hold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of 
$5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as 
a result of the spin-off. You do not recognize 
any gain or loss on the transaction. You receive 
information from RGB Corporation that your ba-
sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your 
basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis 
in SFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB 
stock (after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 – 
$592).
Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting 
corporation should send you information that in-
cludes details on how to allocate basis between 
the old and new stock. Keep this information 
until the period of limitations expires for the year 
in which you dispose of the stock in a taxable 
disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from the 
date the return was due or filed, or 2 years from 
the date the tax was paid, whichever is later.
Stock for stock of the same corporation.
You can exchange common stock for common 
stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in 
the same corporation without having a recog-
nized gain or loss. This is true for a trade be-
tween two stockholders as well as a trade be-
tween a stockholder and the corporation.
If you receive cash for fractional shares, see 
Fractional shares in chapter 1.
Money or other property received.  If in 
an otherwise nontaxable trade you receive 
money or other property in addition to stock, 
then your gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but 
only up to the amount of the money or other 
property. Any loss is not recognized.
If you received cash for fractional shares, 
see Fractional shares in chapter 1.
Nonqualified preferred stock.  Nonquali-
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop-
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to 
preferred stock with one or more of the follow-
ing features.
The holder has the right to require the is-
suer or a related person to redeem or pur-
chase the stock.
The issuer or a related person is required 
to redeem or purchase the stock.
The issuer or a related person has the right 
to redeem the stock, and on the issue 
date, it is more likely than not that the right 
will be exercised.
The dividend rate on the stock varies with 
reference to interest rates, commodity pri-
ces, or similar indices.
For a detailed definition of nonqualified prefer-
red stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Internal 
Revenue Code.
Convertible stocks and bonds.  You gener-
ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you 
Page 48 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 48  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into 
common stock of the same corporation accord-
ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the 
bond or the preferred stock certificate.
Example. In November, you bought for $1 
a right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, 
on payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond is-
sued by that corporation.
On December 5, you subscribed to the 
bond, which was issued on December 12. The 
bond contained a clause stating that you would 
receive one share of XYZ Corporation common 
stock on surrender of one bond and the pay-
ment of $50.
Later, you presented the bond and $50 and 
received one share of XYZ Corporation com-
mon stock. You did not have a recognized gain 
or loss. This is true whether the fair market 
value of the stock was more or less than $150 
on the date of the conversion.
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 
+ $99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your 
holding period for the part based on your own-
ership of the bond ($100 basis) begins on De-
cember 5. Your holding period for the part 
based on your cash investment ($50 basis) be-
gins on the day after you acquired the share of 
stock.
Bonds for stock of another corporation. 
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one cor-
poration into common stock of another corpora-
tion, according to the terms of the bond issue, 
you must recognize gain or loss up to the differ-
ence between the fair market value of the stock 
received and the adjusted basis of the bonds 
exchanged. In some instances, however, such 
as trades that are part of mergers or other cor-
porate reorganizations, you will have no recog-
nized gain or loss if certain requirements are 
met. For more information about the tax conse-
quences of converting securities of one corpo-
ration into common stock of another corpora-
tion, under circumstances such as those just 
described, consult the respective corporations 
and the terms of the bond issue. This informa-
tion is also available on the prospectus of the 
bond issue.
Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
tion. If you transfer property to a corporation 
solely in exchange for stock in that corporation, 
and immediately after the trade you are in con-
trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not rec-
ognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both to 
individuals and to groups who transfer property 
to a corporation. It does not apply if the corpora-
tion is an investment company.
If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro-
ceeding and you transfer property to a control-
led corporation under a plan, other than a reor-
ganization, you must recognize gain to the 
extent the stock you receive in the exchange is 
used to pay off your debts.
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-
ration, you or your group of transferors must 
own, immediately after the exchange, at least 
80% of the total combined voting power of all 
classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 
80% of the outstanding shares of each class of 
nonvoting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you may 
have to attach to your return a complete state-
ment of all facts pertinent to the exchange. For 
details, see Regulations section 1.351-3.
Money or other property received.  If, in 
an otherwise nontaxable trade of property for 
corporate stock, you also receive money or 
property other than stock, you may have a taxa-
ble gain. However, you are taxed only up to the 
amount of money plus the fair market value of 
the other property you receive. The rules for fig-
uring taxable gain in this situation generally fol-
low those for a partly nontaxable exchange dis-
cussed earlier under Like­Kind Exchanges . If 
the property you give up includes depreciable 
property, the taxable gain may have to be re-
ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-
tion. (See chapter 3 of Pub. 544.) No loss is rec-
ognized.
Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-
lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora­
tion) received is generally treated as property 
other than stock.
Basis of stock or other property re-
ceived. The basis of the stock you receive is 
generally the adjusted basis of the property you 
transfer. Increase this amount by any amount 
that was treated as a dividend, plus any gain 
recognized on the trade. Decrease this amount 
by any cash you received and the fair market 
value of any other property you received.
The basis of any other property you receive 
is its fair market value on the date of the trade.
Exchange of Shares In One 
Mutual Fund For Shares In 
Another Mutual Fund
Any exchange of shares in one fund for shares 
in another fund is a taxable exchange. This is 
true even if you exchange shares in one fund 
for shares in another fund within the same fam-
ily of funds. Report any gain or loss on the 
shares you gave up as a capital gain or loss in 
the year in which the exchange occurs. Usually, 
you can add any service charge or fee paid in 
connection with an exchange to the cost of the 
shares acquired. For an exception, see Com­
missions and load charges, earlier.
Insurance Policies
and Annuities
You will not have a recognized gain or loss if the 
insured or annuitant is the same under both 
contracts and you trade:
A life insurance contract for another life in-
surance contract or for an endowment or 
annuity contract or for a qualified long-term 
care insurance contract,
An endowment contract for another en-
dowment contract that provides for regular 
payments beginning at a date no later than 
the beginning date under the old contract 
or for annuity contract or for a qualified 
long-term insurance contract,
An annuity contract for annuity contract or 
for a qualified long-term care insurance 
contract, or
A qualified long-term care insurance con-
tract for a qualified long-term care insur-
ance contract.
You also may not have to recognize gain or loss 
from an exchange of a portion of an annuity 
contract for another annuity contract. For trans-
fers completed before October 24, 2011, see 
Revenue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Proce-
dure 2008-24 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 
2008-13. Revenue Ruling 2003-76 is available 
at www.irs.gov/irb/2003­33_IRB/ar11.html. 
Revenue Procedure 2008-24 is available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2008­13_IRB/ar13.html. For 
transfers completed on or after October 24, 
2011, see Revenue Ruling 2003-76, above, and 
Revenue Procedure 2011-38, in Internal Reve-
nue Bulletin 2011-30. Revenue Procedure 
2011-38 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2011­30_IRB/ar09.html. For tax years begin-
ning after 2010, amounts received as an annu-
ity for a period of 10 years or more, or for the 
lives of one or more individuals, under any por-
tion of an annuity, endowment, or life insurance 
contract, are treated as a separate contract and 
are considered partial annuities. A portion of an 
annuity, endowment, or life insurance contract 
may be annuitized, provided that the annuitiza-
tion period is for 10 years or more or for the 
lives of one or more individuals. The investment 
in the contract is allocated between the part of 
the contract from which amounts are received 
as an annuity and the part of the contract from 
which amounts are not received as an annuity.
Exchanges of contracts not included in this 
list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-
ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-
tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.
Demutualization of Life
Insurance Companies
A life insurance company may change from a 
mutual company to a stock company. This is 
commonly called demutualization. If you were a 
policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-
pany, you may have received either stock in the 
stock company or cash in exchange for your 
equity interest in the mutual company.
If the demutualization transaction qualifies 
as a tax-free reorganization under section 
368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain 
or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your 
holding period for the new stock includes the 
period you held an equity interest in the mutual 
company as a policyholder or annuitant.
If the demutualization transaction does not 
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, 
you must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your 
holding period for the stock does not include 
the period you held an equity interest in the mu-
tual company.
If you received cash in exchange for your 
equity interest, you must recognize a capital 
gain. If you held an equity interest for more than 
1 year, your gain is long term.
Page 49 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 49

U.S. Treasury
Notes or Bonds
You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury 
obligations for other issues, designated by the 
Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss 
recognized on the trade.
See the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. 
Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information 
about income from these investments.
Transfers Between 
Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a 
transfer of property from an individual to (or in 
trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to 
a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition 
rule does not apply in the following situations.
The recipient spouse or former spouse is a 
nonresident alien.
Property is transferred in trust and liability 
exceeds basis. Gain must be recognized 
to the extent the amount of the liabilities 
assumed by the trust, plus any liabilities on 
the property, exceed the adjusted basis of 
the property.
An installment obligation is transferred in 
trust. For information on the disposition of 
an installment obligation, see Pub. 537.
Certain stock redemptions, which are taxa-
ble to a spouse under the tax law, a di-
vorce or separation instrument, or a valid 
written agreement, discussed in Regula-
tions section 1.1041-2.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or for-
mer spouse on which gain or loss is not recog-
nized is treated by the recipient as a gift and is 
not considered a sale or exchange. The recipi-
ent's basis in the property will be the same as 
the adjusted basis of the giver immediately be-
fore the transfer. This carryover basis rule ap-
plies whether the adjusted basis of the transfer-
red property is less than, equal to, or greater 
than either its fair market value at the time of 
transfer or any consideration paid by the recipi-
ent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-
ing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized on 
a transfer in trust increases the basis.
A transfer of property is incident to a divorce 
if the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date 
on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is 
related to the ending of the marriage. For more 
information, see Property Settlements  in Pub. 
504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. 
Related Party 
Transactions
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop-
erty between related parties.
Gain on Sale or Trade
of Depreciable Property
Your gain from the sale or trade of property to a 
related party may be ordinary income, rather 
than capital gain, if the property can be depreci-
ated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 in 
Pub. 544 for more information.
Like-Kind Exchanges
Generally, if you trade business or investment 
property for other business or investment prop-
erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. 
See Like­Kind Exchanges , earlier, under Non­
taxable Trades.
This rule also applies to trades of property 
between related parties, defined next under 
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How-
ever, if either you or the related party disposes 
of the like property within 2 years after the 
trade, you both must report any gain or loss not 
recognized on the original trade on your return 
for the year in which the later disposition oc-
curs.
This rule generally does not apply to:
Dispositions due to the death of either rela-
ted party,
Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 544), or
Trades and later dispositions whose main 
purpose is not the avoidance of federal in-
come tax.
If a property holder's risk of loss on the prop-
erty is substantially diminished during any pe-
riod, that period is not counted in determining 
whether the property was disposed of within 2 
years. The property holder's risk of loss is sub-
stantially diminished by:
The holding of a put on the property,
The holding by another person of a right to 
acquire the property, or
A short sale or any other transaction.
Losses on Sales or
Trades of Property
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of 
property, other than a distribution in complete 
liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is 
directly or indirectly between you and the fol-
lowing related parties.
Members of your family. This includes only 
your brothers and sisters, half-brothers 
and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (pa-
rents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
A partnership in which you directly or indi-
rectly own more than 50% of the capital in-
terest or the profits interest.
A corporation in which you directly or indi-
rectly own more than 50% in value of the 
outstanding stock (see Constructive own­
ership of stock, later).
A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-
ganization directly or indirectly controlled, 
in any manner or by any method, by you or 
by a member of your family, whether or not 
this control is legally enforceable.
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of prop-
erty is not deductible if the transaction is directly 
or indirectly between the following related par-
ties.
A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary and 
beneficiary, of any trust.
Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the fi-
duciary and beneficiary of two different 
trusts, if the same person is the grantor of 
both trusts.
A trust fiduciary and a corporation of which 
more than 50% in value of the outstanding 
stock is directly or indirectly owned by or 
for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the 
trust.
A corporation and a partnership if the 
same persons own more than 50% in value 
of the outstanding stock of the corporation 
and more than 50% of the capital interest, 
or the profits interest, in the partnership.
Two S corporations if the same persons 
own more than 50% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation.
Two corporations, one of which is an S 
corporation, if the same persons own more 
than 50% in value of the outstanding stock 
of each corporation.
An executor and a beneficiary of an estate 
(except in the case of a sale or trade to sat-
isfy a pecuniary bequest).
Two corporations that are members of the 
same controlled group (under certain con-
ditions, however, these losses are not dis-
allowed but must be deferred).
Two partnerships if the same persons own, 
directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the 
capital interests or the profit interests in 
both partnerships.
Multiple property sales or trades.  If you sell 
or trade to a related party a number of blocks of 
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you 
must figure the gain or loss separately for each 
block of stock or piece of property. The gain on 
each item may be taxable. However, you can-
not deduct the loss on any item. Also, you can-
not reduce gains from the sales of any of these 
items by losses on the sales of any of the other 
items.
Indirect transactions.  You cannot deduct 
your loss on the sale of stock through your 
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related 
party buys the same stock you had owned. This 
does not apply to a trade between related par-
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
dental and is not prearranged.
Constructive ownership of stock.  In deter-
mining whether a person directly or indirectly 
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
tion, the following rules apply.
Rule 1.  Stock directly or indirectly owned 
by or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or 
trust is considered owned proportionately by or 
for its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to own 
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for 
his or her family. Family includes only brothers 
and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, 
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by 
applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is 
considered to own the stock directly or indi-
rectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock 
constructively owned by a person under rule 1 
Page 50 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 50  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

is treated as actually owned by that person. But 
stock constructively owned by an individual un-
der rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by 
that individual for again applying either rule 2 or 
rule 3 to make another person the constructive 
owner of the stock.
Property received from a related party.  If 
you sell or trade at a gain property you acquired 
from a related party, you recognize the gain 
only to the extent that it is more than the loss 
previously disallowed to the related party. This 
rule applies only if you are the original trans-
feree and you acquired the property by pur-
chase or exchange. This rule does not apply if 
the related party's loss was disallowed because 
of the wash sale rules, described later under 
Wash Sales.
If you sell or trade at a loss property you ac-
quired from a related party, you cannot recog-
nize the loss that was not allowed to the related 
party.
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for 
$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother 
cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell 
the same stock to an unrelated party for 
$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-
able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the 
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).
Example 2.  If, in Example 1 , you sold the 
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your rec-
ognized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis 
minus $6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that 
was not allowed to your brother.
Capital Gains
and Losses
Terms you may need to know 
(see Glossary):
 Call
 Commodity future
 Conversion transaction
 Forward contract
 Limited partner
 Listed option
 Nonequity option
 Options dealer
 Put
 Regulated futures contract
 Section 1256 contract
 Straddle
 Wash sale
 
This section discusses the tax treatment of 
gains and losses from different types of invest-
ment transactions.
Character of gain or loss.  You need to clas-
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or 
capital gains or losses. You then need to clas-
sify your capital gains and losses as either short 
term or long term. If you have long-term gains 
and losses, you must identify your 28% rate 
gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, 
you must also identify any unrecaptured section 
1250 gain.
The correct classification and identification 
helps you figure the limit on capital losses and 
the correct tax on capital gains. For information 
about determining whether your capital gain or 
loss is short term or long term, see Holding Pe­
riod, later. For information about 28% rate gain 
or loss and unrecaptured section 1250 gain, 
see Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.
Capital or Ordinary
Gain or Loss
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss 
from a transaction, it may be either a capital 
gain or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depend-
ing on the circumstances. Generally, a sale or 
trade of a capital asset (defined next) results in 
a capital gain or loss. A sale or trade of a non-
capital asset generally results in ordinary gain 
or loss. Depending on the circumstances, a 
gain or loss on a sale or trade of property used 
in a trade or business may be treated as either 
capital or ordinary, as explained in Pub. 544. In 
some situations, part of your gain or loss may 
be a capital gain or loss, and part may be an or-
dinary gain or loss.
Capital Assets and
Noncapital Assets
For the most part, everything you own and use 
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment 
is a capital asset. Some examples are:
Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
count;
A house owned and used by you and your 
family;
Household furnishings;
A car used for pleasure or commuting;
Coin or stamp collections;
Gems and jewelry; and
Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-
cept the following noncapital assets.
1. Property held mainly for sale to customers 
or property that will physically become a 
part of the merchandise for sale to cus-
tomers. For an exception, see Capital as­
set treatment for self­created musical 
works, later.
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or 
business, even if fully depreciated.
3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
ness.
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic 
composition, a letter or memorandum, or 
similar property that is:
a. Created by your personal efforts,
b. Prepared or produced for you (in the 
case of a letter, memorandum, or sim-
ilar property), or
c. Acquired under circumstances (for 
example, by gift) entitling you to the 
basis of the person who created the 
property or for whom it was prepared 
or produced.
For an exception to this rule, see Capi­
tal asset treatment for self­created musical 
works, later.
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in 
the ordinary course of a trade or business 
for services rendered or from the sale of 
property described in (1).
6. U.S. government publications that you re-
ceived from the government free or for 
less than the normal sales price, or that 
you acquired under circumstances enti-
tling you to the basis of someone who re-
ceived the publications free or for less 
than the normal sales price.
7. Certain commodities derivative financial 
instruments held by commodities deriva-
tives dealers. For more information, see 
section 1221 of the Internal Revenue 
Code.
8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-
action is clearly identified as a hedging 
transaction before the close of the day on 
which it was acquired, originated, or en-
tered into. For more information, see the 
definition of hedging transaction, earlier, 
and the discussion of hedging transac-
tions under Commodity Futures, later.
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use or 
consume in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
Investment property.  Investment property is 
a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or 
trade generally is a capital gain or loss.
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. 
These are capital assets except when they are 
held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from 
their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or 
loss.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.  All of 
these, including stock received as a dividend, 
are capital assets except when they are held for 
sale by a securities dealer. However, see Los­
ses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock 
and Losses on Small Business Investment 
Company Stock, later.
Personal use property. Property held for per-
sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a 
capital asset, and you must report a gain from 
its sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot 
deduct a loss from selling personal use prop-
erty.
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu-
sical works.  You can elect to treat musical 
compositions and copyrights in musical works 
as capital assets when you sell or exchange 
them if:
Your personal efforts created the property, 
or
You acquired the property under circum-
stances (for example, by gift) entitling you 
to the basis of the person who created the 
property or for whom it was prepared or 
produced.
You must make a separate election for each 
musical composition (or copyright in a musical 
work) sold or exchanged during the tax year. 
Make the election by the due date (including 
Page 51 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 51

extensions) of the income tax return for the tax 
year of the sale or exchange. Make the election 
on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040) by 
treating the sale or exchange as the sale or ex-
change of a capital asset, according to Form 
8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), and their 
separate instructions.
You can revoke the election if you have IRS 
approval. To get IRS approval, you must submit 
a request for a letter ruling under the appropri-
ate IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, 
Revenue Procedure 2017-1, available at 
www.irs.gov/irb/2017­01_IRB/ar07.html. Alter-
natively, you are granted an automatic 6-month 
extension from the due date of your income tax 
return (excluding extensions) to revoke the 
election, provided you timely file your income 
tax return, and within this 6-month extension 
period, you file Form 1040X that treats the sale 
or exchange as the sale or exchange of prop-
erty that is not a capital asset.
Discounted Debt Instruments
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, 
or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument 
originally issued at a discount or bought at a 
discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-
plained in the following discussions.
Short-term government obligations.  Treat 
gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-
ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt ob-
ligations) as ordinary income up to your ratable 
share of the acquisition discount. This treatment 
applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date 
not more than 1 year from the date of issue. Ac-
quisition discount is the stated redemption price 
at maturity minus your basis in the obligation.
However, do not treat these gains as in-
come to the extent you previously included the 
discount in income. See Discount on 
Short­Term Obligations in chapter 1 for more in-
formation.
Short-term nongovernment obligations. 
Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-
gations as ordinary income up to your ratable 
share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga-
tions with a fixed maturity date of not more than 
1 year from the date of issue.
However, to the extent you previously inclu-
ded the discount in income, you do not have to 
include it in income again. See Discount on 
Short­Term Obligations in chapter 1 for more in-
formation.
Tax-exempt state and local government 
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued at 
a discount before September 4, 1982, or you 
acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your 
part of OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure 
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these 
bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part 
of OID.
If the bonds were issued after September 3, 
1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-
crease the adjusted basis by your part of OID to 
figure gain or loss. For more information on the 
basis of these bonds, see Discounted tax­ex­
empt obligations, earlier in this chapter.
Any gain from market discount is usually 
taxable on disposition or redemption of 
tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds be-
fore May 1, 1993, the gain from market discount 
is capital gain. If you bought the bonds after 
April 30, 1993, the gain from market discount is 
ordinary income.
You figure market discount by subtracting 
the price you paid for the bond from the sum of 
the original issue price of the bond and the 
amount of accumulated OID from the date of is-
sue that represented interest to any earlier hold-
ers. For more information, see Market Discount 
Bonds in chapter 1.
A loss on the sale or other disposition of a 
tax-exempt state or local government bond is 
deductible as a capital loss.
Redeemed before maturity.  If a state or 
local bond issued before June 9, 1980, is re-
deemed before it matures, the OID is not taxa-
ble to you.
If a state or local bond issued after June 8, 
1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of 
OID earned while you hold the bond is not taxa-
ble to you. However, you must report the un-
earned part of OID as a capital gain.
Example. On July 5, 2005, the date of is-
sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond 
for $800. The face amount of the bond was 
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time 
the bond was issued, the issuer had no inten-
tion of redeeming it before it matured. The bond 
was callable at its face amount beginning 10 
years after the issue date.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of 
11 years (July 5, 2016) for its face amount of 
$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The 
OID earned during the time you held the bond, 
$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual in-
terest also is not taxable. However, you must 
report the unearned part of OID, $127 ($200 − 
$73), as a capital gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued after 
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before 
July 2, 1982, if a government instrument). If 
you sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of 
these debt instruments, the part of your gain 
that is not more than your ratable share of OID 
at the time of sale or redemption is ordinary in-
come. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, 
however, there was an intention to call the debt 
instrument before maturity, all of your gain that 
is not more than the entire OID is treated as or-
dinary income at the time of the sale. This treat-
ment of taxable gain also applies to corporate 
instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a 
written commitment that was binding on May 
27, 1969, and at all times thereafter.
Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April 
5, 1982, and sold it for $900 on October 17, 
2016, for a $200 gain. The redemption price is 
$1,000. At the time of original issue, there was 
no intention to call the bond before maturity. 
You have held the bond for 424 full months. Do 
not count the additional days that are less than 
a full month. The number of complete months 
from date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30 
years). The fraction 424/360 multiplied by the 
discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to 
$353. This is your ratable share of OID for the 
period you owned the bond. You must treat any 
part of the gain up to $353 as ordinary income. 
As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated as or-
dinary income.
Long-term debt instruments issued after 
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
ernment instrument). If you hold one of these 
debt instruments, you must include a part of 
OID in your gross income each year you own 
the instrument. Your basis in that debt instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID that 
you have included in your gross income. See 
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument be-
fore maturity, your gain is a capital gain. How-
ever, if at the time the instrument was originally 
issued there was an intention to call it before its 
maturity, your gain generally is ordinary income 
to the extent of the entire OID reduced by any 
amounts of OID previously includible in your in-
come. In this case, the rest of the gain is capital 
gain.
An intention to call a debt instrument before 
maturity means there is a written or oral agree-
ment or understanding not provided for in the 
debt instrument between the issuer and original 
holder that the issuer will redeem the debt in-
strument before maturity. In the case of debt in-
struments that are part of an issue, the agree-
ment or understanding must be between the 
issuer and the original holders of a substantial 
amount of the debt instruments in the issue.
Example 1.  On February 10, 2014, you 
bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor-
poration's 10-year, 5% bond which has a stated 
redemption price at maturity of $10,000. On 
February 11, 2016, you sold the bond for 
$9,040. Assume you have included $334 of OID 
in your gross income (including the amount ac-
crued for 2016) and increased your basis in the 
bond by that amount. Your basis is now $7,934. 
If at the time of the original issue there was no 
intention to call the bond before maturity, your 
gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus 
$7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of 
original issue there was an intention to call the 
bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordi-
nary income. You figure this as follows:
1. Entire OID ($10,000 stated redemption 
price at maturity minus $7,600 issue 
price) ........................ $2,400 
2. Minus: Amount previously included
in income ..................... 334
3. Maximum amount of ordinary 
income ....................... $2,066
Because the amount in (3) is more than your 
gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-
come.
Market discount bonds.  If the debt instru-
ment has market discount and you chose to in-
clude the discount in income as it accrued, in-
crease your basis in the debt instrument by the 
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss 
on its disposition. If you did not choose to in-
clude the discount in income as it accrued, you 
must report gain as ordinary interest income up 
to the instrument's accrued market discount. 
Page 52 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 52  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

See Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1. The 
rest of the gain is capital gain.
However, a different rule applies if you dis-
pose of a market discount bond that was:
Issued before July 19, 1984; and
Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
In that case, any gain is treated as interest in-
come up to the amount of your deferred interest 
deduction for the year you dispose of the bond. 
The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The limit on 
the interest deduction for market discount 
bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under When To 
Deduct Investment Interest.)
Report the sale or trade of a market discount 
bond in Form 8949, Part I or Part II, whichever 
is appropriate. Use the table How To Complete 
Form 8949, Columns (f) and (g) in the Instruc-
tions for Form 8949 to help you figure the 
amounts to report for a sale or trade of a market 
discount bond. Also report the amount of ac-
crued market discount in column (g) as interest 
income on Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), 
line 1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Dis-
count.”
Report your sales or trades of a market 
discount bond on Form 8949 with the 
correct box checked for these transac­
tions. See Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Form 8949.
Retirement of debt instrument.  Any amount 
you receive on the retirement of a debt instru-
ment is treated in the same way as if you had 
sold or traded that instrument.
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation 
of an individual issued with OID after March 1, 
1984, you generally must include the OID in 
your income currently, and your gain or loss on 
its sale or retirement is generally capital gain or 
loss. An exception to this treatment applies if 
the obligation is a loan between individuals and 
all the following requirements are met.
The lender is not in the business of lending 
money.
The amount of the loan, plus the amount of 
any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 or 
less.
Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-
cipal purposes of the loan.
If the exception applies, or the obligation 
was issued before March 2, 1984, you do not 
include the OID in your income currently. When 
you sell or redeem the obligation, the part of 
your gain that is not more than your accrued 
share of OID at that time is ordinary income. 
The rest of the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any 
loss on the sale or redemption is capital loss.
Bearer Obligations
You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation re-
quired to be in registered form that is instead 
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the 
sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-
nary income. However, if the issuer was subject 
to a tax when the obligation was issued, then 
you can deduct any loss, and any gain may 
qualify for capital gain treatment.
TIP
Obligations required to be in registered 
form. Any obligation must be in registered form 
unless:
It is issued by a natural person,
It is not of a type offered to the public,
It has a maturity at the date of issue of not 
more than 1 year, or
It was issued before 1983.
Deposit in Insolvent or
Bankrupt Financial Institution
If you lose money you have on deposit in a 
bank, credit union, or other financial institution 
that becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may 
be able to deduct your loss in one of three 
ways.
Ordinary loss.
Casualty loss.
Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital 
loss).
Ordinary loss or casualty loss.  If you can 
reasonably estimate your loss, you can choose 
to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary 
loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either 
way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-
tion.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a 
miscellaneous itemized deduction on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum 
amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if 
you are married filing separately) reduced by 
any expected state insurance proceeds. Your 
loss is subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-
come limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordi-
nary loss if any part of the deposit is federally 
insured.
If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form 
4684 to your return. Each loss must be reduced 
by $100. Your total casualty losses for the year 
are reduced by 10% of your adjusted gross in-
come.
You cannot choose either of these methods 
if:
You own at least 1% of the financial institu-
tion,
You are an officer of the institution, or
You are related to such an owner or officer. 
You are related if you and the owner or offi-
cer are “related parties,” as defined earlier 
under Related Party Transactions, or if you 
are the aunt, uncle, nephew, or niece of 
the owner or officer.
If the actual loss that is finally determined is 
more than the amount you deducted as an esti-
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a 
bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the 
amount deducted as an estimated loss, you 
must include in income (in the final determina-
tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov­
eries in Pub. 525.
Nonbusiness bad debt.  If you do not choose 
to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty loss 
or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year the 
amount of the actual loss is determined and de-
duct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year. 
Report it as a short-term capital loss on Form 
8949, Part I, line 1, as explained under How to 
report bad debts, later.
Sale of Annuity
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity 
contract before its maturity date that is based 
on interest accumulated on the contract is ordi-
nary income.
Conversion Transactions
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion 
transaction is treated as ordinary income. This 
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi-
nation of any position you held as part of a con-
version transaction you entered into after April 
30, 1993.
A conversion transaction is any transaction 
that meets both of these tests.
1. Substantially all of your expected return 
from the transaction is due to the time 
value of your net investment. In other 
words, the return on your investment is, in 
substance, like interest on a loan.
2. The transaction is one of the following.
a. A straddle as defined under Strad­
dles, later, but including any set of off-
setting positions on stock established 
before October 22, 2004.
b. Any transaction in which you acquire 
property (whether or not actively tra-
ded) at substantially the same time 
that you contract to sell the same 
property, or substantially identical 
property, at a price set in the contract.
c. Any other transaction that is marketed 
or sold as producing capital gains 
from a transaction described in (1).
Amount treated as ordinary income.  The 
amount of gain treated as ordinary income is 
the smaller of:
The gain recognized on the disposition or 
other termination of the position, or
The “applicable imputed income amount.”
Applicable imputed income amount.  Figure 
this amount as follows.
1. Figure the amount of interest that would 
have accrued on your net investment in 
the conversion transaction for the period 
ending on the earlier of:
a. The date you dispose of the position, 
or
b. The date the transaction stops being 
a conversion transaction.
To figure this amount, use an interest 
rate equal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” 
defined later.
2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as 
ordinary income from any earlier disposi-
tion or other termination of a position held 
as part of the same conversion transac-
tion.
Applicable rate. If the term of the conver-
sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate 
is the federal short-term rate in effect under 
section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
Page 53 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 53

during the period of the conversion transaction, 
compounded daily.
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the 
“applicable federal rate” determined as if the 
conversion transaction were a debt instrument 
and compounded semi-annually.
The rates discussed above are published by 
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. The In-
ternal Revenue Bulletin is available through 
IRS.gov. You can also find applicable federal 
rates in the Index of Applicable Federal Rates 
(AFR) Rulings at https://apps.IRS.gov/app/
picklist/list/federalRates.html.
See chapter 5, How To Get Tax Help , for in-
formation on contacting the IRS.
Net investment. To determine your net invest-
ment in a conversion transaction, include the 
fair market value of any position at the time it 
becomes part of the transaction. This means 
your net investment generally will be the total 
amount you invested, less any amount you re-
ceived for entering into the position (for exam-
ple, a premium you received for writing a call).
Position with built-in loss.  A special rule ap-
plies when a position with a built-in loss be-
comes part of a conversion transaction. A 
built-in loss is any loss you would have realized 
if you had disposed of or otherwise terminated 
the position at its fair market value at the time it 
became part of the conversion transaction.
When applying the conversion transaction 
rules to a position with a built-in loss, use the 
position's fair market value at the time it be-
came part of the transaction. But, when you dis-
pose of or otherwise terminate the position in a 
transaction in which you recognize gain or loss, 
you must recognize the built-in loss. The con-
version transaction rules do not affect whether 
the built-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capi-
tal loss.
Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
tions. Before determining the amount of gain 
treated as ordinary income, you can net certain 
gains and losses from positions of the same 
conversion transaction. To do this, you have to 
dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe-
riod that is within a single tax year. You cannot 
net the built-in loss against the gain.
You can net gains and losses only if 
you identify the conversion transaction 
as an identified netting transaction on 
your books and records. Each position of the 
conversion transaction must be identified be-
fore the end of the day on which the position 
becomes part of the conversion transaction. For 
conversion transactions entered into before 
February 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the 
identification was made by that date.
Options dealers and commodities traders. 
These rules do not apply to options dealers and 
commodities traders.
How to report.  Use Form 6781 to report con-
version transactions. See the instructions for 
lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.
RECORDS
Commodity Futures
A commodity futures contract is a standardized, 
exchange-traded contract for the sale or pur-
chase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a fu-
ture date for a fixed price.
If the contract is a regulated futures contract, 
the rules described earlier under Section 1256 
Contracts Marked to Market apply to it.
The termination of a commodity futures con-
tract generally results in capital gain or loss un-
less the contract is a hedging transaction.
Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that 
is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
ing transaction if you enter into the contract in 
the ordinary course of your business primarily to 
manage the risk of interest rate or price 
changes or currency fluctuations on borrow-
ings, ordinary property, or ordinary obligations. 
(Generally, ordinary property or obligations are 
those that cannot produce capital gain or loss 
under any circumstances.) For example, the off-
set or exercise of a futures contract that pro-
tects against price changes in your business in-
ventory results in an ordinary gain or loss.
For more information about hedging trans-
actions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. 
Also, see Hedging Transactions under Section 
1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
If you have multiple transactions in the 
commodity futures market during the 
year, the burden of proof is on you to 
show which transactions are hedging transac-
tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions 
on your books and records before the end of 
the day you entered into the transaction. It may 
be helpful to have separate brokerage accounts 
for your hedging and nonhedging transactions. 
For specific requirements concerning identifica-
tion of hedging transactions and the underlying 
item, items, or aggregate risk being hedged, 
see Regulations section 1.1221-2(f).
Gains From Certain Constructive 
Ownership Transactions
If you have a gain from a constructive owner-
ship transaction entered into after July 11, 
1999, involving a financial asset (discussed 
later) and the gain normally would be treated as 
long-term capital gain, all or part of the gain 
may be treated instead as ordinary income. In 
addition, if any gain is treated as ordinary in-
come, your tax is increased by an interest 
charge.
Constructive ownership transactions.  The 
following are constructive ownership transac-
tions.
A notional principal contract in which you 
have the right to receive all or substantially 
all of the investment yield on a financial as-
set and you are obligated to reimburse all 
or substantially all of any decline in value 
of the financial asset.
A forward or futures contract to acquire a 
financial asset.
RECORDS
The holding of a call option and writing of a 
put option on a financial asset at substan-
tially the same strike price and maturity 
date.
This provision does not apply if all the posi-
tions are marked to market. Marked-to-market 
rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed 
in detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked 
to Market, earlier.
Financial asset.  A financial asset, for this 
purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through 
entity. Pass-through entities include partner-
ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-
ment companies, and real estate investment 
trusts.
Amount of ordinary income. Long-term capi-
tal gain is treated as ordinary income to the ex-
tent it is more than the net underlying long-term 
capital gain. The net underlying long-term capi-
tal gain is the net capital gain you would have 
realized if you acquired the asset for its fair mar-
ket value on the date the constructive owner-
ship transaction was opened and sold the asset 
for its fair market value on the date the transac-
tion was closed. If you do not establish the 
amount of net underlying long-term capital gain 
by clear and convincing evidence, it is treated 
as zero.
More information. For more information about 
constructive ownership transactions, see sec-
tion 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Losses on Section 1244
(Small Business) Stock
Subject to the limitations discussed under Ordi­
nary loss limit, later, you can deduct as an ordi-
nary loss, rather than as a capital loss, a loss on 
the sale, trade, or worthlessness of section 
1244 stock. Report the loss on Form 4797, 
line 10. Any loss in excess of the amounts de-
scribed in Ordinary loss limit , later, should be 
reported on Form 8949.
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital 
gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands. 
Do not offset gains against losses that are 
within the ordinary loss limit, explained later in 
this discussion, even if the transactions are in 
stock of the same company. Report the gain on 
Form 8949.
If you must figure a net operating loss, any 
ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 
stock is a business loss.
Ordinary loss limit.  The amount you can de-
duct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000 
each year. On a joint return the limit is 
$100,000, even if only one spouse has this type 
of loss. If your loss is $110,000 and your 
spouse has no loss, you can deduct $100,000 
as an ordinary loss on a joint return. The re-
maining $10,000 is a capital loss.
Section 1244 (small business) stock. This is 
stock issued for money or property (other than 
stock and securities) in a domestic small busi-
ness corporation. During its 5 most recent tax 
years before the loss, this corporation must 
have derived more than 50% of its gross 
Page 54 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 54  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi-
dends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales 
and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpo-
ration was in existence for at least 1 year, but 
less than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the 
tax years ending before the loss. If the corpora-
tion was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% 
test applies to the entire period the corporation 
was in existence before the day of the loss. 
However, if the corporation's deductions (other 
than the net operating loss and dividends re-
ceived deductions) were more than its gross in-
come during this period, this 50% test does not 
apply.
The corporation must have been largely an 
operating company for ordinary loss treatment 
to apply.
If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, 
the stock must be common stock. If issued after 
July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common 
or preferred. For more information about the re-
quirements of a small business corporation or 
the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see 
section 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and 
its regulations.
The stock must be issued to the person tak-
ing the loss. You must be the original owner of 
the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treatment. 
To claim a deductible loss on stock issued to 
your partnership, you must have been a partner 
when the stock was issued and have remained 
so until the time of the loss. You add your dis-
tributive share of the partnership loss to any in-
dividual section 1244 stock loss you may have 
before applying the ordinary loss limit.
Stock distributed by partnership.  If your 
partnership distributes the stock to you, you 
cannot treat any later loss on that stock as an 
ordinary loss.
Stock sold through underwriter.  Stock 
sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 
stock unless the underwriter only acted as a 
selling agent for the corporation.
Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stock 
you receive as a stock dividend qualifies as 
section 1244 stock if:
You receive it from a small business corpo-
ration in which you own stock, and
The stock you own meets the requirements 
when the stock dividend is distributed.
If you trade your section 1244 stock for new 
stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza-
tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that is 
only a change in identity, form, or place of or-
ganization, the new stock is section 1244 stock 
if the stock you trade meets the requirements 
when the trade occurs.
If you hold section 1244 stock and other 
stock in the same corporation, not all of the 
stock you receive as a stock dividend or in a re-
organization will qualify as section 1244 stock. 
Only that part based on the section 1244 stock 
you hold will qualify.
Example. Your basis for 100 shares of X 
common stock is $1,000. These shares qualify 
as section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock 
dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com-
mon stock, the basis of which is determined 
from the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are 
also section 1244 stock.
If you also own stock in the corporation that 
is not section 1244 stock when you receive the 
stock dividend, you must divide the shares you 
receive as a dividend between the section 1244 
stock and the other stock. Only the shares from 
the former can be section 1244 stock.
Contributed property.  To determine ordinary 
loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a 
trade for property, you have to reduce the basis 
of the stock if:
The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of the 
property, immediately before the trade, 
was more than its fair market value; and
The basis of the stock is determined by the 
basis of the property.
Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference 
between the adjusted basis of the property and 
its fair market value at the time of the trade. You 
reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss. 
Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any 
other purpose.
Example. You transfer property with an ad-
justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of 
$250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock. 
The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure 
the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of 
your stock is $250 ($1,000 − $750). If you later 
sell the section 1244 stock for $200, your $800 
loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capital loss 
of $750.
Contributions to capital.  If the basis of your 
section 1244 stock has increased, through con-
tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat 
this increase as applying to stock that is not 
section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary 
loss on its sale.
Example. You buy 100 shares of section 
1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original 
owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to 
capital that increases the total basis of the 100 
shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares 
for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can 
deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000) 
as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-
maining $500 is a capital loss.
Recordkeeping. You must keep re-
cords sufficient to show your stock 
qualifies as section 1244 stock. Your 
records must also distinguish your section 1244 
stock from any other stock you own in the cor-
poration.
Losses on Small Business 
Investment Company Stock
A small business investment company (SBIC) is 
one that is licensed and operated under the 
Small Business Investment Act of 1958.
If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can 
deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital 
loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-
ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or trade 
of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset your 
gains and losses, even if they are on stock of 
the same company.
RECORDS
How to report. You report this type of ordinary 
loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition to 
the information required by the form, you must 
include the name and address of the company 
that issued the stock. If applicable, also include 
the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-
proximate date it became worthless. Report a 
capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock on 
Form 8949.
Short sale.  If you close a short sale of SBIC 
stock with other SBIC stock you bought only for 
that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is a 
capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this chap-
ter, for more information.
Holding Period
If you sold or traded investment property, you 
must determine your holding period for the 
property. Your holding period determines 
whether any capital gain or loss was a 
short-term or a long-term capital gain or loss.
Long-term or short-term.  If you hold invest-
ment property more than 1 year, any capital 
gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If 
you hold the property 1 year or less, any capital 
gain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.
To determine how long you held the invest-
ment property, begin counting on the date after 
the day you acquired the property. The day you 
disposed of the property is part of your holding 
period.
Example. If you bought investment prop-
erty on February 3, 2015, and sold it on Febru-
ary 3, 2016, your holding period is not more 
than 1 year and you have a short-term capital 
gain or loss. If you sold it on February 4, 2016, 
your holding period is more than 1 year and you 
have a long-term capital gain or loss.
Securities traded on an established market. 
For securities traded on an established securi-
ties market, your holding period begins the day 
after the trade date you bought the securities, 
and ends on the trade date you sold them.
Do not confuse the trade date with the 
settlement date, which is the date by 
which the stock must be delivered and 
payment must be made.
Example. You are a cash method, calendar 
year taxpayer. You sold stock on December 30, 
2016. According to the rules of the stock ex-
change, the sale was closed by delivery of the 
stock and payment of the sale price in January 
2017. You received payment of the sale price 
on that same day. Report your gain or loss on 
your 2016 return, even though you received the 
payment in 2017. The gain or loss is long term 
or short term depending on whether you held 
the stock more than 1 year. Your holding period 
ended on December 30.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds.  The holding 
period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at 
auction on the basis of yield starts the day after 
the Secretary of the Treasury, through news re-
leases, gives notification of acceptance to suc-
cessful bidders. The holding period of U.S. 
CAUTION
!
Page 55 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 55

Treasury notes and bonds sold through an of-
fering on a subscription basis at a specified 
yield starts the day after the subscription is sub-
mitted.
Automatic investment service.  In determin-
ing your holding period for shares bought by the 
bank or other agent, full shares are considered 
bought first and any fractional shares are con-
sidered bought last. Your holding period starts 
on the day after the bank's purchase date. If a 
share was bought over more than one purchase 
date, your holding period for that share is a split 
holding period. A part of the share is considered 
to have been bought on each date that stock 
was bought by the bank with the proceeds of 
available funds.
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment 
property in a trade for other investment property 
and your basis for the new property is deter-
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the 
old property, your holding period for the new 
property begins on the day following the date 
you acquired the old property.
Property received as a gift.  If you receive a 
gift of property and your basis is determined by 
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period 
is considered to have started on the same day 
the donor's holding period started.
If your basis is determined by the fair market 
value of the property, your holding period starts 
on the day after the date of the gift.
Inherited property.  If you inherited property 
from someone who died before or after 2010, or 
from someone who died in 2010 and the execu-
tor of the decedent's estate did not elect to file 
Form 8939, your capital gain or loss on any 
later disposition of that property is treated as 
long-term gain or loss, regardless of how long 
you held the property. If you acquired the prop-
erty from someone who died in 2010 and the 
executor made the election to file Form 8939, 
see Pub. 4895 to determine your holding pe-
riod. Pub. 4895 is available at https://
www.irs.gov/pub/irs­prior/p4895­­2011.pdf.
Real property bought. To figure how long you 
have held real property bought under an uncon-
ditional contract, begin counting on the day af-
ter you received title to it or on the day after you 
took possession of it and assumed the burdens 
and privileges of ownership, whichever hap-
pened first. However, taking delivery or posses-
sion of real property under an option agreement 
is not enough to start the holding period. The 
holding period cannot start until there is an ac-
tual contract of sale. The holding period of the 
seller cannot end before that time.
Real property repossessed.  If you sell real 
property but keep a security interest in it, and 
then later repossess the property under the 
terms of the sales contract, your holding period 
for a later sale includes the period you held the 
property before the original sale and the period 
after the repossession. Your holding period 
does not include the time between the original 
sale and the repossession. That is, it does not 
include the period during which the first buyer 
held the property. However, the holding period 
for any improvements made by the first buyer 
begins at the time of repossession.
Stock dividends. The holding period for stock 
you received as a taxable stock dividend begins 
on the date of distribution.
The holding period for new stock you re-
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins 
on the same day as the holding period of the 
old stock. This rule also applies to stock ac-
quired in a spin-off, which is a distribution of 
stock or securities in a controlled corporation.
Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period 
for nontaxable stock rights includes the holding 
period of the underlying stock. The holding pe-
riod for stock acquired through the exercise of 
stock rights begins on the date the right was ex-
ercised.
Section 1256 contracts.  Gains or losses on 
section 1256 contracts open at the end of the 
year, or terminated during the year, are treated 
as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-
less of how long the contracts were held. See 
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-
lier.
Option exercised.  Your holding period for 
property you acquire when you exercise an op-
tion begins the day after you exercise the op-
tion.
Wash sales. Your holding period for substan-
tially identical stock or securities you acquire in 
a wash sale includes the period you held the old 
stock or securities.
Qualified small business stock.  Your hold-
ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free 
rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small 
business stock, described later under Gains on 
Qualified Small Business Stock , includes the 
period you held the old stock.
Commodity futures. Your holding period for a 
commodity received in satisfaction of a com-
modity futures contract, other than a regulated 
futures contract subject to Internal Revenue 
Code section 1256, includes your holding pe-
riod for the futures contract if you held the con-
tract as a capital asset.
Securities futures contract.  Your holding 
period for a security received in satisfaction of a 
securities futures contract, other than one that 
is a section 1256 contract, includes your hold-
ing period for the futures contract if you held the 
contract as a capital asset.
Your holding period for a security received 
in satisfaction of a securities futures contract to 
sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-
tract, is determined by the rules that apply to 
short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.
Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 
months or less.  If you hold stock in a mutual 
fund (or other regulated investment company) 
or real estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 
months or less and then sell it at a loss (other 
than under a periodic liquidation plan), special 
rules may apply.
Capital gain distributions received.  The 
loss (after reduction for any exempt-interest div-
idends you received, as explained later) is 
treated as a long-term capital loss up to the total 
of any capital gain distributions you received 
and your share of any undistributed capital 
gains. Any remaining loss is short-term capital 
loss.
Reinvested distributions.  If your dividends 
and capital gain distributions are reinvested in 
new shares, the holding period of each new 
share begins the day after that share was pur-
chased. Therefore, if you sell both the new 
shares and the original shares, you might have 
both short-term and long-term gains and losses.
Example. On April 4, 2016, you bought a 
mutual fund share for $20. On June 20, 2016, 
the mutual fund paid a capital gain distribution 
of $2 a share, which is taxed as a long-term 
capital gain. On July 18, 2016, you sold the 
share for $17.50. If it were not for the capital 
gain distribution, your loss would be a 
short-term loss of $2.50 ($20 − $17.50). How-
ever, the part of the loss that is not more than 
the capital gain distribution ($2) must be repor-
ted as a long-term capital loss. The remaining 
$0.50 of the loss can be reported as a 
short-term capital loss.
Exempt-interest dividends on mutual 
fund stock.  If you received exempt-interest 
dividends on the stock, at least part of your loss 
is disallowed. You can deduct only the amount 
of loss that is more than the exempt-interest 
dividends. Report the loss as a short-term capi-
tal loss. On Form 8949, Part I, line 1, column 
(d), increase the sales price by the amount of 
exempt-interest dividends, but do not increase 
it to more than the cost or other basis shown in 
column (e).
For more information on Form 8949 
and Schedule D (Form 1040), see the 
Instructions for Form 8949 and the In­
structions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Example. On January 11, 2016, you 
bought a mutual fund share for $40. On Febru-
ary 8, 2016, the mutual fund paid a $5 dividend 
from tax-exempt interest, which is not taxable to 
you. On February 16, 2016, you sold the share 
for $34. If it were not for the tax-exempt divi-
dend, your loss would be $6 ($40 − $34). How-
ever, you must increase the sales price from 
$34 to $39 (to account for the $5 portion of the 
loss that is not deductible). You can deduct only 
$1 as a short-term capital loss.
Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.
Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must be 
treated as a long-term capital loss to the extent 
you received, from that stock, qualified divi-
dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-
nary dividends. This is true regardless of how 
long you actually held the stock. Generally, an 
extraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals 
or exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferred 
stock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.
TIP
Page 56 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 56  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Nonbusiness Bad Debts
If someone owes you money that you cannot 
collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able 
to deduct the amount owed to you when you fig-
ure your tax for the year the debt becomes 
worthless.
There are two kinds of bad debts—business 
and nonbusiness. A business bad debt, gener-
ally, is one that comes from operating your 
trade or business and is deductible as a busi-
ness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusiness 
bad debts and are deductible as short-term 
capital losses.
Example. An architect made personal 
loans to several friends who were not clients. 
She could not collect on some of these loans. 
They are deductible only as nonbusiness bad 
debts because the architect was not in the busi-
ness of lending money and the loans do not 
have any relationship to her business.
Business bad debts. For information on busi-
ness bad debts of an employee, see Pub. 529, 
Miscellaneous Deductions. For information on 
other business bad debts, see chapter 10 of 
Pub. 535.
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.  To be 
deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to-
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly 
worthless nonbusiness debt.
Genuine debt required.  A debt must be 
genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is gen-
uine if it arises from a debtor-creditor relation-
ship based on a valid and enforceable obliga-
tion to repay a fixed or determinable sum of 
money.
Loan or gift.  For a bad debt, you must 
show there was an intention at the time of the 
transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you 
lend money to a relative or friend with the un-
derstanding that it may not be repaid, it is con-
sidered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a 
bad debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a 
bad debt unless there is a true creditor-debtor 
relationship between you and the person or or-
ganization that owes you the money.
When minor children borrow from their pa-
rents to pay for their basic needs, there is no 
genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted 
for such a loan.
Basis in bad debt required.  To deduct a 
bad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is, 
you must have already included the amount in 
your income or loaned out your cash. For exam-
ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for 
court-ordered child support not paid to you by 
your former spouse. If you are a cash method 
taxpayer (most individuals are), you generally 
cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid 
salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, 
and similar items.
When deductible.  You can take a bad debt 
deduction only in the year the debt becomes 
worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt 
is due to determine whether it is worthless. A 
debt becomes worthless when there is no lon-
ger any chance that the amount owed will be 
paid.
It is not necessary to go to court if you can 
show that a judgment from the court would be 
uncollectible. You must only show that you have 
taken reasonable steps to collect the debt. 
Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of 
an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a 
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or 
Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier.
Filing a claim for refund. If you do not de-
duct a bad debt on your original return for the 
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim 
for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do 
this, use Form 1040X to amend your return for 
the year the debt became worthless. You must 
file it within 7 years from the date your original 
return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years 
from the date you paid the tax, whichever is 
later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless 
securities generally must be filed within 3 years 
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from 
the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For 
more information about filing a claim, see Pub. 
556.
Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt that 
becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad debt 
deduction for your payments on the debt unless 
you can show either that your reason for making 
the guarantee was to protect your investment or 
that you entered the guarantee transaction with 
a profit motive. If you make the guarantee as a 
favor to friends and do not receive any consid-
eration in return, your payments are considered 
a gift and you cannot take a deduction.
Example 1.  Henry Lloyd, an officer and 
principal shareholder of the Spruce Corpora-
tion, guaranteed payment of a bank loan the 
corporation received. The corporation defaulted 
on the loan and Henry made full payment. Be-
cause he guaranteed the loan to protect his in-
vestment in the corporation, Henry can take a 
nonbusiness bad debt deduction.
Example 2.  Milt and John are co-workers. 
Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at 
their local credit union. John does not pay the 
note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the 
note. However, since he did not enter into the 
guarantee agreement to protect an investment 
or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt 
deduction.
Deductible in year paid.  Unless you have 
rights against the borrower, discussed next, a 
payment you make on a loan you guaranteed is 
deductible in the year you make the payment.
Rights against the borrower.  When you 
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you 
may have the right to take the place of the 
lender (the right of subrogation). The debt is 
then owed to you. If you have this right or some 
other right to demand payment from the bor-
rower, you cannot take a bad debt deduction 
until these rights become totally worthless.
Debts owed by political parties.  You cannot 
take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any 
worthless debt owed to you by:
A political party;
A national, state, or local committee of a 
political party; or
A committee, association, or organization 
that either accepts contributions or spends 
money to influence elections.
Mechanics' and suppliers' liens.  Workers 
and material suppliers may file liens against 
property because of debts owed by a builder or 
contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid fore-
closure and loss of your property, you are enti-
tled to repayment from the builder or contractor. 
If the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad 
debt deduction.
Insolvency of contractor. You can take a bad 
debt deduction for the amount you deposit with 
a contractor if the contractor becomes insolvent 
and you are unable to recover your deposit. If 
the deposit is for work unrelated to your trade or 
business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-
tion.
Secondary liability on home mortgage.  If 
the buyer of your home assumes your mort-
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer de-
faults on the loan and the house is then sold for 
less than the amount outstanding on the mort-
gage, you may have to make up the difference. 
You can take a bad debt deduction for the 
amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you 
cannot collect it from the buyer.
Worthless securities.  If you own securities 
that become totally worthless, you can take a 
deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. See 
Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale or 
Trade, earlier in this chapter.
Recovery of a bad debt.  If you deducted a 
bad debt and in a later tax year you recover 
(collect) all or part of it, you may have to include 
the amount you recover in your gross income. 
However, you can exclude from gross income 
the amount recovered up to the amount of the 
deduction that did not reduce your tax in the 
year deducted. See Recoveries in Pub. 525.
How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on 
Form 8949.
On Form 8949, Part I, line 1, enter the name 
of the debtor and “bad debt statement attached” 
in column (a). Enter your basis in the bad debt 
in column (e) and enter zero in column (d). Use 
a separate line for each bad debt.
Make sure you report your bad debt(s) 
(and any other short­term transactions 
for which you did not receive a Form 
1099­B) on Form 8949 with box C checked.
For each bad debt, attach a statement to 
your return that contains:
A description of the debt, including the 
amount, and the date it became due;
The name of the debtor, and any business 
or family relationship between you and the 
debtor;
CAUTION
!
Page 57 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 57

The efforts you made to collect the debt; 
and
Why you decided the debt was worthless. 
For example, you could show that the bor-
rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
gal action to collect would probably not re-
sult in payment of any part of the debt.
Short Sales
A short sale occurs when you agree to sell 
property you do not own (or own but do not 
wish to sell). You make this type of sale in two 
steps.
You sell short. You borrow property and 
deliver it to a buyer.
You close the sale. At a later date, you ei-
ther buy substantially identical property 
and deliver it to the lender or make delivery 
out of property you held at the time of the 
sale. Delivery of property borrowed from 
another lender does not satisfy this re-
quirement.
You do not realize gain or loss until delivery of 
property to close the short sale. You will have a 
capital gain or loss if the property used to close 
the short sale is a capital asset.
The Instructions for Form 1099-B discuss 
when you should receive a Form 1099-B for 
short sales. For more information, see the In-
structions for Form 1099-B.
Reporting a short sale. Report any short sale 
on Form 8949 in the year it closes. If a short 
sale closed in 2016 but you did not get a Form 
1099-B for it because you entered into it before 
2011, report it on a Form 8949 in Part I or Part II 
(whichever applies). In column (a), enter (for ex-
ample) “100 sh. XYZ Co. — 2010 short sale 
closed.” Fill in the other columns according to 
their instructions. Report the short sale the 
same way if you received a 2016 Form 1099-B 
that does not show proceeds (sales price).
Exception if property becomes worthless. 
A different rule applies if the property sold short 
becomes substantially worthless. In that case, 
you must recognize gain as if the short sale 
were closed when the property became sub-
stantially worthless.
Exception for constructive sales.  Entering 
into a short sale may cause you to be treated as 
having made a constructive sale of property. In 
that case, you will have to recognize gain on the 
date of the constructive sale. For details, see 
Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po­
sitions, earlier.
Example. On May 9, 2016, you bought 100 
shares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. 
On September 12, 2016, you sold short 100 
shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You 
made no other transactions involving Baker 
stock for the rest of 2016 and the first 30 days 
of 2017. Your short sale is treated as a con-
structive sale of an appreciated financial posi-
tion because a sale of your Baker stock on the 
date of the short sale would have resulted in a 
gain. You recognize a $600 short-term capital 
gain from the constructive sale and your new 
holding period in the Baker stock begins on 
September 12.
Short-Term or Long-Term
Capital Gain or Loss
As a general rule, you determine whether you 
have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss 
on a short sale by the amount of time you ac-
tually hold the property eventually delivered to 
the lender to close the short sale.
Example. Even though you do not own any 
stock of Ace Corporation, you contract to sell 
100 shares of it, which you borrow from your 
broker. After 13 months, when the price of the 
stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace Cor-
poration stock and immediately deliver them to 
your broker to close out the short sale. Your 
loss is a short-term capital loss because your 
holding period for the delivered property is less 
than 1 day.
Special rules.  Special rules may apply to 
gains and losses from short sales of stocks, se-
curities, and commodity and securities futures 
(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-
quired property substantially identical to prop-
erty that sold short. But if the amount of prop-
erty you sold short is more than the amount of 
that substantially identical property, the special 
rules do not apply to the gain or loss on the ex-
cess.
Gains and holding period.  If you held the 
substantially identical property for 1 year or less 
on the date of the short sale, or if you acquired 
the substantially identical property after the 
short sale and by the date of closing the short 
sale, then:
 Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close 
the short sale is a short-term capital gain, 
and
 Rule 2. The holding period of the substan-
tially identical property begins on the date 
of the closing of the short sale or on the 
date of the sale of this property, whichever 
comes first.
Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, 
you held substantially identical property for 
more than 1 year, any loss you realize on the 
short sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you 
held the property used to close the sale for 1 
year or less. Certain losses on short sales of 
stock or securities are also subject to wash sale 
treatment. For information, see Wash Sales , 
later.
Mixed straddles.  Under certain elections, 
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short 
sale as long term under the special rule. These 
elections are for positions that are part of a 
mixed straddle. See Other elections , later, for 
more information about these elections.
Reporting Substitute Payments
If any broker transferred your securities for use 
in a short sale or similar transaction and re-
ceived certain substitute dividend payments on 
your behalf while the short sale was open, that 
broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or a 
similar statement reporting the amount of these 
payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for 
those substitute payments totaling $10 or more 
that are known on the payment's record date to 
be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-
tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution, 
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or 
that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not 
treat these substitute payments as dividends or 
interest. Instead, report the substitute payments 
shown on Form 1099-MISC as “Other income” 
on line 21 of Form 1040.
Substitute payment.  A substitute payment 
means a payment in lieu of:
Tax-exempt interest (including OID) ac-
crued while the short sale was open, and
A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after 
the transfer of stock for use in a short sale 
and before the closing of the short sale.
Payments in lieu of dividends.  If you borrow 
stock to make a short sale, you may have to re-
mit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi-
dends distributed while you maintain your short 
position. You can deduct these payments only if 
you hold the short sale open at least 46 days 
(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordi-
nary dividend as defined later) and you itemize 
your deductions.
You deduct these payments as investment 
interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter­
est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
If you close the short sale by the 45th day 
after the date of the short sale (1 year or less in 
the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-
not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend 
you make to the lender. Instead, you must in-
crease the basis of the stock used to close the 
short sale by that amount.
To determine how long a short sale is kept 
open, do not include any period during which 
you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a 
contractual obligation to buy substantially iden-
tical stock or securities.
If your payment is made for a liquidating dis-
tribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if 
you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu-
tion issued on the borrowed stock during your 
short position, you have a capital expense. You 
must add the payment to the cost of the stock 
sold short.
Exception. If you close the short sale within 
45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay in 
lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the 
extent the payments are more than the amount 
you receive as ordinary income from the lender 
of the stock for the use of collateral with the 
short sale. This exception does not apply to 
payments in place of extraordinary dividends.
Extraordinary dividends. If the amount of any 
dividend you receive on a share of preferred 
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of 
other stock) of the amount realized on the short 
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-
nary dividend.
Wash Sales
You cannot deduct losses from sales or trades 
of stock or securities in a wash sale unless the 
loss was incurred in the ordinary course of your 
business as a dealer in stock or securities.
Page 58 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 58  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade 
stock or securities at a loss and within 30 days 
before or after the sale you:
1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-
ties,
2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
curities in a fully taxable trade,
3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-
stantially identical stock or securities, or
4. Acquire substantially identical stock for 
your individual retirement account (IRA) or 
Roth IRA.
If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-
tion you control buys substantially identical 
stock, you also have a wash sale.
If your loss was disallowed because of the 
wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the 
cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4) 
above). The result is your basis in the new stock 
or securities. This adjustment postpones the 
loss deduction until the disposition of the new 
stock or securities. Your holding period for the 
new stock or securities includes the holding pe-
riod of the stock or securities sold.
Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock 
for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and 
within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 
shares of the same stock for $800. Because 
you bought substantially identical stock, you 
cannot deduct your loss of $250 on the sale. 
However, you add the disallowed loss of $250 
to the cost of the new stock, $800, to obtain 
your basis in the new stock, which is $1,050.
Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-
poration with an incentive pay plan. Under this 
plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpora-
tion's stock as a bonus award. You include the 
fair market value of the stock in your gross in-
come as additional pay. You later sell these 
shares at a loss. If you receive another bonus 
award of substantially identical stock within 30 
days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss 
on the sale.
Options and futures contracts.  The wash 
sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades 
of contracts and options to acquire or sell stock 
or securities. They do not apply to losses from 
sales or trades of commodity futures contracts 
and foreign currencies. See Coordination of 
Loss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules , 
later, for information about the tax treatment of 
losses on the disposition of positions in a strad-
dle.
Securities futures contract to sell.  Los-
ses from the sale, exchange, or termination of a 
securities futures contract to sell generally are 
treated in the same manner as losses from the 
closing of a short sale, discussed later in this 
section under Short sales.
Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you 
sell common stock at a loss and, at the same 
time, buy warrants for common stock of the 
same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a 
loss and, at the same time, buy common stock 
in the same corporation, the wash sale rules ap-
ply only if the warrants and stock are 
considered substantially identical, as discussed 
next.
Substantially identical.  In determining 
whether stock or securities are substantially 
identical, you must consider all the facts and 
circumstances in your particular case. Ordina-
rily, stocks or securities of one corporation are 
not considered substantially identical to stocks 
or securities of another corporation. However, 
they may be substantially identical in some ca-
ses. For example, in a reorganization, the 
stocks and securities of the predecessor and 
successor corporations may be substantially 
identical.
Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-
poration are not ordinarily considered substan-
tially identical to the common stock of the same 
corporation. However, where the bonds or pre-
ferred stock are convertible into common stock 
of the same corporation, the relative values, 
price changes, and other circumstances may 
make these bonds or preferred stock and the 
common stock substantially identical. For ex-
ample, preferred stock is substantially identical 
to the common stock if the preferred stock:
Is convertible into common stock,
Has the same voting rights as the common 
stock,
Is subject to the same dividend restric-
tions,
Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-
cantly from the conversion ratio, and
Is unrestricted as to convertibility.
More or less stock bought than sold.  If the 
number of shares of substantially identical stock 
or securities you buy within 30 days before or 
after the sale is either more or less than the 
number of shares you sold, you must determine 
the particular shares to which the wash sale 
rules apply. You do this by matching the shares 
bought with an equal number of the shares 
sold. Match the shares bought in the same or-
der that you bought them, beginning with the 
first shares bought. The shares or securities so 
matched are subject to the wash sale rules.
Example 1.  You bought 100 shares of M 
stock on September 21, 2015, for $5,000. On 
December 14, 2015, you bought 50 shares of 
substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-
cember 21, 2015, you bought 25 shares of sub-
stantially identical stock for $1,125. On January 
4, 2016, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares you 
bought in September. You have a $1,000 loss 
on the sale. However, because you bought 75 
shares of substantially identical stock within 30 
days before the sale, you cannot deduct the 
loss ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the 
loss ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of 
the 50 shares bought on December 14, 2015, is 
increased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750 
disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares 
is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25 
shares bought on December 21, 2015, is in-
creased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 
($1,125 + $250).
Example 2.  You bought 100 shares of M 
stock on September 21, 2015. On February 5, 
2016, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss. 
On each of the 4 days from February 9, 2016, to 
February 12, 2016, you bought 50 shares of 
substantially identical stock. You cannot deduct 
your $1,000 loss. You must add half the disal-
lowed loss ($500) to the basis of the 50 shares 
bought on February 9. Add the other half ($500) 
to the basis of the shares bought on February 
10.
Loss and gain on same day.  Loss from a 
wash sale of one block of stock or securities 
cannot be used to reduce any gains on identical 
blocks sold the same day.
Example. During 2010, you bought 100 
shares of X stock on each of three occasions. 
You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100 
shares, $100 a share for the second block, and 
$95 a share for the third block. On December 
28, 2015, you sold 300 shares of X stock for 
$125 a share. On January 11, 2016, you bought 
250 shares of identical X stock. You cannot de-
duct the loss of $33 a share on the first block 
because within 30 days after the date of sale 
you bought 250 identical shares of X stock. In 
addition, you cannot reduce the gain realized 
on the sale of the second and third blocks of 
stock by this loss.
Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a 
dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a 
transaction made in the ordinary course of busi-
ness.
Short sales.  The wash sale rules apply to a 
loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter 
into another short sale of, substantially identical 
stock or securities within a period beginning 30 
days before the date the short sale is complete 
and ending 30 days after that date.
For purposes of the wash sale rules, a short 
sale is considered complete on the date the 
short sale is entered into, if:
On that date, you own stock or securities 
identical to those sold short (or by that date 
you enter into a contract or option to ac-
quire that stock or those securities), and
You later deliver the stock or securities to 
close the short sale.
Otherwise, a short sale is not considered 
complete until the property is delivered to close 
the sale.
This treatment also applies to losses from 
the sale, exchange, or termination of a securi-
ties futures contract to sell.
Example. On June 4, you buy 100 shares 
of stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of 
the stock for $750 on October 15. On October 
16, you buy 100 shares of the same stock for 
$750. You close the short sale on November 19 
by delivering the shares bought on June 4. You 
cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750) 
because the date of entering into the short sale 
(October 15) is considered the date the sale is 
complete for wash sale purposes and you 
bought substantially identical stock within 30 
days from that date.
Residual interests in a REMIC.  The wash 
sale rules generally will apply to the sale of your 
residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-
vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period 
beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-
est and ending 6 months after that sale, you 
Page 59 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 59

acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or 
any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is 
comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are 
discussed in chapter 1.
Nondeductible wash sale loss.  If you re-
ceived a Form 1099-B, box 1g will show the 
amount of wash sale loss disallowed if:
The stock or securities sold were covered 
securities, and
The substantially identical stock or securi-
ties you bought had the same CUSIP num-
bers as the stock or securities you sold 
and were bought in the same account as 
the stock or securities you sold.
However, you cannot deduct a loss from a 
wash sale even if it is not reported on Form 
1099-B.
How to report. Report a wash sale transaction 
in Part I or Part II of Form 8949 with the appro-
priate box checked. Complete all columns. En-
ter “W” in column (f). Enter as a positive number 
in column (g) the amount of the loss not al-
lowed. See the Instructions for Form 8949.
Securities Futures Contracts
A securities futures contract is a contract of sale 
for future delivery of a single security or of a 
narrow-based security index.
Gain or loss from the contract generally will 
be treated in a manner similar to gain or loss 
from transactions in the underlying security. 
This means gain or loss from the sale, ex-
change, or termination of the contract will gen-
erally have the same character as gain or loss 
from transactions in the property to which the 
contract relates. Any capital gain or loss on a 
sale, exchange, or termination of a contract to 
sell property will be considered short term, re-
gardless of how long you hold the contract. 
These contracts are not section 1256 contracts 
(unless they are dealer securities futures con-
tracts).
Options
Options are generally subject to the rules de-
scribed in this section. If the option is part of a 
straddle, the Loss Deferral Rules  covered later 
under Straddles may also apply. For special 
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealer 
equity options, see Section 1256 Contracts 
Marked to Market, earlier.
Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an op-
tion to buy or sell property that is a capital asset 
in your hands, or would be if you acquired it, is 
capital gain or loss. If the property is not or 
would not be a capital asset, the gain or loss is 
ordinary gain or loss.
Example 1.  You purchased an option to 
buy 100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The 
stock increases in value, and you sell the option 
for more than you paid for it. Your gain is capital 
gain because the stock underlying the option 
would have been a capital asset in your hands.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except the stock decreases in value 
and you sell the option for less than you paid for 
it. Your loss is a capital loss.
Option not exercised.  If you have a loss be-
cause you did not exercise an option to buy or 
sell, you are considered to have sold or traded 
the option on the date it expired.
Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option, 
how you report your gain or loss depends on 
whether it was exercised.
If you are not in the business of writing op-
tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-
ties, commodities, or commodity futures is not 
exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-
ceive is a short-term capital gain.
If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-
erty is exercised, see Writers of puts and calls , 
later.
Section 1256 contract options.  Gain or loss 
is recognized on the exercise of an option on a 
section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts 
are defined under Section 1256 Contracts 
Marked to Market, earlier.
Cash settlement option.  A cash settlement 
option is treated as an option to buy or sell 
property. A cash settlement option is any option 
that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled 
in, cash or property other than the underlying 
property.
How to report.  Report on Form 8949 gain or 
loss from the closing or expiration of an option 
that is not a section 1256 contract but is a capi-
tal asset in your hands. If an option you pur-
chased expired, enter the expiration date in col-
umn (c) and enter “Expired” in column (d). If an 
option that was granted (written) expired, enter 
the expiration date in column (b) and enter “Ex-
pired” in column (e). Fill in the other columns as 
appropriate.
If a call option you sold was exercised and 
the option premium you received was not re-
flected in the sales price shown on the Form 
1099-B you received, enter the premium as a 
positive number in column (g) of Form 8949 and 
enter “E” in column (f).
Puts and Calls
Puts and calls are options on securities and are 
covered by the rules just discussed for options. 
The following are specific applications of these 
rules to holders and writers of options that are 
bought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on 
a national securities exchange, such as the Chi-
cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Sec­
tion 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, 
for special rules that may apply to nonequity op-
tions and dealer equity options.) These rules 
are also presented in Table 4-3.
Puts and calls are issued by writers (gran-
tors) to holders for cash premiums. They are 
ended by exercise, closing transaction, or 
lapse.
A “put option” is the right to sell to the writer, 
at any time before a specified future date, a sta-
ted number of shares at a specified price. Con-
versely, a “call option” is the right to buy from 
the writer of the option, at any time before a 
specified future date, a stated number of shares 
of stock at a specified price.
Holders of puts and calls.  If you buy a put or 
a call, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capital 
expenditure.
If you sell the put or the call before you exer-
cise it, the difference between its cost and the 
amount you receive for it is either a long-term or 
short-term capital gain or loss, depending on 
how long you held it.
If the option expires, its cost is either a 
long-term or short-term capital loss, depending 
on your holding period, which ends on the expi-
ration date.
If you exercise a call, add its cost to the ba-
sis of the stock you bought. If you exercise a 
put, reduce your amount realized on the sale of 
the underlying stock by the cost of the put when 
figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on 
the sale of the underlying stock is long term or 
short term depending on your holding period for 
the underlying stock.
Put option as short sale. Buying a put op-
tion is generally treated as a short sale, and the 
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-
ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. If 
you have held the underlying stock for 1 year or 
less at the time you buy the put, any gain on the 
exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a 
short-term capital gain. The same is true if you 
buy the underlying stock after you buy the put 
but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your 
holding period for the underlying stock begins 
on the earliest of:
The date you dispose of the stock,
The date you exercise the put,
The date you sell the put, or
The date the put expires.
Writers of puts and calls.  If you write (grant) 
a put or a call, do not include the amount you 
receive for writing it in your income at the time 
of receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:
Your obligation expires;
You buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in the 
case of a call, the underlying stock when 
the option is exercised; or
You engage in a closing transaction.
If your obligation expires, the amount you re-
ceived for writing the call or put is short-term 
capital gain.
If a put you write is exercised and you buy 
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the 
stock by the amount you received for the put. 
Your holding period for the stock begins on the 
date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the 
put.
If a call you write is exercised and you sell 
the underlying stock, increase your amount re-
alized on the sale of the stock by the amount 
you received for the call when figuring your gain 
or loss. The gain or loss is long term or short 
term depending on your holding period of the 
stock.
If you enter into a closing transaction by 
paying an amount equal to the value of the put 
or call at the time of the payment, the difference 
between the amount you pay and the amount 
you receive for the put or call is a short-term 
capital gain or loss.
Page 60 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 60  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Examples of non-dealer transactions. 
1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is-
sued on April 11, 2016, for $4,000. These 
equity options expired in December 2016, 
without being exercised. If you were a 
holder (buyer) of the options, you would 
recognize a short-term capital loss of 
$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, 
you would recognize a short-term capital 
gain of $4,000.
2. Closing transaction. The facts are the 
same as in (1), except that on May 9, 
2016, the options were sold for $6,000. If 
you were the holder of the options who 
sold them, you would recognize a 
short-term capital gain of $2,000. If you 
were the writer of the options and you 
bought them back, you would recognize a 
short-term capital loss of $2,000.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in 
(1), except that the options were exercised 
on May 23, 2016. The buyer adds the cost 
of the options to the basis of the stock 
bought through the exercise of the op-
tions. The writer adds the amount received 
from writing the options to the amount re-
alized from selling the stock to figure gain 
or loss. The gain or loss is short term or 
long term depending upon the holding pe-
riod of the stock.
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are 
the same as in (1), except the options 
were nonequity options, subject to the 
rules for section 1256 contracts. If you 
were a buyer of the options, you would 
recognize a short-term capital loss of 
$1,600, and a long-term capital loss of 
$2,400. If you were a writer of the options, 
you would recognize a short-term capital 
gain of $1,600, and a long-term capital 
gain of $2,400. See Section 1256 Con­
tracts Marked to Market, earlier, for more 
information.
Straddles
This section discusses the loss deferral rules 
that apply to the sale or other disposition of po-
sitions in a straddle. These rules do not apply to 
the straddles described under Exceptions, later.
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions 
on personal property. For example, a straddle 
may consist of a purchased option to buy and a 
purchased option to sell on the same number of 
shares of the security, with the same exercise 
price and period.
Personal property. This is any actively traded 
property. It includes stock options and contracts 
to buy stock but generally does not include 
stock.
Straddle rules for stock.  Although stock 
is generally excluded from the definition of 
personal property when applying the straddle 
rules, it is included in the following two situa-
tions.
1. The stock is of a type which is actively tra-
ded, and at least one of the offsetting posi-
tions is a position on that stock or substan-
tially similar or related property.
2. The stock is in a corporation formed or 
availed of to take positions in personal 
property that offset positions taken by any 
shareholder.
Note. For positions established before Oc-
tober 22, 2004, condition (1) earlier does not 
apply. Instead, personal property includes stock 
if condition (2) above applies or the stock was 
part of a straddle in which at least one of the off-
setting positions was:
An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-
stantially identical stock or securities,
A securities futures contract on the stock 
or substantially identical stock or securi-
ties, or
A position on substantially similar or rela-
ted property (other than stock).
Position. A position is an interest in personal 
property. A position can be a forward or futures 
contract or an option.
An interest in a loan denominated in a for-
eign currency is treated as a position in that cur-
rency. For the straddle rules, foreign currency 
for which there is an active interbank market is 
considered to be actively-traded personal prop-
erty. See also Foreign currency contract , ear-
lier.
Offsetting position.  This is a position that 
substantially reduces any risk of loss you may 
have from holding another position. However, if 
a position is part of a straddle that is not an 
identified straddle (described later), do not treat 
it as offsetting to a position that is part of an 
identified straddle.
Presumed offsetting positions.  Two or 
more positions will be presumed to be offsetting 
if:
The positions are established in the same 
personal property (or in a contract for this 
property), and the value of one or more po-
sitions varies inversely with the value of 
one or more of the other positions;
The positions are in the same personal 
property, even if this property is in a sub-
stantially changed form, and the positions' 
values vary inversely as described in the 
first condition;
The positions are in debt instruments with 
a similar maturity, and the positions' values 
vary inversely as described in the first con-
dition;
The positions are sold or marketed as off-
setting positions, whether or not the posi-
tions are called a straddle, spread, butter-
fly, or any similar name; or
The aggregate margin requirement for the 
positions is lower than the sum of the mar-
gin requirements for each position if held 
separately.
Related persons.  To determine if two or 
more positions are offsetting, you will be treated 
as holding any position your spouse holds 
Puts and Calls
Puts
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from 
sale of the underlying stock by the 
cost of the put.
Reduce your basis in the stock you 
buy by the amount you received for 
the put.
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital 
loss on the date it expires.*
Report the amount you received for 
the put as a short-term capital gain.
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the 
cost of the put and the amount you 
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.*
This does not affect you. (But if you 
buy back the put, report the 
difference between the amount you 
pay and the amount you received for 
the put as a short-term capital gain 
or loss.)
Calls
When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis 
in the stock purchased.
Increase your amount realized on 
sale of the stock by the amount you 
received for the call.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital 
loss on the date it expires.*
Report the amount you received for 
the call as a short-term capital gain.
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the 
cost of the call and the amount you 
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.*
This does not affect you. (But if you 
buy back the call, report the 
difference between the amount you 
pay and the amount you received for 
the call as a short-term capital gain 
or loss.)
*See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or 
loss is short term or long term.
Table 4-3.
Page 61 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 61

during the same period. If you take into account 
part or all of the gain or loss for a position held 
by a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or 
trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-
tion.
Loss Deferral Rules
Generally, you can deduct a loss on the dispo-
sition of one or more positions only to the extent 
the loss is more than any unrecognized gain 
you have on offsetting positions. Unused losses 
are treated as sustained in the next tax year.
Unrecognized gain. This is:
The amount of gain you would have had on 
an open position if you had sold it on the 
last business day of the tax year at its fair 
market value, and
The amount of gain realized on a position 
if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has 
been realized but not recognized.
Example. On July 11, 2016, you entered 
into a straddle. On December 12, 2016, you 
closed one position of the straddle at a loss of 
$15,000. On December 31, 2016, the end of 
your tax year, you have an unrecognized gain of 
$12,750 in the offsetting open position. On your 
2016 return, your deductible loss on the posi-
tion you closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − 
$12,750). You must carry forward the unused 
loss of $12,750.
Note. If you physically settle a position es-
tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of 
a straddle by delivering property to which the 
position relates (and you would realize a loss on 
that position if you terminated it), you are 
treated as having terminated the position for its 
fair market value immediately before the settle-
ment and as having sold the property used to 
physically settle the position at its fair market 
value.
Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-
ply to:
1. Positions established after October 21, 
2004, comprising an identified straddle,
2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified 
covered call options and the stock to be 
purchased under the options,
3. Hedging transactions, described earlier 
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to 
Market, and
4. Straddles consisting entirely of section 
1256 contracts, as described earlier under 
Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market 
(but see Identified straddle, later).
Note. For positions established before Oc-
tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also do 
not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-
dle at the end of the tax year.
Identified straddle.  Any straddle (other 
than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) is 
an identified straddle if all the following condi-
tions exist.
You clearly identified the straddle on your 
records before the close of the day on 
which you acquired it.
For straddles acquired after December 29, 
2007, you identified the positions in the 
straddle that are offsetting with respect to 
one another (for example, position A off-
sets position D, and position B offsets po-
sition C).
The straddle is not part of a larger straddle.
If there is a loss from any position in an iden-
tified straddle, you must increase the basis of 
each of the positions that offset the loss posi-
tion in the identified straddle. The increase is 
the loss multiplied by the following fraction:
Unrecognized gain (if any) on the offsetting 
position 
The total unrecognized gain on all positions 
that offset the loss position in the identified 
straddle
For this purpose, your unrecognized gain is 
the excess of the fair market value of the posi-
tion that is part of an identified straddle at the 
time you incur a loss on another position in the 
identified straddle, over the fair market value of 
that position when you identified it as a position 
in the straddle.
If the application of the above rule does not 
result in the increase in basis of any offsetting 
position in the identified straddle, you must in-
crease the basis of each of the offsetting posi-
tions in the straddle in a manner that:
Is reasonable,
Is consistently applied by you,
Is consistent with the purposes of the iden-
tified straddle rules, and
Results in a total increase in the basis of 
those offsetting positions equal to the loss.
If you adopt an allocation method under this 
rule, you must describe that method in your 
books and records.
The identified straddle rules also apply to 
positions that are or have been a liability or obli-
gation to you (for example, a debt obligation 
you issued, a written option, or a notional princi-
pal contract you entered into).
Neither you nor anyone else can take into 
account any loss on a position that is part of an 
identified straddle to the extent the loss increa-
ses the basis of any positions that offset the 
loss position in the identified straddle.
Note. For positions established before Oc-
tober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to 
meet two additional conditions.
1. All the original positions that you identify 
were acquired on the same day.
2. All the positions included in item (1) were 
disposed of on the same day during the 
tax year, or none of the positions were dis-
posed of by the end of the tax year.
Also, the losses from positions are deferred un-
til you dispose of all the positions in the strad-
dle. The rule discussed above for increasing the 
basis of each of the positions does not apply.
Qualified covered call options and op-
tioned stock.  A straddle is not subject to the 
loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the fol-
lowing are true.
All the offsetting positions consist of one or 
more qualified covered call options and the 
stock to be purchased from you under the 
options.
The straddle is not part of a larger straddle.
But see Special year­end rule , later, for an ex-
ception.
A qualified covered call option is any option 
you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock 
you acquire in connection with granting the op-
tion), but only if all the following are true.
The option is traded on a national securi-
ties exchange or other market approved by 
the Secretary of the Treasury.
The option is granted more than 30 days 
before its expiration date.
For covered call options entered into 
after July 28, 2002, the option is granted 
not more than 12 months before its expira-
tion date or satisfies term limitation and 
qualified benchmark requirements pub-
lished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin.
The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-
tion.
You are not an options dealer who granted 
the option in connection with your activity 
of dealing in options.
Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or 
loss.
A deep-in-the-money option is an option 
with a strike price lower than the lowest quali-
fied benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the 
price at which the option is to be exercised. 
Strike prices are listed in the financial section of 
many newspapers. The LQB is the highest 
available strike price that is less than the appli-
cable stock price. However, the LQB for an op-
tion with a term of more than 90 days and a 
strike price of more than $50 is the second 
highest available strike price that is less than 
the applicable stock price.
The availability of strike prices for equity op-
tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-
termination of the LQB for an option that is not 
an equity option with flexible terms.
The applicable stock price for any stock for 
which an option has been granted is:
1. The closing price of the stock on the most 
recent day on which that stock was traded 
before the date on which the option was 
granted; or
2. The opening price of the stock on the day 
on which the option was granted, but only 
if that price is greater than 110% of the 
price determined in (1).
If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, 
the LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of 
the applicable stock price. If the applicable 
stock price is $150 or less, the LQB will be 
treated as not less than an amount that is $10 
below the applicable stock price.
Example. On May 17, 2016, you held XYZ 
stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call op-
tion with a strike price of $120. The closing 
price of one share of XYZ stock on May 16, 
2016, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/
September call options offered on May 17, 
2016, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125, 
$130, and $135. Because the option has a term 
of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the sec-
ond highest strike price that is less than 
$130.25, the applicable stock price. The call 
Page 62 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 62  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

option is a deep-in-the-money option because 
its strike price is lower than the LQB. As a re-
sult, the option is not a qualified covered call 
option, and the loss deferral rules apply if you 
closed out the option or the stock at a loss dur-
ing the year.
Capital loss on qualified covered call 
options. If you hold stock and you write a 
qualified covered call option on that stock with a 
strike price less than the applicable stock price, 
treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-
tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain 
on the sale or exchange of the stock would be 
treated as long-term capital gain. The holding 
period of the stock does not include any period 
during which you are the writer of the option.
Special year-end rule.  The loss deferral 
rules for straddles apply if all the following are 
true.
The qualified covered call options are 
closed, or the stock is disposed of at a loss 
during any tax year.
Gain on disposition of the stock or gain on 
the options is includible in gross income in 
a later tax year.
The stock or options were held less than 
30 days after the closing of the options or 
the disposition of the stock.
How To Report Gains
and Losses (Form 6781)
As a general rule, report each position (whether 
or not it is part of a straddle) on which you have 
unrecognized gain at the end of the tax year 
and the amount of this unrecognized gain in 
Part III of Form 6781. Use Part II of Form 6781 
to figure your gains and losses on straddles. 
See the Form 6781 instructions for how to re-
port these gains and losses.
Coordination of Loss Deferral 
Rules and Wash Sale Rules
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any 
disposition of a position or positions of a strad-
dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then ap-
ply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if 
stocks or securities make up a position that is 
part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle 
does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.
Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-
sition of shares of stock or securities that make 
up the positions of a straddle if, within a period 
beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-
sition and ending 30 days after that date, you 
acquired substantially identical stock or securi-
ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the 
following tax year, subject to any further appli-
cation of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also 
apply if you entered into a contract or option to 
acquire the stock or securities within the time 
period described above. See Loss carryover , 
later, for more information about how to treat 
the loss in the following tax year.
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se-
curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any 
losses you sustained in the ordinary course of 
your business.
Example. You are not a dealer in stock or 
securities. On December 5, 2016, you bought 
stock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off-
setting put option. On December 12, 2016, 
there was $20 of unrealized gain in the put op-
tion and you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By 
December 19, 2016, the value of the put option 
had declined, eliminating all unrealized gain in 
the position. On December 19, you bought a 
second XX stock position that is substantially 
identical to the XX stock you sold on December 
12. At the end of the year, there is no unrecog-
nized gain in the put option or in the XX stock. 
Under these circumstances, the $20 loss will be 
disallowed for 2016 under Rule 1 because, 
within a period beginning 30 days before De-
cember 12, and ending 30 days after that date, 
you bought stock substantially identical to the 
XX stock you sold.
Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-
sition of less than all the positions of a straddle 
(your loss position) to the extent that any unrec-
ognized gain at the close of the tax year in one 
or more of the following positions is more than 
any loss disallowed under Rule 1.
Successor positions.
Offsetting positions to the loss position.
Offsetting positions to any successor posi-
tion.
Successor position. A successor position 
is a position that is or was at any time offsetting 
to a second position, if both the following condi-
tions are met.
The second position was offsetting to the 
loss position that was sold.
The successor position is entered into dur-
ing a period beginning 30 days before, and 
ending 30 days after, the sale of the loss 
position.
Example 1. On November 7, 2016, you en-
tered into offsetting long and short positions in 
non-section 1256 contracts. On November 14, 
2016, you disposed of the long position at a $10 
loss. On November 21, 2016, you entered into a 
new long position (successor position) that is 
offsetting to the retained short position, but not 
substantially identical to the long position dis-
posed of on November 14. You held both posi-
tions through year end, at which time there was 
$10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long 
position and no unrecognized gain in the offset-
ting short position. Under these circumstances, 
the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2016 
because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in 
the successor long position.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that at year end you have $4 
of unrecognized gain in the successor long po-
sition and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offset-
ting short position. Under these circumstances, 
the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2016 
because there is a total of $10 of unrecognized 
gain in the successor long position and offset-
ting short position.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that at year end you have $8 
of unrecognized gain in the successor long po-
sition and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offset-
ting short position. Under these circumstances, 
$8 of the total $10 realized loss will be disal-
lowed for 2016 because there is $8 of unrecog-
nized gain in the successor long position.
Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed loss 
that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2, 
you must carry it over to the next tax year and 
apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss. 
For example, a loss disallowed in 2015 under 
Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2016, unless the 
substantially identical stock or securities (which 
caused the loss to be disallowed in 2015) were 
disposed of during 2016. In addition, the carry-
over loss will not be allowed in 2016 if Rule 1 or 
Rule 2 disallows it.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
example under Rule 1. On December 22, 2017, 
you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss and 
there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put op-
tion. Under these circumstances, you cannot 
deduct in 2017 either the $20 loss disallowed in 
2016 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De-
cember 22, 2017, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does 
not apply because the substantially identical XX 
stock was sold during the year and no substan-
tially identical stock or securities were bought 
within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does 
apply because there is $40 of unrecognized 
gain in the put option, an offsetting position to 
the loss positions.
Capital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss 
position would have resulted in a capital loss, 
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on 
the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the 
gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-
nary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a 
loss position (in the case of section 1256 con-
tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term 
capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss, 
you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 
rule, even if you would treat any gain or loss on 
any successor positions as 100% long-term or 
short-term capital gain or loss.
Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad-
dle losses and wash sales do not apply to the 
following loss situations.
Loss on the sale of one or more positions 
in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans­
actions are described under Section 1256 
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)
Loss on the sale of a loss position in a 
mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad­
dle account (Election C), later.)
Loss on the sale of a position that is part of 
a straddle consisting only of section 1256 
contracts.
Holding Period and
Loss Treatment Rules
The holding period of a position in a straddle 
generally begins no earlier than the date on 
which the straddle ends (the date you no longer 
hold an offsetting position). This rule does not 
apply to any position you held more than 1 year 
before you established the straddle. But see 
Exceptions, later.
Example. On March 9, 2015, you acquired 
gold. On January 11, 2016, you entered into an 
offsetting short gold forward contract 
Page 63 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 63

(nonregulated futures contract). On April 4, 
2016, you disposed of the short gold forward 
contract at no gain or loss. On April 11, 2016, 
you sold the gold at a gain. Because the gold 
had been held for 1 year or less before the off-
setting short position was entered into, the hold-
ing period for the gold begins on April 4, 2016, 
the date the straddle ended. Gain recognized 
on the sale of the gold will be treated as 
short-term capital gain.
Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale of 
one or more positions (the loss position) of a 
straddle as a long-term capital loss if both the 
following are true.
You held (directly or indirectly) one or more 
offsetting positions to the loss position on 
the date you entered into the loss position.
You would have treated all gain or loss on 
one or more of the straddle positions as 
long-term capital gain or loss if you had 
sold these positions on the day you en-
tered into the loss position.
Mixed straddles.  Special rules apply to a 
loss position that is part of a mixed straddle and 
that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixed 
straddle is a straddle:
That is not part of a larger straddle,
In which all positions are held as capital 
assets,
In which at least one (but not all) of the po-
sitions is a section 1256 contract, and
For which the mixed straddle election 
(Election A, discussed later) has not been 
made.
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss 
and 40% short-term capital loss, if all the follow-
ing conditions apply.
Gain or loss from the sale of one or more 
of the straddle positions that are section 
1256 contracts would be considered gain 
or loss from the sale or exchange of a capi-
tal asset.
The sale of no position in the straddle, 
other than a section 1256 contract, would 
result in a long-term capital gain or loss.
You have not made a straddle-by-straddle 
identification election (Election B) or mixed 
straddle account election (Election C), 
both discussed later.
Example. On March 7, 2016, you entered 
into a long gold forward contract. On July 18, 
2016, you entered into an offsetting short gold 
regulated futures contract. You did not make an 
election to offset gains and losses from posi-
tions in a mixed straddle. On August 8, 2016, 
you disposed of the long forward contract at a 
loss. Because the gold forward contract was 
part of a mixed straddle and the disposition of 
this non-section 1256 position would not result 
in long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on 
the termination of the gold forward contract will 
be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% 
short-term capital loss.
Exceptions. The special holding period and 
loss treatment for straddle positions does not 
apply to positions that:
Constitute part of a hedging transaction,
Are included in a straddle consisting only 
of section 1256 contracts, or
Are included in a mixed straddle account 
(Election C), discussed later.
Mixed Straddle Elections
If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle 
and make one of the elections described in the 
following discussions, report your gain or loss 
as indicated in those discussions. If you do not 
make any of the elections, report your gain or 
loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of 
the section 1256 component of the straddle, en-
ter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or 
your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form 
6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 
13 (Part II).
Mixed straddle election (Election A).  You 
can elect out of the marked-to-market rules, dis-
cussed under Section 1256 Contracts Marked 
to Market, earlier, for all section 1256 contracts 
that are part of a mixed straddle. Instead, the 
gain and loss rules for straddles will apply to 
these contracts. However, if you make this elec-
tion for an option on a section 1256 contract, 
the gain or loss treatment discussed earlier un-
der Options will apply, subject to the gain and 
loss rules for straddles.
You can make this election if:
At least one (but not all) of the positions is 
a section 1256 contract, and
Each position forming part of the straddle 
is clearly identified as being part of that 
straddle on the day the first section 1256 
contract forming part of the straddle is ac-
quired.
If you make this election, it will apply for all 
later years as well. It cannot be revoked without 
the consent of the IRS. If you made this elec-
tion, check box A of Form 6781. Do not report 
the section 1256 component in Part I.
Other elections.  You can avoid the 60% 
long-term capital loss treatment required for a 
non-section 1256 loss position that is part of a 
mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose 
either of the two following elections to offset 
gains and losses for these positions.
Election B. Make a separate identification 
of the positions of each mixed straddle for 
which you are electing this treatment (the 
straddle-by-straddle identification method).
Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-
count for a class of activities for which 
gains and losses will be recognized and 
offset on a periodic basis.
These two elections are alternatives to the 
mixed straddle election. You can choose only 
one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to in-
dicate your election choice by checking box A, 
B, or C, whichever applies.
Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-
tion (Election B).  Under this election, you 
must clearly identify each position that is part of 
the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:
The close of the day the identified mixed 
straddle is established, or
The time the position is disposed of.
If you dispose of a position in the mixed strad-
dle before the end of the day on which the 
straddle is established, this identification must 
be made by the time you dispose of the posi-
tion. You are presumed to have properly identi-
fied a mixed straddle if independent verification 
is used.
If you make this election, any positions you 
held on the day before the election are deemed 
sold for their fair market value at the close of the 
last business day before the day of the election. 
For elections made on or before August 18, 
2014, take this gain or loss into account when 
computing taxable income for the year in which 
the election was made. For elections made af-
ter August 18, 2014, take this gain or loss into 
account in the year you would have reported 
the gain or loss if the identified mixed straddle 
had not been established. In addition, when the 
gain or loss that accrued prior to the time the 
identified mixed straddle was established is 
taken into account, it will have the same charac-
ter it would have had if the identified mixed 
straddle had not been established. See Regula-
tions section 1.1092(b)-6 for details.
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under 
this election depends on which side of the 
straddle produced the total net gain or loss. If 
the net gain or loss from the straddle is due to 
the section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is 
treated as 60% long-term capital gain or loss 
and 40% short-term capital gain or loss. Enter 
the net gain or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and 
identify the election by checking box B.
If the net gain or loss is due to the non-sec-
tion 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-term 
capital gain or loss. See the Form 6781 instruc-
tions for how to report the net gain or loss.
For the specific application of the rules of 
this election, see Regulations sections 
1.1092(b)-3T and 1.1092(b)-6.
Example 1. Straddle established on or be-
fore August 18, 2014. On April 2, 2014, you en-
tered into a non-section 1256 position and an 
offsetting section 1256 contract. You also made 
a valid election to treat this straddle as an iden-
tified mixed straddle. On April 9, 2014, you dis-
posed of the non-section 1256 position at a 
$600 loss and the section 1256 contract at an 
$800 gain. Under these circumstances, the 
$600 loss on the non-section 1256 position will 
be offset against the $800 gain on the section 
1256 contract. The net gain of $200 from the 
straddle will be treated as 60% long-term capi-
tal gain and 40% short-term capital gain be-
cause it is due to the section 1256 contract.
Example 2.  Straddle established after Au-
gust 18, 2014. On December 1, 2015, you en-
tered into a non-section 1256 position for $100. 
At the end of the day on January 25, 2016, the 
position had a value of $500. On January 26, 
2016, you entered into an offsetting section 
1256 position. You elected to treat the straddle 
as an identified mixed straddle.
On February 10, 2016, you closed out the 
section 1256 contract at a $500 loss and dis-
posed of the non-section 1256 position for 
$975. Prior to entering into the identified mixed 
straddle, you had a $400 unrealized short-term 
capital gain on the non-section 1256 position. 
When you disposed of the non-section 1256 
position on February 10, 2016, you recognized 
the $400 gain. This gain is calculated as though 
you had disposed of the position on the day 
Page 64 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 64  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

prior to establishing the identified mixed 
straddle.
You also realized a gain of $475 ($975 pro-
ceeds – $500 value before entering into the 
identified mixed straddle). This gain is offset by 
the $500 loss on the section 1256 contract for a 
net loss of $25. This net loss is recognized and 
treated as 60% long-term capital loss and 40% 
short-term capital loss attributable to the section 
1256 contract.
Mixed straddle account (Election C). 
You may elect to establish one or more ac-
counts for determining gains and losses from all 
positions in a mixed straddle. You must estab-
lish a separate mixed straddle account for each 
separate designated class of activities.
Generally, you must determine gain or loss 
for each position in a mixed straddle account as 
of the close of each business day of the tax 
year. You offset the net section 1256 contracts 
against the net non-section 1256 positions to 
determine the “daily account net gain or loss.”
If the daily account amount is due to 
non-section 1256 positions, the amount is 
treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the 
daily account amount is due to section 1256 
contracts, the amount is treated as 60% 
long-term and 40% short-term capital gain or 
loss.
On the last business day of the tax year, you 
determine the “annual account net gain or loss” 
for each account by netting the daily account 
amounts for that account for the tax year. The 
“total annual account net gain or loss” is deter-
mined by netting the annual account amounts 
for all mixed straddle accounts that you had es-
tablished.
The net amounts keep their long-term or 
short-term classification. However, no more 
than 50% of the total annual account net gain 
for the tax year can be treated as long-term 
capital gain. Any remaining gain is treated as 
short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40% 
of the total annual account net loss can be 
treated as short-term capital loss. Any remain-
ing loss is treated as long-term capital loss.
The election to establish one or more mixed 
straddle accounts for each tax year must be 
made by the due date (without extensions) of 
your income tax return for the immediately pre-
ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new 
class of activities during a tax year, you must 
make the election for the new class of activities 
by the later of either:
The due date of your return for the immedi-
ately preceding tax year (without exten-
sions), or
60 days after you entered into the first 
mixed straddle in the new class of activi-
ties.
You make the election on Form 6781 by 
checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-
come tax return for the immediately preceding 
tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies. 
Report the annual account net gain or loss from 
a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 
6781. In addition, you must attach a statement 
to Form 6781 specifically designating the class 
of activities for which a mixed straddle account 
is established.
For the specific application of the rules of 
this election, see Regulations section 
1.1092(b)-4T.
Interest expense and carrying charges 
relating to mixed straddle account posi-
tions. You cannot deduct interest and carrying 
charges that are allocable to any positions held 
in a mixed straddle account. Treat these 
charges as an adjustment to the annual account 
net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-
ately between the net short-term and the net 
long-term capital gains or losses.
To find the amount of interest and carrying 
charges that is not deductible and that must be 
added to the annual account net gain or loss, 
apply the rules described earlier to the positions 
held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest 
expense and carrying charges on straddles  in 
chapter 3.
Sales of Stock to ESOPs
or Certain Cooperatives
If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3 
years to an employee stock ownership plan 
(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative, 
you may be able to elect to postpone all or part 
of the gain on the sale if you bought qualified re-
placement property (certain securities) within 
the period that began 3 months before the sale 
and ended 12 months after the sale. If you 
make the election, you must recognize gain on 
the sale only to the extent the proceeds from 
the sale exceed the cost of the qualified re-
placement property.
You must reduce the basis of the replace-
ment property by any postponed gain. If you 
dispose of any replacement property, you may 
have to recognize all of the postponed gain.
Generally, to qualify for the election the 
ESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of 
the outstanding stock of the corporation that is-
sued the qualified securities. Also, the qualified 
replacement property must have been issued 
by a domestic operating corporation.
How to make the election.  You must make 
the election no later than the due date (includ-
ing extensions) for filing your tax return for the 
year in which you sold the stock. If your original 
return was filed on time, you may make the 
election on an amended return filed no later 
than 6 months after the due date of your return 
(excluding extensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to 
section 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended 
return and file it at the same address you used 
for your original return.
How to report and postpone gain.  Re-
port the sale in Part II of Form 8949 as you 
would if you were not making the election. Then 
enter “R” in column (f). Enter the amount of the 
postponed gain as a negative number in col-
umn (g). Put it in parentheses to show it is neg-
ative. Complete all remaining columns. If the 
actual postponed gain is different from the 
amount you report, file an amended return.
Report your sales of stock to ESOPs or 
certain cooperatives on Form 8949 
with the correct box checked for these 
transactions. See Form 8949 and the Instruc­
tions for Form 8949.
Also attach the following statements.
CAUTION
!
1. A “statement of election” that indicates you 
are making an election under section 
1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
that includes the following information.
a. A description of the securities sold, in-
cluding the type and number of 
shares, the date of the sale, the 
amount realized on the sale, and the 
adjusted basis of the securities.
b. The name of the ESOP or cooperative 
to which the qualified securities were 
sold.
c. For a sale that was part of a single, in-
terrelated transaction under a prear-
ranged agreement between taxpayers 
involving other sales of qualified se-
curities, the names and identifying 
numbers of the other taxpayers under 
the agreement and the number of 
shares sold by the other taxpayers.
2. A notarized “statement of purchase” de-
scribing the qualified replacement prop-
erty, date of purchase, and the cost of the 
property and declaring the property to be 
qualified replacement property for the 
qualified stock you sold. The statement 
must have been notarized no later than 30 
days after the purchase. If you have not 
yet purchased the qualified replacement 
property, you must attach the notarized 
“statement of purchase” to your income 
tax return for the year following the elec-
tion year (or the election will not be valid).
3. A verified written statement of the domes-
tic corporation whose employees are cov-
ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities, 
or of any authorized officer of the coopera-
tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-
tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal Rev-
enue Code on certain dispositions, and 
prohibited allocations of the stock pur-
chased by the ESOP or cooperative.
More information.  For details, see section 
1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-
tions section 1.1042-1T.
Rollover of Gain
From Publicly
Traded Securities
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain 
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. 
This means that if you buy certain replacement 
property and make the choice described in this 
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the ba-
sis of the replacement property as described in 
Basis of replacement property , later. This post-
pones your gain until the year you dispose of 
the replacement property.
You qualify to make this choice if you meet 
all the following tests.
You sell publicly traded securities at a 
gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-
ties traded on an established securities 
market.
Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
During the 60-day period beginning on the 
date of the sale, you buy replacement 
Page 65 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 65

property. This replacement property must 
be either common stock of, or a partner-
ship interest in, a specialized small busi-
ness investment company (SSBIC). This is 
any partnership or corporation licensed by 
the Small Business Administration under 
section 301(d) of the Small Business In-
vestment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 
13, 1993.
Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the 
choice described in this section, you must rec-
ognize gain only up to the following amount:
The amount realized on the sale, minus
The cost of any common stock or partner-
ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought 
during the 60-day period beginning on the 
date of sale (and did not previously take 
into account on an earlier sale of publicly 
traded securities).
If this amount is less than the amount of your 
gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, 
subject to the limit described next. If this 
amount is equal to or more than the amount of 
your gain, you must recognize the full amount of 
your gain.
Limit on gain postponed.  The amount of 
gain you can postpone each year is limited to 
the smaller of:
$50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and 
file a separate return), or
$500,000 ($250,000 if you are married and 
file a separate return), minus the amount of 
gain you postponed for all earlier years.
Basis of replacement property.  You must 
subtract the amount of postponed gain from the 
basis of your replacement property.
How to report and postpone gain.  Report 
the entire gain realized from the sale in Part I or 
Part II of Form 8949. To make the election to 
postpone gain, report the gain as you would if 
you were not making the election. Enter “R” in 
column (f). Enter the amount of the postponed 
gain as a negative number in column (g). Put it 
in parentheses to show it is negative. Complete 
all remaining columns.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949 with the correct box checked. 
See Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Form 8949.
Also attach a schedule showing how you fig-
ured the postponed gain, the name of the 
SSBIC in which you purchased common stock 
or a partnership interest, the date of that pur-
chase, and your new basis in that SSBIC stock 
or partnership interest.
You must make the choice to postpone gain 
no later than the due date (including exten-
sions) for filing your tax return for the year in 
which you sold the securities. If your original re-
turn was filed on time, you may make the choice 
on an amended return filed no later than 6 
months after the due date of your return (ex-
cluding extensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to 
section 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended 
return and file it at the same address you used 
for your original return.
Your choice is revocable with the consent of 
the IRS.
CAUTION
!
Gains on Qualified
Small Business Stock
This section discusses two provisions of the law 
that may apply to gain from the sale or trade of 
qualified small business stock. You may qualify 
for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain. 
You may be able to exclude gain from your in-
come.
Qualified small business stock. This is stock 
that meets all the following tests.
1. It must be stock in a C corporation.
2. It must have been originally issued after 
August 10, 1993.
3. The corporation must have total gross as-
sets of $50 million or less at all times after 
August 9, 1993, and before it issued the 
stock. Its total gross assets immediately 
after it issued the stock must also be $50 
million or less.
When figuring the corporation's total 
gross assets, you must also count the as-
sets of any predecessor of the corpora-
tion. In addition, you must treat all corpora-
tions that are members of the same 
parent-subsidiary controlled group as one 
corporation.
4. You must have acquired the stock at its 
original issue, directly or through an under-
writer, in exchange for money or other 
property (not including stock), or as pay 
for services provided to the corporation 
(other than services performed as an un-
derwriter of the stock). In certain cases, 
your stock may also meet this test if you 
acquired it from another person who met 
this test, or through a conversion or trade 
of qualified small business stock that you 
held.
5. The corporation must have met the active 
business test, defined next, and must 
have been a C corporation during sub-
stantially all the time you held the stock.
6. Within the period beginning 2 years before 
and ending 2 years after the stock was is-
sued, the corporation cannot have bought 
more than a de minimis amount of its 
stock from you or a related party.
7. Within the period beginning 1 year before 
and ending 1 year after the stock was is-
sued, the corporation cannot have bought 
more than a de minimis amount of its 
stock from anyone, unless the total value 
of the stock it bought is 5% or less of the 
total value of all its stock.
For more information about tests (6) and (7), 
see the regulations under section 1202 of the 
Internal Revenue Code.
Active business test.  A corporation meets 
this test for any period of time if, during that pe-
riod, both the following are true.
It was an eligible corporation, defined be-
low.
It used at least 80% (by value) of its assets 
in the active conduct of at least one quali-
fied trade or business, defined below.
Exception for SSBIC.  Any specialized 
small business investment company (SSBIC) is 
treated as meeting the active business test. An 
SSBIC is an eligible corporation licensed to op-
erate under section 301(d) of the Small Busi-
ness Investment Act of 1958, as in effect on 
May 13, 1993.
Eligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor-
poration other than:
A Domestic International Sales Corpora-
tion (DISC) or a former DISC;
A corporation that has made, or whose 
subsidiary has made, an election under 
section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code;
A regulated investment company;
A real estate investment trust (REIT);
A real estate mortgage investment conduit 
(REMIC);
Certain financial asset securitization in-
vestment trusts (FASITs); or
A cooperative.
Qualified trade or business.  This is any 
trade or business other than:
One involving services performed in the 
fields of health, law, engineering, architec-
ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-
forming arts, consulting, athletics, financial 
services, or brokerage services;
One whose principal asset is the reputa-
tion or skill of one or more employees;
Any banking, insurance, financing, leasing, 
investing, or similar business;
Any farming business (including the busi-
ness of raising or harvesting trees);
Any business involving the production or 
extraction of products for which percent-
age depletion can be claimed; or
Any business of operating a hotel, motel, 
restaurant, or similar business.
Rollover of Gain
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capital 
gain from the sale of qualified small business 
stock held more than 6 months. This means 
that, if you buy certain replacement stock and 
make the choice described in this section, you 
postpone part or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the ba-
sis of the replacement stock as described in Ba­
sis of replacement stock , later. This postpones 
your gain until the year you dispose of the re-
placement stock.
You can make this choice if you meet all the 
following tests.
You buy replacement stock during the 
60-day period beginning on the date of the 
sale.
The replacement stock is qualified small 
business stock.
The replacement stock continues to meet 
the active business requirement for small 
business stock for at least the first 6 
months after you buy it.
Amount of gain recognized.  If you make the 
choice described in this section, you must rec-
ognize the capital gain only up to the following 
amount.
The amount realized on the sale, minus
Page 66 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 66  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

The cost of any qualified small business 
stock you bought during the 60-day period 
beginning on the date of sale (and did not 
previously take into account on an earlier 
sale of qualified small business stock).
If this amount is less than the amount of your 
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that 
gain. If this amount equals or is more than the 
amount of your capital gain, you must recognize 
the full amount of your gain.
Basis of replacement stock.  You must sub-
tract the amount of postponed gain from the ba-
sis of your replacement stock.
Holding period of replacement stock.  Your 
holding period for the replacement stock in-
cludes your holding period for the stock sold, 
except for the purpose of applying the 6-month 
holding period requirement for choosing to roll 
over the gain on its sale.
Pass-through entity.  A pass-through entity (a 
partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company) also may 
make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit 
of the postponed gain applies to your share of 
the entity's postponed gain if you held an inter-
est in the entity for the entire period the entity 
held the stock.
If a pass-through entity sold qualified small 
business stock held for more than 6 months and 
you held an interest in the entity for the entire 
period the entity held the stock, you also may 
choose to postpone gain if you, rather than the 
pass-through entity, buy the replacement stock 
within the 60-day period.
How to report gain.  Report the entire gain re-
alized from the sale in Part I or Part II of Form 
8949. To make the election to postpone gain, 
report the gain as you would if you were not 
making the election. Enter “R” in column (f). En-
ter the amount of the postponed gain as a nega-
tive number in column (g). Put it in parentheses 
to show it is negative. Complete all remaining 
columns.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949 with the correct box checked. 
See Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Form 8949.
You must make the choice to postpone gain 
no later than the due date (including exten-
sions) for filing your tax return for the year in 
which you sold the stock. If your original return 
was filed on time, you may make the choice on 
an amended return filed no later than 6 months 
after the due date of your return (excluding ex-
tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return 
and file it at the same address you used for your 
original return.
Section 1202 Exclusion
You generally can exclude from your income up 
to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of 
qualified small business stock held by you for 
more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to 
75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009, 
and no later than September 27, 2010, and up 
to 100% for stock acquired after September 27, 
CAUTION
!
2010. The exclusion can be up to 60% for cer-
tain empowerment zone business stock. See 
Empowerment zone business stock , later. The 
eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclusion 
is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates, 
later.
SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small 
business investment company (SSBIC) stock 
you bought as replacement property for publicly 
traded securities you sold at a gain, you must 
reduce the basis of the stock by the amount of 
any postponed gain on that earlier sale, as ex-
plained earlier under Rollover of Gain From 
Publicly Traded Securities . But do not reduce 
your basis by that amount when figuring your 
section 1202 exclusion.
Limit on eligible gain.  The amount of your 
gain from the stock of any one issuer that is eli-
gible for the exclusion in 2016 is limited to the 
greater of:
Ten times your basis in all qualified stock 
of the issuer you sold or exchanged during 
the year, or
$10 million ($5 million for married individu-
als filing separately) minus the amount of 
gain from the stock of the same issuer you 
used to figure your exclusion in earlier 
years.
How to report gain.  Report the sale or ex-
change in Form 8949, Part II, with the appropri-
ate box checked, as you would if you were not 
taking the exclusion. Then enter “Q” in column 
(f) and enter the amount of the excluded gain as 
a negative number in column (g). Put it in paren-
theses to show it is negative. Complete all re-
maining columns. If you are completing line 18 
of Schedule D (Form 1040), enter as a positive 
number the amount of the exclusion on line 2 of 
the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the Sched-
ule D (Form 1040) instructions. But if you ex-
clude 60% of the gain, enter 23 of the exclusion. 
If you exclude 75% of the gain, enter 13 of the 
exclusion. If you exclude 100% of the gain, do 
not enter an amount.
Report these transactions on Form 
8949 with the correct box checked. 
See Form 8949 and the Instructions for 
Form 8949.
More information. For information about addi-
tional requirements that may apply, see section 
1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Empowerment zone business stock.  You 
can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet 
all the following additional requirements.
1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation 
that qualifies as an empowerment zone 
business during substantially all of the 
time you held the stock, and
2. You acquired the stock after December 
21, 2000.
Condition (1) will still be met if the corporation 
ceased to qualify after the 5-year period that be-
gins on the date you acquired the stock. How-
ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-
sion cannot be more than the gain you would 
CAUTION
!
have had if you had sold the stock on the date 
the corporation ceased to qualify.
Note. If either the 75% or 100% exclusion 
applies, then the 60% exclusion does not apply.
Exclusion of Gain From DC 
Zone Assets
If you sold or exchanged a District of Columbia 
Enterprise Zone (DC Zone) asset that you ac-
quired after 1997 and held for more than 5 
years, you may be able to exclude capital gain 
that you would otherwise include in income. 
The exclusion applies to an interest in, or prop-
erty of, certain businesses operating in the Dis-
trict of Columbia. See section 1400B for more 
details.
How to report.  Report the sale or exchange 
on Form 8949, Part II, as you would if you were 
not taking the exclusion. Enter “X” in column (f) 
and enter the amount of the exclusion as a neg-
ative number in column (g). Put the amount in 
parentheses to show it is negative. See the In-
structions for Form 8949, columns (f), (g), and 
(h). Complete all remaining columns.
Reporting Capital
Gains and Losses
Generally, report capital gains and losses on 
Form 8949. Complete Form 8949 before you 
complete line 1b, 2, 3, 8b, 9, or 10 of Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
Use Form 8949 to report:
The sale or exchange of a capital asset not 
reported on another form or schedule,
Gains from involuntary conversions (other 
than from casualty or theft) of capital as-
sets not held for business or profit,
Nonbusiness bad debts, and
Worthlessness of a security.
Use Schedule D (Form 1040) to report:
Overall gain or loss from transactions re-
ported on Form 8949;
Certain transactions you do not have to re-
port on Form 8949;
Gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of 
Form 4797;
Gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 
8824;
Gain or loss from a partnership, S corpora-
tion, estate or trust;
Capital gain distributions not reported di-
rectly on your Form 1040; and
Capital loss carryover from the previous 
year to the current year.
On Form 8949, enter all sales and ex-
changes of capital assets, including stocks, 
bonds, etc., and real estate (if not reported on 
Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, 8824, or line 1a 
or 8a of Schedule D (Form 1040)). Include 
these transactions even if you did not receive a 
Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From 
Real Estate Transactions, for the transaction. 
Report short-term gains or losses in Part I. Re-
port long-term gains or losses in Part II. Use as 
many Forms 8949 as you need.
Page 67 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 67

Exceptions to filing Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).  There are certain situa-
tions where you may not have to file Form 8949 
and/or Schedule D (Form 1040).
Exception 1. You do not have to file Form 
8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) if you have no 
capital losses and your only capital gains are 
capital gain distributions from Form(s) 
1099-DIV, box 2a. If any Form(s) 1099-DIV you 
receive have an amount in box 2b (unrecap-
tured section 1250 gain), box 2c (section 1202 
gain), or box 2d (collectibles (28%) gain), you 
do not qualify for this exception.
If you qualify for this exception, report your 
capital gain distributions directly on line 13 of 
Form 1040 (and check the box on line 13). Also 
use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain 
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to 
figure your tax. You can report your capital gain 
distributions on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead 
of on Form 1040, if none of the Forms 1099-DIV 
you received have an amount in box 2b, 2c, or 
2d, and you do not have to file Form 1040.
Exception 2.  You must file Schedule D 
(Form 1040), but generally do not have to file 
Form 8949, if Exception 1  does not apply and 
your only capital gains and losses are:
Capital gain distributions;
A capital loss carryover;
A gain from Form 2439 or 6252 or Part I of 
Form 4797;
A gain or loss from Form 4684, 6781, or 
8824;
A gain or loss from a partnership, S corpo-
ration, estate, or trust; or
Gains and losses from transactions for 
which you received a Form 1099-B that 
shows basis was reported to the IRS, for 
which the Ordinary box in box 2 is not 
checked, and for which you do not need to 
make any adjustments in column (g) of 
Form 8949 or enter any codes in column (f) 
of Form 8949.
Installment sales. You cannot use the install-
ment method to report a gain from the sale of 
stock or securities traded on an established se-
curities market. You must report the entire gain 
in the year of sale (the year in which the trade 
date occurs).
At-risk rules.  Special at-risk rules apply to 
most income-producing activities. These rules 
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the 
amount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk 
rules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade 
of an asset used in an activity to which the 
at-risk rules apply. For more information, see 
Pub. 925. Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, 
to figure the amount of loss you can deduct.
Passive activity gains and losses.  If you 
have gains or losses from a passive activity, 
you may also have to report them on Form 
8582. In some cases, the loss may be limited 
under the passive activity rules. Refer to Form 
8582 and its instructions for more information 
about reporting capital gains and losses from a 
passive activity.
Form 1099-B transactions.  If you sold prop-
erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain com-
modities, through a broker, you should receive 
Form 1099-B from the broker. Use the Form 
1099-B to complete Form 8949 and/or Sched-
ule D (Form 1040).
If you received a Form 1099-B for a transac-
tion, you usually report the transaction on Form 
8949. Report the proceeds shown in box 1d of 
Form 1099-B in column (d) of either Part I or 
Part II of Form 8949, whichever applies.
Include in column (g) any selling expenses 
or option premiums not reflected in Form 
1099-B, box 1d or box 1e. If you include a sell-
ing expense in column (g), enter “E” in column 
(f).
Enter the basis shown in box 1e in column 
(e). If the basis shown on Form 1099-B is not 
correct, see the table How To Complete Form 
8949, Columns (f) and (g), in the Instructions for 
Form 8949 for the adjustment you must make. If 
no basis is shown on Form 1099-B, enter the 
correct basis of the property in column (e). See 
the instructions for Form 1099-B, Form 8949, 
and Schedule D (Form 1040) for more informa-
tion.
Example 1.  You sold 100 shares of Fund 
HIJ for $2,500. You paid a $75 commission to 
the broker for handling the sale. Your Form 
1099-B shows that the net sales proceeds, 
$2,425 ($2,500 − $75), were reported to the 
IRS. Report $2,425 in column (d) of Form 8949. 
Complete columns (a), (b), (c), and (e).
Example 2.  You sold 200 shares of Fund 
KLM for $10,000. You paid a $100 commission 
at the time of the sale. The broker reported the 
gross proceeds to the IRS on Form 1099-B, so 
on Form 8949, you enter “E” in column (f), 
$10,000 in column (d), and $100 as a negative 
adjustment in column (g). Complete all remain-
ing columns.
Section 1256 contracts and straddles.
Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from 
section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-
tering these amounts on Schedule D (Form 
1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your 
income tax return.
Market discount bonds.  Report the sale 
or trade of a market discount bond on Part I or 
Part II of Form 8949, whichever is appropriate. 
See the table How To Complete Form 8949, 
Columns (f) and (g), in the Instructions for Form 
8949 to help you figure the amounts to report 
for a sale or trade of a market discount bond. 
Use the Worksheet for Accrued Market Dis-
count Adjustment in Column (g) in those in-
structions to compute the adjusted accrued 
market discount. Also report the amount of ac-
crued market discount as interest income on 
Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1, and 
identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.” See 
the Instructions for Form 8949 for more informa-
tion.
Form 1099-CAP transactions.  If a corpora-
tion in which you own stock has had a change 
in control or a substantial change in capital 
structure, you should receive Form 1099-CAP, 
Changes in Corporate Control and Capital 
Structure, from the corporation. Use the Form 
1099-CAP to fill in Form 8949. If your computa-
tions show that you would have a loss because 
of the change, do not enter any amounts on 
Form 8949 or Schedule D (Form 1040) as a re-
sult of this transaction.
Report the aggregate amount received 
shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the sales 
price in column (d) of either Part I or Part II of 
Form 8949, whichever applies.
Form 1099-S transactions.  If you sold or tra-
ded reportable real estate, you generally should 
receive from the real estate reporting person a 
Form 1099-S showing the gross proceeds.
“Reportable real estate” is defined as any 
present or future ownership interest in any of 
the following.
Improved or unimproved land, including air 
space;
Inherently permanent structures, including 
any residential, commercial, or industrial 
building;
A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
tures and common elements, including 
land;
Stock in a cooperative housing corporation 
(as defined in section 216 of the Internal 
Revenue Code); and
Any non-contingent interest in standing 
timber.
A “real estate reporting person” could in-
clude the buyer's attorney, your attorney, the ti-
tle or escrow company, a mortgage lender, your 
broker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquir-
ing the biggest interest in the property.
Your Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-
ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. See 
the Instructions for Form 8949 and the Instruc-
tions for Schedule D (Form 1040) for how to re-
port these transactions and include them in Part 
I or Part II of Form 8949 as appropriate. How-
ever, report like-kind exchanges on Form 8824 
instead.
It is unlawful for any real estate reporting 
person to separately charge you for complying 
with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.
Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a 
nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your 
name but actually belong to someone else), see 
the Instructions for Form 8949 for how to report 
these amounts on Form 8949.
File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with 
the IRS.  If you received gross proceeds as a 
nominee in 2016, you must file a Form 1099-B 
or Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the 
IRS. Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S 
with a Form 1096 to your Internal Revenue 
Service Center by February 28, 2017 (March 
31, 2017, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 
1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of 
the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or 
Form 1099-S by February 15, 2017. On Form 
1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” 
The actual owner should be listed as the “Re-
cipient.” On Form 1099-S, you should be listed 
as the “Filer.” The actual owner should be listed 
as the “Transferor.” You do not have to file a 
Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds 
for your spouse. For more information about the 
reporting requirements and the penalties for 
failure to file (or furnish) certain information re-
turns, see the General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns.
Page 68 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 68  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Sale of property bought at various times.  If 
you sell a block of stock or other property that 
you bought at various times, report the 
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one row 
in Part I of Form 8949 and the long-term gain or 
loss on one row in Part II of Form 8949. Enter 
“Various” in column (b) for the “Date acquired.”
Sale expenses. On Form 8949, include in col-
umn (g) any expense of sale, such as broker's 
fees, commissions, state and local transfer 
taxes, and option premiums, unless you repor-
ted the net sales price in column (d). If you in-
clude an expense of sale in column (g), enter 
“E” in column (f).
Short-term gains and losses.  Capital gain or 
loss on the sale or trade of investment property 
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or 
loss. You report it in Part I of Form 8949.
You combine your share of short-term capi-
tal gain or loss from partnerships, S corpora-
tions, and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital 
loss carryover, with your other short-term capi-
tal gains and losses to figure your net 
short-term capital gain or loss on line 7 of 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Long-term gains and losses.  A capital gain 
or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-
erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital 
gain or loss. You report it in Part II of Form 
8949.
You also report the following in Part II of 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
Undistributed long-term capital gains from 
a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-
ment company) or real estate investment 
trust (REIT);
Your share of long-term capital gains or 
losses from partnerships, S corporations, 
and fiduciaries;
All capital gain distributions from mutual 
funds and REITs not reported directly on 
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form 
1040; and
Long-term capital loss carryovers.
The result after combining these items with 
your other long-term capital gains and losses is 
your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of 
Schedule D (Form 1040)).
Total net gain or loss.  To figure your total net 
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capi-
tal gain or loss (Schedule D (Form 1040), line 7) 
with your net long-term capital gain or loss 
(Schedule D (Form 1040), line 15). Enter the re-
sult on Schedule D (Form 1040), Part III, 
line 16. If your losses are more than your gains, 
see Capital Losses, next. If both lines 15 and 16 
of your Schedule D (Form 1040) are gains and 
your taxable income on your Form 1040 is 
greater than zero, see Capital Gain Tax Rates , 
later.
Capital Losses
If your capital losses are more than your capital 
gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. 
Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, 
enclosed in parentheses.
Limit on deduction.  Your allowable capital 
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D (Form 
1040), is the lesser of:
$3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file a 
separate return), or
Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of 
Schedule D (Form 1040).
You can use your total net loss to reduce your 
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net 
loss on line 16 of Schedule D (Form 1040) that 
is more than the yearly limit on capital loss de-
ductions, you can carry over the unused part to 
the next year and treat it as if you had incurred it 
in that next year. If part of the loss is still un-
used, you can carry it over to later years until it 
is completely used up.
When you figure the amount of any capital 
loss carryover to the next year, you must take 
the current year's allowable deduction into ac-
count, whether or not you claimed it and 
whether or not you filed a return for the current 
year.
When you carry over a loss, it remains long 
term or short term. A long-term capital loss you 
carry over to the next tax year will reduce that 
year's long-term capital gains before it reduces 
that year's short-term capital gains.
Figuring your carryover.  The amount of 
your capital loss carryover is the amount of your 
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:
1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for 
the year, or
2. Your taxable income increased by your al-
lowable capital loss deduction for the year 
and your deduction for personal exemp-
tions.
If your deductions are more than your gross 
income for the tax year, use your negative taxa-
ble income in computing the amount in item (2).
Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the 
part of your capital loss that you can carry over.
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in 
2016. The sales resulted in a capital loss of 
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. 
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their 
joint 2016 return, they can deduct $3,000. The 
unused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − 
$3,000), can be carried over to 2017.
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2016 to 2017 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that 
loss is a smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, is less than zero. Otherwise, you do 
not have any carryovers.
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............. 1.  
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ................................... 2.  
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................................... 3.  
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3 ......................................................... 4.  
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount .................................... 5.  
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ...................... 6.  
7. Add lines 4 and 6 ....................................................................... 7.  
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2017. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... 8.  
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ................................... 9.  
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 ...................................... 10.  
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................. 11.  
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ..................................................................... 12.  
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2017. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... 13.  
Page 69 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property  Page 69

If their capital loss had been $2,000, their 
capital loss deduction would have been $2,000. 
They would have no carryover.
Use short-term losses first.  When you 
figure your capital loss carryover, use your 
short-term capital losses first, even if you incur-
red them after a long-term capital loss. If you 
have not reached the limit on the capital loss 
deduction after using the short-term capital los-
ses, use the long-term capital losses until you 
reach the limit.
Decedent's capital loss.  A capital loss 
sustained by a decedent during his or her last 
tax year (or carried over to that year from an 
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final 
income tax return filed for the decedent. The 
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in 
this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-
duct any of the loss or carry it over to following 
years.
Joint and separate returns.  If you and 
your spouse once filed separate returns and are 
now filing a joint return, combine your separate 
capital loss carryovers. However, if you and 
your spouse once filed a joint return and are 
now filing separate returns, any capital loss car-
ryover from the joint return can be deducted 
only on the return of the spouse who actually 
had the loss.
Capital Gain Tax Rates
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are 
generally lower than the tax rates that apply to 
other income. These lower rates are called the 
maximum capital gain rates.
The term “net capital gain” means the 
amount by which your net long-term capital gain 
for the year is more than your net short-term 
capital loss.
For 2016, the maximum capital gain rates 
are 0%, 15%, 20%, 25%, and 28%. See Ta-
ble 4-4 for details.
If you figure your tax using the maxi­
mum capital gain rate and the regular 
tax computation results in a lower tax, 
the regular tax computation applies.
TIP
Example. All of your net capital gain is from 
selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate 
would be 28%. If you are otherwise subject to a 
rate lower than 28%, the 28% rate does not ap-
ply.
Investment interest deducted.  If you claim a 
deduction for investment interest, you may have 
to reduce the amount of your net capital gain 
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates. Re-
duce it by the amount of the net capital gain you 
choose to include in investment income when 
figuring the limit on your investment interest de-
duction. This is done on the Schedule D Tax 
Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and Capi-
tal Gain Tax Worksheet. For more information 
about the limit on investment interest, see Inter­
est Expenses in chapter 3.
28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or loss 
from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain 
from the sale of qualified small business stock 
minus the section 1202 exclusion.
Collectibles gain or loss.  This is gain or 
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, 
antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic 
beverage held more than 1 year.
Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale 
of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or 
trust due to unrealized appreciation of collecti-
bles.
Gain on qualified small business stock.
If you realized a gain from qualified small busi-
ness stock that you held more than 5 years, you 
generally can exclude some or all of your gain 
under section 1202. The eligible gain minus 
your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. 
See Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock , 
earlier in this chapter.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally, 
this is any part of your capital gain from selling 
section 1250 property (real property) that is due 
to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-
tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the 
28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 
1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 
1040) instructions to figure your unrecaptured 
section 1250 gain. For more information about 
section 1250 property and section 1231 gain, 
see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
Tax computation using maximum capital 
gain rates.  Use the Qualified Dividends and 
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D 
Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure 
your tax if you have qualified dividends or net 
capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, are both 
gains.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet.  Use the 
Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D 
(Form 1040) instructions to figure your tax if:
You have to file Schedule D (Form 1040); 
and
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 18 (28% rate 
gain) or line 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 
gain), is more than zero.
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain 
Tax Worksheet. If you do not have to use the 
Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained 
above) and any of the following apply, use the 
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form 
1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.
You received qualified dividends. (See 
Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.)
You do not have to file Schedule D (Form 
1040) and you received capital gain distri-
butions. (See Exceptions to filing Form 
8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), ear-
lier.)
Schedule D (Form 1040), lines 15 and 16, 
are both more than zero.
Alternative minimum tax.  These capital gain 
rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-
mum tax.
Special Rules for
Traders in Securities
Special rules apply if you are a trader in securi-
ties in the business of buying and selling securi-
ties for your own account. To be engaged in 
business as a trader in securities, you must 
meet all the following conditions.
You must seek to profit from daily market 
movements in the prices of securities and 
not from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
preciation.
Your activity must be substantial.
You must carry on the activity with continu-
ity and regularity.
The following facts and circumstances 
should be considered in determining if your ac-
tivity is a securities trading business.
Typical holding periods for securities 
bought and sold.
The frequency and dollar amount of your 
trades during the year.
The extent to which you pursue the activity 
to produce income for a livelihood.
The amount of time you devote to the ac-
tivity.
If your trading activities do not meet the 
above definition of a business, you are consid-
ered an investor, and not a trader. It does not 
Table 4-4. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from...
THEN your maximum 
capital gain rate is...
collectibles gain 28%
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the 
section 1202 exclusion 28%
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 39.6% 20%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25%, 
28%, 33%, or 35% 15%
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 10% 
or 15% 0%
1 “Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or 
unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
Page 70 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 70  Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

matter whether you call yourself a trader or a 
“day trader.”
Note. You may be a trader in some securi-
ties and have other securities you hold for in-
vestment. The special rules discussed here do 
not apply to the securities held for investment. 
You must keep detailed records to distinguish 
the securities. The securities held for invest-
ment must be identified as such in your records 
on the day you got them (for example, by hold-
ing them in a separate brokerage account).
How To Report
Transactions from trading activities result in 
capital gains and losses and must be reported 
on Form 8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040), as 
appropriate. Losses from these transactions are 
subject to the limit on capital losses explained 
earlier in this chapter.
Mark-to-market election made.  If you made 
the mark-to-market election, you should report 
all gains and losses from trading as ordinary 
gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, in-
stead of as capital gains and losses on Form 
8949 and Schedule D (Form 1040). In that 
case, securities held at the end of the year in 
your business as a trader are marked to market 
by treating them as if they were sold (and reac-
quired) for fair market value on the last business 
day of the year. But do not mark to market any 
securities you held for investment. Report sales 
from those securities on Form 8949 and Sched-
ule D (Form 1040), as appropriate, not Form 
4797. See the Instructions for Form 8949 and 
Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Expenses. Interest expense and other invest-
ment expenses that an investor would deduct 
on Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a 
trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or 
Loss From Business, if the expenses are from 
the trading business. Commissions and other 
costs of acquiring or disposing of securities are 
not deductible but must be used to figure gain 
or loss. The limit on investment interest ex-
pense, which applies to investors, does not ap-
ply to interest paid or incurred in a trading busi-
ness.
Self-employment tax.  Gains and losses from 
selling securities as a trader are not subject to 
self-employment tax. This is true whether the 
election is made or not. For an exception that 
applies to section 1256 contracts, see Self­Em­
ployment Income, earlier.
How To Make the
Mark-to-Market Election
To make the mark-to-market election for 2017, 
you must file a statement with your timely filed 
return for 2016 or with a properly filed request 
for extension of time to file (Form 4868, Applica-
tion for Automatic Extension of Time To File 
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) on or before 
the normal due date of the return. The state-
ment must include the following information.
That you are making an election under 
section 475(f) of the Internal Revenue 
Code.
The first tax year for which the election is 
effective.
The trade or business for which you are 
making the election.
If you are not required to file a 2016 income 
tax return, you make the election by placing the 
above statement in your books and records no 
later than March 15, 2017. Attach a copy of the 
statement to your 2017 return.
If your method of accounting for 2016 is in-
consistent with the mark-to-market election, you 
must change your method of accounting for se-
curities under Revenue Procedure 2016-29 (or 
its successor) available at www.irs.gov/irb/
2016­21_IRB/ar13.html. Revenue Procedure 
2016-29 requires you to file Form 3115, Appli-
cation for Change in Accounting Method. Fol-
low its instructions. Enter “64” on line 1a of the 
Form 3115.
Once you make the election, it will apply to 
2017 and all later tax years, unless you get per-
mission from the IRS to revoke it. The effect of 
making the election is described under 
Mark­to­market election made, earlier.
For more information on this election, see 
Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 at
www.irs.gov/pub/irs­irbs/irb99­07.pdf.
5.
How To Get Tax 
Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need 
help preparing your tax return, or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov and find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  Find 
free options to prepare and file your return on 
IRS.gov or in your local community if you qual-
ify.
The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program offers free tax help to people 
who generally make $54,000 or less, persons 
with disabilities, the elderly, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help prepar-
ing their own tax returns. The Tax Counseling 
for the Elderly (TCE) program offers free tax 
help for all taxpayers, particularly those who are 
60 years of age and older. TCE volunteers spe-
cialize in answering questions about pensions 
and retirement-related issues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov and click on the Fil-
ing tab to see your options for preparing and fil-
ing your return which include the following.
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/freefile. See if 
you qualify to use brand-name software to 
prepare and e­file your federal tax return 
for free.
VITA. Go to IRS.gov/vita, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 1-800-906-9887 
to find the nearest VITA location for free 
tax preparation.
TCE. Go to IRS.gov/tce, download the free 
IRS2Go app, or call 1-888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest TCE location for free tax 
preparation.
Getting answers to your tax law 
questions. On IRS.gov get answers to 
your tax questions anytime, anywhere.
Go to IRS.gov/help or IRS.gov/letushelp 
pages for a variety of tools that will help 
you get answers to some of the most com-
mon tax questions.
Go to IRS.gov/ita for the Interactive Tax 
Assistant, a tool that will ask you questions 
on a number of tax law topics and provide 
answers. You can print the entire interview 
and the final response for your records.
Go to IRS.gov/pub17 to get Pub. 17, Your 
Federal Income Tax for Individuals, which 
features details on tax-saving opportuni-
ties, 2016 tax changes, and thousands of 
interactive links to help you find answers to 
your questions. View it online in HTML or 
as a PDF or, better yet, download it to your 
mobile device to enjoy eBook features.
You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms and publications you may need. You 
can also download and view popular tax publi-
cations and instructions (including the 1040 in-
structions) on mobile devices as an eBook at no 
charge. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/orderforms 
to place an order and have forms mailed to you 
within 10 business days.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to combine direct deposit 
and IRS e­file. Direct deposit securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Eight in 10 taxpayers use di-
rect deposit to receive their refund. IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Delayed refund for returns claiming certain 
credits. Due to changes in the law, the IRS 
can’t issue refunds before February 15, 2017, 
for returns that claim the earned income credit 
(EIC) or the additional child tax credit (ACTC). 
This applies to the entire refund, not just the 
portion associated with these credits.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/transcripts. Click on either 
"Get Transcript Online" or "Get Transcript by 
Mail" to order a copy of your transcript. If you 
prefer, you can:
Order your transcript by calling 
1-800-908-9946.
Mail Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ (both 
available on IRS.gov).
Page 71 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help  Page 71

Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/tools for the following.
The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/eic) determines if you are eligible 
for the EIC.
The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/ein) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number.
The IRS Withholding Calculator (IRS.gov/
w4app) estimates the amount you should 
have withheld from your paycheck for fed-
eral income tax purposes.
The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look­up (IRS.gov/homebuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/salestax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), choose not to 
claim state and local income taxes, and 
you didn’t save your receipts showing the 
sales tax you paid.
Resolving tax-related identity theft issues.
The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email or telephone to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes any type of electronic communica-
tion, such as text messages and social me-
dia channels.
Go to IRS.gov/idprotection for information 
and videos.
If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you 
suspect you are a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, visit IRS.gov/id to learn what 
steps you should take.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
Go to IRS.gov/refunds.
Due to changes in the law, the IRS can’t is-
sue refunds before February 15, 2017, for 
returns that claim the EIC or the ACTC. 
This applies to the entire refund, not just 
the portion associated with these credits.
Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
Call the automated refund hotline at 
1-800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the lat-
est encryption technology to ensure your elec-
tronic payments are safe and secure. You can 
make electronic payments online, by phone, 
and from a mobile device using the IRS2Go 
app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. 
Go to IRS.gov/payments to make a payment 
using any of the following options.
IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
Debit or credit card: Choose an ap-
proved payment processor to pay online, 
by phone, and by mobile device.
Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered 
only when filing your federal taxes using 
tax preparation software or through a tax 
professional.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment Sys-
tem: Best option for businesses. Enroll-
ment is required.
Check or money order: Mail your pay-
ment to the address listed on the notice or 
instructions.
Cash: If cash is your only option, you may 
be able to pay your taxes at a participating 
retail store.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
payments for more information about your op-
tions.
Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/opa) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
Use the Offer in Compromise Pre­Qualifier 
(IRS.gov/oic) to see if you can settle your 
tax debt for less than the full amount you 
owe.
Checking the status of an amended return. 
Go to IRS.gov and click on Where’s My 
Amended Return?  (IRS.gov/wmar) under the 
“Tools” bar to track the status of Form 1040X 
amended returns. Please note that it can take 
up to 3 weeks from the date you mailed your 
amended return for it show up in our system 
and processing it can take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter. Go to 
IRS.gov/notices to find additional information 
about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be resolved on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS Tax Assistance 
Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/letushelp for the 
topics people ask about most. If you still need 
help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax is-
sue can’t be handled online or by phone. All 
TACs now provide service by appointment so 
you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without waiting. Before you 
visit, go to IRS.gov/taclocator to find the nearest 
TAC, check hours, available services, and ap-
pointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, un-
der the Stay Connected tab, choose the Con-
tact Us option and click on “Local Offices.”
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSvideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other languages. 
For taxpayers whose native language isn’t Eng-
lish, we have the following resources available. 
Taxpayers can find information on IRS.gov in 
the following languages.
Spanish (IRS.gov/spanish).
Chinese (IRS.gov/chinese).
Vietnamese (IRS.gov/vietnamese).
Korean (IRS.gov/korean).
Russian (IRS.gov/russian).
The IRS TACs provide over-the-phone inter-
preter service in over 170 languages, and the 
service is available free to taxpayers.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Is Here To Help 
You
What is the Taxpayer Advocate Service? 
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an in-
dependent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. 
Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is 
treated fairly and that you know and understand 
your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of Rights.
What Can the Taxpayer Advocate Service 
Do For You?  We can help you resolve prob-
lems that you can’t resolve with the IRS. And 
our service is free. If you qualify for our assis-
tance, you will be assigned to one advocate 
who will work with you throughout the process 
and will do everything possible to resolve your 
issue. TAS can help you if:
Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business,
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action, or
You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach Us?  We have offices in 
every state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico. Your local advocate’s number is in your 
local directory and at taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov. 
You can also call us at 1-877-777-4778.
How Can You Learn About Your Taxpayer 
Rights? The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 
10 basic rights that all taxpayers have when 
dealing with the IRS. Our Tax Toolkit at 
taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov can help you under-
stand what these rights mean to you  and how 
they apply. These are your rights. Know them. 
Use them.
How Else Does the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Help Taxpayers?  TAS works to re-
solve large-scale problems that affect many tax-
payers. If you know of one of these broad is-
sues, please report it to us at IRS.gov/sams.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) serve in-
dividuals whose income is below a certain level 
and need to resolve tax problems such as au-
dits, appeals, and tax collection disputes. Some 
clinics can provide information about taxpayer 
rights and responsibilities in different languages 
for individuals who speak English as a second 
language. To find a clinic near you, visit 
IRS.gov/litc or see IRS Publication 4134, Low 
Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 72 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 72  Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Glossary
Accrual method:  An accounting 
method under which you report your 
income when you earn it, whether or 
not you have received it. You gener-
ally deduct your expenses when you 
incur a liability for them, rather than 
when you pay them.
At-risk rules:  Rules that limit the 
amount of loss you may deduct to 
the amount you risk losing in the ac-
tivity.
Basis: Basis is the amount of your 
investment in property for tax purpo-
ses. The basis of property you buy is 
usually the cost. Basis is used to fig-
ure gain or loss on the sale or dispo-
sition of investment property.
Below-market loan:  A demand 
loan (defined later) on which interest 
is payable at a rate below the appli-
cable federal rate, or a term loan 
where the amount loaned is more 
than the present value of all pay-
ments due under the loan.
Call: An option that entitles the pur-
chaser to buy, at any time before a 
specified future date, property such 
as a stated number of shares of 
stock at a specified price.
Cash method:  An accounting 
method under which you report your 
income in the year in which you ac-
tually or constructively receive it. 
You generally deduct your expenses 
in the year you pay them.
Commodities trader:  A person 
who is actively engaged in trading 
section 1256 contracts and is regis-
tered with a domestic board of trade 
designated as a contract market by 
the Commodities Futures Trading 
Commission.
Commodity future:  A contract 
made on a commodity exchange, 
calling for the sale or purchase of a 
fixed amount of a commodity at a fu-
ture date for a fixed price.
Covered security: For purposes of 
Form 1099-B, a covered security is 
any of the following:
Stock you acquired after 2010 
(generally after 2011 if in a mu-
tual fund or other regulated in-
vestment company, or acquired 
through a dividend reinvest-
ment plan).
Certain stock held in a mutual 
fund or in connection with a div-
idend reinvestment plan for 
which a single-account election 
is in effect.
Certain debt instruments you 
acquired after 2013.
Certain options, warrants, and 
stock rights you granted or ac-
quired for cash after 2013.
A securities futures contract 
you entered into after 2013.
Variable rate debt instruments, 
inflation-indexed debt instru-
ments, contingent payment 
debt instruments, and converti-
ble debt instruments, acquired 
after 2015.
Options on debt instruments 
with payments denominated in 
(or determined by reference to) 
a currency other than the U.S. 
dollar and granted or acquired 
after 2015.
Options issued as part of in-
vestment units and granted or 
acquired after 2015.
See the Instructions for Form 
1099-B for more details.
A “specified security” is any of 
the following:
A share of stock (or any interest 
treated as stock, such as an 
American Depositary Receipt) 
in an entity organized as, or 
treated for federal tax purposes 
as, a corporation (foreign or do-
mestic). For this purpose, a se-
curity classified as stock by the 
issuer is treated as stock. If the 
issuer has not classified the se-
curity, the security is not 
treated as stock unless the 
broker knows that the security 
is reasonably classified as 
stock under general federal tax 
principles.
Any debt instrument, other than 
a debt instrument subject to 
section 1272(a)(6) (certain in-
terests in or mortgages held by 
a REMIC, certain other debt in-
struments with payments sub-
ject to acceleration, and pools 
of debt instruments the yield on 
which may be affected by pre-
payments), or any debt instru-
ment which has a fixed maturity 
date not more than one year 
from the date of issue. For this 
purpose, a security classified 
as debt by the issuer is treated 
as debt. If the issuer has not 
classified the security, the se-
curity is not treated as debt un-
less the broker knows that the 
security is reasonably classified 
as debt under general federal 
tax principles or that the instru-
ment or position is treated as a 
debt instrument under a spe-
cific provision of the Internal 
Revenue Code.
Any option on one or more 
specified securities (which in-
cludes an index substantially all 
of the components of which are 
specified securities), any option 
on financial attributes of speci-
fied securities, or a warrant or 
stock right.
Any securities futures contract.
See the Instructions for Form 
1099-B for more details.
Conversion transaction:  Any 
transaction that you entered into af-
ter April 30, 1993, that meets both of 
these tests.
1. Substantially all of your expec-
ted return from the transaction 
is due to the time value of your 
net investment.
2. The transaction is one of the 
following.
a. A straddle, including any 
set of offsetting positions 
on stock.
b. Any transaction in which 
you acquire property 
(whether or not actively 
traded) at substantially the 
same time that you con-
tract to sell the same prop-
erty or substantially identi-
cal property at a price set 
in the contract.
c. Any other transaction that 
is marketed or sold as pro-
ducing capital gains from a 
transaction described in 
(1).
Demand loan:  A loan payable in 
full at any time upon demand by the 
lender.
Dividend: A distribution of money 
or other property made by a corpo-
ration to its shareholders out of its 
earnings and profits.
Equity option: Any option:
To buy or sell stock, or
That is valued directly or indi-
rectly by reference to any stock 
or narrow-based security index.
Fair market value:  The price at 
which property would change hands 
between a willing buyer and a willing 
seller, both having reasonable 
knowledge of the relevant facts.
Forgone interest:  The amount of 
interest that would be payable for 
any period if interest accrued at the 
applicable federal rate and was 
payable annually on December 31, 
minus any interest payable on the 
loan for that period.
Forward contract:  A contract to 
deliver a substantially fixed amount 
of property (including cash) for a 
substantially fixed price.
Futures contract:  An ex-
change-traded contract to buy or 
sell a specified commodity or finan-
cial instrument at a specified price at 
a specified future date. See also 
Commodity future.
Gift loan:  Any below-market loan 
where the forgone interest is in the 
nature of a gift.
Interest: Compensation for the use 
or forbearance of money.
Investment interest:  The interest 
you paid or accrued on money you 
borrowed that is allocable to prop-
erty held for investment.
Limited partner:  A partner whose 
participation in partnership activities 
is restricted, and whose personal li-
ability for partnership debts is limited 
to the amount of money or other 
property that he or she contributed 
or may have to contribute.
Listed option:  Any option that is 
traded on, or subject to the rules of, 
a qualified board or exchange.
Marked-to-market rule:  The treat-
ment of each section 1256 contract 
(defined later) held by a taxpayer at 
the close of the year as if it were 
sold for its fair market value on the 
last business day of the year.
Market discount:  The stated re-
demption price of a bond at maturity 
minus your basis in the bond imme-
diately after you acquire it. Market 
discount arises when the value of a 
debt obligation decreases after its 
issue date.
Market discount bond:  Any bond 
having market discount except:
Short-term obligations with 
fixed maturity dates of up to 1 
year from the date of issue,
Tax-exempt obligations that 
you bought before May 1, 
1993,
U.S. savings bonds, and
Certain installment obligations.
Mutual fund:  A mutual fund is a 
regulated investment company gen-
erally created by “pooling” funds of 
Page 73 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 (2016)   Page 73

investors to allow them to take ad-
vantage of diversity of investments 
and professional management.
Nominee: A person who receives, 
in his or her name, income that ac-
tually belongs to someone else.
Noncovered security:  A noncov-
ered security, for purposes of Form 
1099-B, is any security that is not a 
covered security. The following se-
curities are not covered securities:
Stock acquired in 2011 that is 
transferred in 2011 to a divi-
dend reinvestment plan that 
meets the requirements of Reg-
ulations section 1.1012-1(e)(6). 
However, a covered security 
acquired in 2011 and transfer-
red to a dividend reinvestment 
plan after 2011 remains a cov-
ered security. For purposes of 
this rule, stock is considered 
transferred to a dividend rein-
vestment plan if it is held in a 
plan that is not a dividend rein-
vestment plan and the plan 
amends its plan documents to 
become a dividend reinvest-
ment plan. The stock is consid-
ered transferred as of the effec-
tive date of the plan 
amendments.
A security acquired due to a 
stock dividend, stock split, reor-
ganization, redemption, stock 
conversion, recapitalization, 
corporate division, or other sim-
ilar action, if the basis of the ac-
quired security is determined 
from the basis of a noncovered 
security.
A security that, when acquired, 
did not have to be reported on 
Form 1099-B because it was 
acquired from an exempt recip-
ient or an exempt foreign per-
son as defined in Regulations 
section 1.6045-1(g)(1).
A security for which reporting is 
required by Regulations section 
1.6049-5(d)(3)(ii) (certain se-
curities owned by a foreign in-
termediary or flow-through en-
tity).
A debt instrument acquired af-
ter 2013 described in Regula-
tions section 1.6045-1(n)(3).
See the Instructions for Form 
1099-B for more details.
Nonequity option:  Any listed op-
tion that is not an equity option, such 
as debt options, commodity futures 
options, currency options, and 
broad-based stock index options.
Options dealer:  Any person regis-
tered with an appropriate national 
securities exchange as a market 
maker or specialist in listed options.
Original issue discount (OID):
The amount by which the stated re-
demption price at maturity of a debt 
instrument is more than its issue 
price.
Passive activity: An activity involv-
ing the conduct of a trade or busi-
ness in which you do not materially 
participate and any rental activity. 
However, the rental of real estate is 
not a passive activity if both of the 
following are true.
More than one-half of the per-
sonal services you perform dur-
ing the year in all trades or 
businesses are performed in 
real property trades or busi-
nesses in which you materially 
participate.
You perform more than 750 
hours of services during the 
year in real property trades or 
businesses in which you mate-
rially participate.
Portfolio income:  Gross income 
from interest, dividends, annuities, 
or royalties that is not derived in the 
ordinary course of a trade or busi-
ness. It includes gains from the sale 
or trade of property (other than an 
interest in a passive activity) produc-
ing portfolio income or held for in-
vestment.
Premium: The amount by which 
your cost or other basis in a bond 
right after you get it is more than the 
total of all amounts payable on the 
bond after you get it (other than pay-
ments of qualified stated interest).
Private activity bond:  A bond that 
is part of a state or local government 
bond issue of which:
1. More than 10% of the pro-
ceeds are to be used for a pri-
vate business use, and
2. More than 10% of the payment 
of the principal or interest is:
a. Secured by an interest in 
property to be used for a 
private business use (or 
payments for the prop-
erty), or
b. Derived from payments for 
property (or borrowed 
money) used for a private 
business use.
Put: An option that entitles the pur-
chaser to sell, at any time before a 
specified future date, property such 
as a stated number of shares of 
stock at a specified price.
Real estate mortgage investment 
conduit (REMIC):  An entity that is 
formed for the purpose of holding a 
fixed pool of mortgages secured by 
interests in real property, with multi-
ple classes of interests held by in-
vestors. These interests may be ei-
ther regular or residual.
Regulated futures contract:  A 
section 1256 contract that:
Provides that amounts that 
must be deposited to, or may 
be withdrawn from, your margin 
account depend on daily mar-
ket conditions (a system of 
marking to market); and
Is traded on, or subject to the 
rules of, a qualified board of ex-
change, such as a domestic 
board of trade designated as a 
contract market by the Com-
modity Futures Trading Com-
mission or any board of trade or 
exchange approved by the 
Secretary of the Treasury.
Restricted stock: Stock you get for 
services you perform that is non-
transferable and is subject to a sub-
stantial risk of forfeiture.
Section 1256 contract: Any:
Regulated futures contract,
Foreign currency contract as 
defined in chapter 4 under For­
eign currency contract,
Nonequity option,
Dealer equity option, or
Dealer securities futures con-
tract.
For tax years beginning after 
July 21, 2010, a section 1256 con-
tract does not include certain swaps 
as listed in Exceptions under Sec­
tion 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar­
ket in chapter 4.
Securities futures contract:  A 
contract of sale for future delivery of 
a single security or of a nar-
row-based security index.
Short sale:  The sale of property 
that you generally do not own. You 
borrow the property to deliver to a 
buyer and, at a later date, you buy 
substantially identical property and 
deliver it to the lender.
Straddle: Generally, a set of offset-
ting positions on personal property. 
A straddle may consist of a pur-
chased option to buy and a pur-
chased option to sell on the same 
number of shares of the security, 
with the same exercise price and 
period.
Stripped preferred stock:  Stock 
that meets the following tests.
1. There has been a separation in 
ownership between the stock 
and any dividend on the stock 
that has not become payable.
2. The stock:
a. Is limited and preferred as 
to dividends,
b. Does not participate in 
corporate growth to any 
significant extent, and
c. Has a fixed redemption 
price.
Term loan:  Any loan that is not a 
demand loan.
Wash sale:  A sale of stock or se-
curities at a loss within 30 days be-
fore or after you buy or acquire in a 
fully taxable trade, or acquire a con-
tract or option to buy, substantially 
identical stock or securities.
Page 74 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 74 Publication 550 (2016)

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Abusive tax shelters (See Tax 
shelters)
Accounting fees 35
Accrual method 7, 17, 25, 32, 73
Accuracy-related penalty 4
Acquisition discount 16, 45
Adjusted basis 21, 42, 45
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 23, 33
Amortization of bond 
premium 34, 35
Annuities:
Borrowing on 36
Interest on 6
Life insurance proceeds used to 
buy 12
Sale of 53
Single-premium 36
Trade for 38, 49
Applicable federal rate 6
Appreciated financial 
positions 38
Arbitrage bonds 12
Assistance (See Tax help)
At-risk rules 31, 68, 73
Attorneys' fees 35
Automatic investment 
service 35, 43, 56
Average basis 46
Double-category method 46
Illustrated 46
B
Backup withholding 3
Bad debts 53, 57
Bankrupt financial institutions:
Deposit in 53
Bargain purchases 41
Basis 41–50, 73
Adjusted 21, 42, 45
Average 46
Cost 41, 46
Inherited property 42
Investment property 41
Like-kind exchanges 48
Other than cost 41
REITs 43
REMIC, residual interest 26
Replacement stock 67
Shares acquired by 
reinvestment 43
Stocks and bonds 21, 22, 34, 
42
Bearer obligations 14, 53
Below-market loans 6, 73
Bonds:
Accrued interest on 19
Amortization of premium 34
Arbitrage 12
Basis 34, 42
Capital asset 51
Convertible 48
Coupon 17
Enterprise zone facility 13
Federally guaranteed 12
Identification 42
Market discount 13, 32, 45, 52, 
68, 73
New York Liberty bonds 13
Par value 45
Premiums on 34, 45, 74
Private activity 12, 74
Redemption or retirement of 38
Sold between interest dates 11
State and local government 52
Stripped 12, 15, 45
Tax credit bonds 12
Tax-exempt 52
Traded flat 6
U.S. savings (See U.S. savings 
bonds)
U.S. Treasury (See U.S. 
Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds)
Brokerage fees 35, 69
C
Calls and puts 60, 73
Table 4-3 61
Capital assets 51
Capital gain distributions 21, 24, 
33, 56
Capital gains and losses 51–56
Constructive ownership 
transactions 54
Definition 51
Empowerment zone assets 67
Investment property 51
Long-term 58, 69
Long-term debt instruments 52
Losses, limit on 69
Passive activities 68
Qualified covered call 
options 63
Qualified small business 
stock 66
Reporting requirements 63, 67
Rollover of gain from sale of 
securities 65
Short-term 58, 69
Tax rates 70
Table 4-4 70
Capital loss carryover 63, 69
Worksheet 4-1 69
Cash method 7, 17, 32, 73
Reporting options for savings 
bond interest 8
Cash-settled options 39
Casualty losses 53
CDOs (Collateralized debt 
obligations) 26
Certificates of deposit (CDs) 14
Children:
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 33
Capital gain distributions 33
Custodian account for 3
Gifts to 4
Investment income of 3, 33
Qualified dividends 33
Savings account with parent as 
trustee 4
U.S. savings bond owner 8
Clerical help 35
Collateralized debt obligations 
(CDOs) 26
Collectibles 70
Commissions 43
Commodities traders 73
Commodity futures 54, 56, 73
Community property:
U.S. savings bonds 8
Constructive ownership 
transactions 50, 54
Constructive receipt 17
Constructive sales 38
Contractors, insolvency of 57
Conversion transactions 53, 73
Convertible stocks and 
bonds 48
Cooperatives, sales of stock 
to 65
Co-owners of U.S. savings 
bonds 8
Corporate distributions 19
Capital gain 24, 33, 56
Constructive 22
Dividends (See Dividends)
Fractional shares 22
Liquidating 22, 25
Nondividend 21, 24
Return of capital 21
Stock rights 22
Undistributed capital gains 21
Corporate reorganizations 48
Cost basis 41, 46
Coupon bonds 17
Covered security, defined 73
D
Day traders 70
Dealer equity options 39
Dealer securities futures 
contracts 40
Debt instruments, retirement 
of 53
Decedents 42, 70
U.S. savings bond interest, 
reporting of 9
Demand loans 73
Demutualization 49
Deposits, loss on 53
Discounted debt instruments 13
Discounted tax-exempt 
obligations 45
Discount on debt instruments 13
Certificates of deposit 14
Election to report all interest as 
OID 16
Face-amount certificates 14
Gain or loss treatment 52
Inflation-indexed 15
Market discount 
bonds (See Market discount 
bonds)
Original issue 
discount (See Original issue 
discount (OID))
Short-term obligations 16, 52
Stripped bonds and coupons 15
Dividends 19, 20, 73
 (See also Form 1099-DIV)
Alaska Permanent Fund 23, 33
Exempt-interest 5, 23, 56
Extraordinary 58
Holding period 20
Insurance policies 23
Money market funds 21
Nominees 20, 24
Ordinary 20
Patronage 23
Payments in lieu of 58
Qualified 20, 24, 33
Qualified foreign corporation 20
Received in January 20
Reinvestment of 56
Reinvestment plans 21, 35, 43
Reporting requirements 20, 
23–25
Restricted stock 23
Sale or trade vs. 38
Scrip 23
Sold stock 20
Stock 43, 56
Underreported 3
Veterans' insurance 5, 23
Divorce 41, 50
E
Education Savings Bond 
Program 10, 11
Interest excluded under 19
Recordkeeping requirements 11
Employee stock options 2
Employee stock ownership plans 
(ESOPs), sales of stock to 65
Employer identification numbers 
(EINs) 27
Empowerment zone 67
Endowment contracts 36
Enterprise zone facility 
bonds 13
Equity option 39, 73
Estate income received by 
beneficiary 3
Exchanges of mutual fund 
shares 49
Exclusion of gain:
DC zone assets 67
Exempt-interest dividends on 
mutual fund stock 56
Expenses of producing 
income 35
F
Face-amount certificates 14
Fair market value 41, 45, 73
Federal guarantee on bonds 12
Fees to buy or sell 35
Financial asset securitization 
investment trusts 
(FASITs) 26
First-in first-out (FIFO) 46
Foreign currency 
transactions 39
Foreign income 2
Forgone interest 73
Form 1040 17, 23
Form 1040, Schedule B 17
Form 1040, Schedule D 67
Form 1040A 17
Page 75 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 (2016)   Page 75

Form 1040X 38
Form 1041 27
Form 1065 27
Schedule K-1 27
Form 1066, Schedule Q 26, 36
Form 1096 19, 24, 68
Form 1099-B 2, 37, 68
Covered security, defined 73
Noncovered security, 
defined 74
Form 1099-CAP 68
Form 1099-DIV 3, 20, 23, 24
Form 1099-INT 2, 3, 5, 10, 18, 19, 
25, 26
Form 1099-MISC 20, 58
Form 1099-OID 2, 5, 14, 18, 25, 26
Form 1099-S 68
Form 1120 27
Form 2439 21
Form 3115 8, 35, 71
Form 4684 53
Form 4797 48, 54, 55
Form 4952 34
Form 6198 68
Form 6781 40, 54, 63, 68
Form 8275 30
Form 8275-R 30
Form 8582 27
Form 8615 3
Form 8815 10, 11, 19
Form 8824 48
Form 8832 27
Form 8886 29, 30
Form 8949:
Bad debts 57
Basis adjustment 21
Capital Gains 67
Capital Losses 67
Cooperative, sale to certain 65
Copyrights in musical works 51
Employee stock ownership plan, 
sale to 65
Empowerment Zone Assets 67
Exempt-interest dividends 56
Form 1099-B 37, 68
Form 1099-CAP 68
Form 1099-S 68
Fractional shares 22
Gain, qualified small business 
stock 67
How to fill in, generally 67
Long-term gains and losses 69
Marked-to-market election 71
Market discount bonds 53, 68
Musical compositions 51
Nominees 68
Nonbusiness bad debt 53
Nondividend distributions 24
Option 60
Property bought at various 
times 69
Rollover, publicly traded 
securities 65
Rollover, qualified small 
business stock 67
Sale expenses 69
Short-term gains and losses 69
Software 42
Worthless securities 38
Form SS-4 27
Form W-8BEN 4
Form W-9 3
Forward contracts 73
Fractional shares 22, 56
Frozen deposits 6, 19
Futures, commodity 54, 56, 73
Wash sales 59
Futures contracts:
Definition 73
Regulated 39, 74
Securities 56, 59, 60
G
Gains on qualified small 
business stock 66
Gains on sales or trades 45, 50, 
51
 (See also Capital gains and losses)
Gifts 4, 41, 56, 73
Gifts of shares 47
Glossary 73, 74
Government obligations 16
H
Hedging transactions 40, 54
Holding period:
Investment property 55
Replacement stock 67
Shares acquired by 
reinvestment 56
Straddles 63
I
Identity theft 72
Income from sources outside 
U.S. 2
Income tax treaties 
(Table 1-3) 21
Indian tribal government 12
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Interest income 5
Inflation-indexed debt 
instruments 15
Inherited property:
Basis 42
Holding period 56
Transfer by inheritance 38
Insolvency of contractors 57
Installment sales 68
Insurance:
Borrowing on 36
Dividends, interest on 6, 23
Interest option on 12
Life, paid to beneficiary 12
Life insurance companies, 
demutualization 49
Prepaid premiums 6
Single-premium life 36
Trades 49
Veterans' dividends, interest 
on 5, 23
Interest expenses:
Allocation of 32
Investment interest 32, 73
Limit on 32, 33
When to deduct 32
Margin accounts 32
Paid in advance 32
Straddles 36
Interest income 5
Annuity contracts 6
Bonds traded flat 6
Certificates of deposits 5
Condemnation awards 6
Deferred interest accounts 5
Dividends on deposit or share 
accounts 5
Frozen deposits 6, 19
Gift for opening account 5
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs) 5
Installment sale payments 6
Insurance dividends 6
Money market funds 5
Nominee distributions 5, 8, 10, 
19
Prepaid insurance premiums 6
Reporting 16–19
Seller-financed mortgage 17, 19
Taxable 5, 6, 11, 12
Tax-exempt 12, 17
Tax refunds 6
U.S. savings bonds, person 
responsible for tax 
(Table 1-2) 8
Underreported 3
Unstated 41
Usurious interest 6
VA insurance dividends 5
Investment clubs 27
Investment counsel and 
advice 35
Investment expenses 31
Allocated 25
At-risk rules 31
Deductible 35
Interest 70
Limits on deductions 31
Nondeductible 36
Pass-through entities 36
Reporting requirements 37
Investment income 2
Children 3, 33
General Information 3
Net income 33
Records to keep 3
Reporting of (Table 1-1) 4
Investment property 32
Basis 41
Definition 37
Gain or loss treatment 51
Gift, received as 41
Holding period 55
Liquidation, received in 44
Nontaxable trades, received 
in 41
Sales and trades 37
Services, received for 41
Spouse, received from 41
Taxable trades, received in 41
J
Joint accounts 4
Joint and separate returns 31, 
70
L
Life insurance companies:
demutualization 49
Like-kind exchanges 48, 50
Basis of property received 48
Reporting requirements 48
Limited partners 73
Liquidating distributions 22, 44
Listed options 39, 73
Load charges 43
Loans:
Below-market 6, 7, 73
Gift and demand 6, 73
Guarantees 57
Term 6, 74
Local government 
obligations (See State or local 
government obligations)
Long-term capital gains and 
losses 58, 69
Long-term debt instruments 52
Losses on sales or trades 51
 (See also Capital gains and losses)
Amount calculation 45
Carryback election 40
Mutual fund or REIT stock held 6 
months or less 56
Passive activities 27, 31, 34
Related parties 50
Section 1244 (small business) 
stock 54
Small business investment 
company stock 55
Wash sales 63
M
Marked-to-market rules 40, 71, 
73
Market discount bonds 13, 15, 
16, 32, 45, 52, 68, 73
Accrued market discount 15
Mark-to-market election 71
Maximum rate of capital gains 
(Table 4-4) 70
Mechanics' and suppliers' 
liens 57
Meetings, expenses of 
attending 36
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Mixed straddles 58, 64
Money market funds 21
Interest income 5
Mortgages:
Revenue bonds 12
Secondary liability on home 57
Seller-financed 19
Municipal bonds 12, 17, 52
 (See also State or local 
government obligations)
Mutual fund, defined 73
Mutual funds 21, 31, 33, 36, 43, 
46, 56
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs) 2
publicly offered 36
N
Net Investment Income Tax 3
New York Liberty bonds 13
NIIT 3
Nominee, defined 74
Nominee distributions:
Dividends 20, 24
Interest income 5, 8, 10, 19
Original issue discount 14
Nonbusiness bad debts 53, 57
Noncapital assets 51
Noncovered security, defined 74
Nondeductible investment 
expenses 36
Page 76 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 76 Publication 550 (2016)

Nondividend distributions 21
Nonequity options 39, 74
Nonqualified preferred stock 48
Nonresident aliens:
Backup withholding 4
Nontaxable return of capital 21
Nontaxable stock rights 56
Nontaxable trades 47, 56
Notes:
Individuals, bought at 
discount 53
U.S. Treasury (See U.S. 
Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds)
O
Office expenses 35
Options 60
Calls and puts 60, 73
Cash settlement 39, 60
Dealer equity 39
Deep-in-the-money 62
Employee stock 2
Equity 39, 73
Gain or loss 60, 62
Holding period 56
Listed 39, 73
Nonequity 39, 74
Qualified covered call 62
Reporting requirements 60
Section 1256 contracts 39, 60
Wash sales 59
Options dealer 74
Ordinary gains and losses 51, 53
Original issue discount:
Nominee distributions 14
Original issue discount 
(OID) 12–15, 45, 74
Adjustment to 19
Reporting requirements 13, 14
Rules 14
P
Passive activities 74
Gains and losses 27, 31, 34, 68
Pass-through entities:
Rollover of gain 67
Patronage dividends 23
Penalties:
Accuracy-related 4, 30
Backup withholding 4
Civil fraud 31
Early withdrawal 5, 19
Failure to pay tax 31
Failure to supply SSN 3
Substantial understatement 30
Valuation misstatement 30
Political parties:
Debts owed by 57
Portfolio income 74
Preferred stock:
Nonqualified 48
Redeemable at a premium 22
Stripped 25, 74
Premiums on bonds 34, 45, 74
Private activity bonds 12, 74
Publications (See Tax help)
Public utility stock 
reinvestment 43
Puts and calls 60, 74
Table 4-3 61
Q
Qualified dividends 24
Qualified small business 
stock 45, 56, 66
Gains on 66
R
Real estate investment trusts 
(REITs) 21, 43, 56
Real estate mortgage investment 
conduits (REMICs) 25, 26, 36, 
74
Regular interest 25
Residual interest 26, 59
Recordkeeping requirements:
Education Savings Bond 
Program 11
Investment income 3
Small business stock 55
Redemption of stock 38
Redemption or retirement of 
bonds 38
Regulated futures contract 39, 
74
Reinvestment rights 43
REITs (See Real estate investment 
trusts (REITs))
Related party transactions 37, 
50, 51
Related persons 61
REMICs (See Real estate mortgage 
investment conduits (REMICs))
Reorganizations, corporate 48
Reporting requirements:
Bad debts 57
Bond premium amortization 35
Capital gains and losses 63, 67
Dividend income 23
Exempt-interest dividends 5
Interest on U.S. savings 
bonds 8
Investment expenses 37
Like-kind exchanges 48
Options 60
Original issue discount 14
S corporation income, 
deductions, and credits 26
Section 1256 contracts 40
State or local government 
obligations 12
Straddles 68
Substitute payments 58
Tax-exempt interest income 17
Trades 71
Repossession of real 
property 56
Restricted property 41
Restricted stock 23, 74
Retirement of debt 
instrument 53
Return of 
capital (See Nondividend 
distributions)
Revocable trust, trustee's 
commissions for 36
Rollover of gain from sale:
Securities 65, 66
S
Safe deposit box 35
Sales and trades of investment 
property 37
Definition 38
Savings bonds (See U.S. savings 
bonds)
SBIC stock (See Small business 
investment company stock)
S corporations 26, 44
Scrip dividends 23
Section 1202 gain 67, 70
Section 1244 stock 54
Section 1250 gain 70
Section 1256 contracts 39, 56, 
60, 68, 74
Net gain on 40
Net loss on 40
Reporting requirements 40
Securities:
Holding period 55
Installment sales 68
Lost, stolen, etc., cost of 
replacing 35
Rollover of gain from sale 65, 66
Traders in 70
Worthless 38, 57
Securities futures contracts 40, 
56, 60, 74
Self-employment income 41
Self-employment tax 71
Seller-financed mortgages 19
Short sales 58
Adjusted basis 45
Defined 74
Expenses of 36
Extraordinary dividends 58
Puts 60
Small business investment 
company stock 55
Short-term capital gains and 
losses 58, 69
Short-term obligations 16, 45, 52
Interest deduction, limit on 33
Sixty/forty (60/40) rule 40
Small business investment 
company stock 55, 67
Reporting requirements 55
Small business stock 45, 54, 56, 
66
Social security number (SSN):
Custodial accounts 3
Joint accounts 3
Requirement to give 3
Specialized small business 
investment company 
stock 45, 67
Spouses:
Transfers between 41, 50
State or local government 
obligations 12, 13
Market discount 
bonds (See Market discount 
bonds)
Private activity bonds 12, 74
Registration requirement 12
Taxable interest 12
Tax-exempt interest 12
Stock:
Basis 21, 22, 42, 67
Capital asset 51
Constructive ownership 50
Convertible 48
Corporate 48
Dividends (See Dividends)
Fractional shares 22, 56
Identification 42
Installment sales 68
Nonqualified preferred stock 48
Options for employees 2
Public utility, reinvestment 43
Redemption of 38
Replacement stock 67
Restricted stock 23, 74
Rights 22, 44, 56
Sales to ESOPs or 
cooperatives 65
S corporations 44
Small business 45, 56
Specialized small business 
investment company 45
Splits 44
Straddles (See Straddles)
Stripped preferred stock 25, 74
Surrender of 38
Trades 48
Trust instruments treated as 39
Straddles 61–65
Defined 74
Holding period 63
Interest expense and carrying 
charges 36
Loss deferral rules 62
Mixed 58, 64
Reporting requirements 68
Stripped bonds and 
coupons 12, 15, 45
Stripped preferred stock 25, 74
Substitute payments 58
T
Tables:
Capital gains maximum rate 
(Table 4-4) 70
Income tax treaties 
(Table 1-3) 21
Investment income, reporting of 
(Table 1-1) 4
Puts and calls (Table 4-3) 61
U.S. savings bonds, person 
responsible for tax 
(Table 1-2) 8
Taxable income, expenses of 36
Tax credit bonds 12
Taxes:
State and local transfer 35
State income 36
Tax-exempt bonds 52
Tax-exempt income:
Expenses of 36
Interest 12, 17
Tax-exempt obligations 12, 15, 
45
Tax help 71
Tax rates:
Capital gain and losses 70
Tax refunds:
Interest on 6
Tax shelters 28–31
Penalties 30
Reporting requirements 29
Rules to curb abuse 28
Term loans 6, 74
Trade or business 31
Traders in securities 70
Trades:
Insurance 49
Investment property 37
Like-kind 48, 50
Page 77 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 (2016)   Page 77

Nontaxable 41, 47, 56
Reporting requirements 71
Stock 48
Taxable 41
U.S. Treasury notes or 
bonds 50
Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds (See U.S. Treasury bills, 
notes, and bonds)
Treasury inflation-indexed 
securities 15
Treasury inflation-protected 
securities (TIPS) 11, 15
Treaties, income tax 
(Table 1-3) 21
Trustee's commission for 
revocable trust 36
Trust income received by 
beneficiary 3
U
U.S. savings bonds 6, 7
Reporting interest on 6, 7
Retirement or profit-sharing plan, 
distributed from 9
Worksheet 18
Tax, responsible person 
(Table 1-2) 8
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 6, 11, 50, 55
Undistributed capital gains 24
Usurious interest 6
V
Veterans' insurance:
Dividends on 23
W
Warrants 59
Wash sales 58–60, 74
Holding period 56
Loss deferral rules, straddles 63
Withholding, backup 3
Worksheets:
Capital loss carryover 69
Worthless securities 38, 57
Page 78 of 78  Fileid: … tions/P550/2016/A/XML/Cycle02/source 15:23 - 13-Mar-2017
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 78 Publication 550 (2016)