Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P17.sgm (26-Apr-2002) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2001Revenue
Service
Returns

Page 2 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
Introduction.......................... 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
Important Changes for 2001.............. 1 21 Standard Deduction................ 141
22 Limit on Itemized Deductions......... 144
Important Changes for 2002.............. 2 23 Medical and Dental Expenses......... 146
24 Taxes ......................... 151Important Reminders................... 3 25 Interest Expense.................. 155
26 Contributions.................... 162Part One. The Income Tax Return 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft1 Filing Information.................. 5 Losses ........................ 1702 Filing Status..................... 21 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents . . .26 Business Expenses............... 1764 Decedents ...................... 35 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax..... 41 Education...................... 194
30 Miscellaneous Deductions........... 199Part Two. Income
6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings.... 49 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Tip Income...................... 56 31 How To Figure Your Tax............ 2058 Interest Income................... 58 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain9 Dividends and Other Corporate Minor Children................... 208Distributions.................... 66 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit....... 21510 Rental Income and Expenses......... 69 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled.... 22511 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 35 Child Tax Credit.................. 233Annuities...................... 78 36 Education Credits................. 23812 Social Security and Equivalent 37 Earned Income Credit.............. 242Railroad Retirement Benefits......... 84 38 Other Credits.................... 25713 Other Income.................... 88
2001 Tax Table........................ 260Part Three. Gains and Losses
14 Basis of Property................. 96 2001 Tax Rate Schedules................ 27215 Sale of Property.................. 101
16 Selling Your Home................ 107 Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 273
17 Reporting Gains and Losses.......... 112
How To Get Tax Help................... 274
Part Four. Adjustments to Income
18 Individual Retirement Arrangements Index............................... 276
(IRAs) ........................ 119
19 Moving Expenses................. 133 Order Blank
20 Alimony........................ 138 (Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2001) • Tax laws enacted by Congress sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court Decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication can help you pre- ple forms and schedules show youing crafts, see the following
pare your tax return by taking you how to report certain items on your publications for more information. Internal Revenue Service
through each part of the return. It return. Also throughout the publica- Technical Publications
• Publication 334, Tax Guidesupplements the information in tion are flowcharts and tables that Branch (W:CAR:MP:FP:P)for Small Business (For Indi-your tax form instruction booklet. Itpresent tax information in an 1111 Constitution Ave., NWviduals Who Use Schedule Cexplains the tax law and will help easy-to-understand manner. Washington, DC 20224or C–EZ).you understand your taxes so thatThe index in the back of the
you pay only the tax you owe and We respond to many letters by• Publication 533, Self-Employ-publication will help you find the
no more. telephone. Therefore, it would bement Tax.information you need.
The publication begins with the helpful if you would include yourSome material that you may • Publication 535, Business Ex-rules for filing a tax return. It ex- daytime phone number, includingfind helpful is not included in thispenses.plains who must file a return, which the area code, in your correspon-publication but can be found in yourtax form to use, when the return is dence.• Publication 587, Businesstax form instruction booklet. It in-due, and other general information. Use of Your Home (Includingcludes the following information. Using a personal com-It will help you identify which filing Use by Day-Care Providers). puter and modem, youstatus you qualify for, whether you• List of where to report certain can e-mail us while visit-can claim any dependents, and items listed on information For information on how you caning our web site at www.irs.gov.whether the income you are receiv-documents. get free IRS publications and
ing is taxable. The publication goes forms, see How To Get Tax Help in• List of mailing addresses foron to explain the standard deduc- the back of this publication.where to file returns.tion, the kinds of expenses you
may be able to deduct, and the Sending us comments and rec-• List of recorded tax informa-
various kinds of credits you may be ommendations. We welcometion topics (TeleTax).
able to take to reduce your tax. your comments about this publica-
Throughout the publication are If you operate your own business tion and your suggestions for future
examples showing how the tax law or have other self-employment in- editions. You can write us at the
applies in typical situations. Sam- come, such as babysitting or sell- following address.
I
Important Changes for 2001
This section summarizes importantOther tax rates. The other tax ment to income interest paid on a2001. You can elect to treat certain
rates, 28%, 31%, 36%, and 39.6% qualified student loan. The maxi-assets held on January 1, 2001, astax changes that took effect in
are reduced to 27.5%, 30.5%, mum deduction is increased to sold and then reacquired on the2001. These changes are dis-
35.5%, and 39.1%, respectively. $2,500. See Publication 970, Tax same date. The purpose of thiscussed in more detail throughout
These reduced rates should haveBenefits for Higher Education. election is to make any future gainthis publication.
been reflected in amounts withheld on the property that would other-Changes are also discussed in Traditional IRA income limits.(such as backup withholding) on wise be subject to the 20% capitalPublication 553, Highlights of 2001 Generally, if you have a traditionalcertain payments made after Au- gain rate eligible for the 18% rate ifTax Changes. individual retirement arrangementgust 6, 2001. the property is held for more than 5and are covered by an employerTax relief for victims of terrorist years from the date reacquired.Advance payment of income tax. retirement plan, the amount of in-attacks. At the time this publica- See Publication 553.If you received an advance pay- come you can have and not be af-tion was being prepared for print,ment of income tax in 2001, you do fected by the deduction phaseout isForeign earned income exclu-Congress was considering legisla-not have to report this payment as increased. The amounts vary de-sion. The amount of foreigntion that would provide tax relief forincome on your federal income tax pending on filing status. See chap-earned income that you can ex-individuals affected by terrorist at-return. This payment reduces your ter 18. clude increased to $78,000. Seetacks against the United States.rate reduction credit, discussed Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.Alternative minimum tax (AMT).For more information, see Pub-next. Citizens and Resident AliensThe AMT exemption amounts arelication 3920. Abroad.Rate reduction credit.If you did increased. See chapter 31.
Reduced tax rates. For tax not receive the maximum advance Standard mileage rate. TheSchedule D tax computationyears beginning in 2001, the in-payment in 2001, you may qualify standard mileage rate for the costsimplified.The tax computationcome tax rates have been reduced.for the rate reduction credit. You of operating your car increased toon Schedule D is now easier forThe following items highlight thesecan use the worksheet in your form 341/2 cents a mile for all businessmost taxpayers. For information onchanges. instructions to determine whether miles driven. See chapter 28.completing Schedule D, see chap-you can claim the credit. See chap-10% tax rate. A portion of your ter 17.ter 38.income that would be subject to the Minimum required distributions.
15% tax rate is subject to a reduced Until final regulations are issued,Lower capital gain tax rate.AChild tax credit.The maximumrate of 10%. For 2001, most individ- proposed regulations can be reliednew capital gain tax rate applies tochild tax credit for each child is in-uals receive the benefits of the 10% on to determine the minimum re-gain that is “qualified 5-year gain.”creased to $600. The qualificationsrate through the rate reduction quired distribution from certainQualified 5-year gain is long-termfor claiming the additional child taxcredit, discussed later. A person qualified plans and individual retire-capital gain from the sale of prop-credit have been changed to in-who can be claimed as a depen- ment arrangements (IRAs). Theseerty that you held for more than 5clude a qualifying individual withdent on someone else’s return is regulations simplify the rules foryears and that would otherwise befewer than 3 children. See chapternot eligible for the credit and will distributions during the life of thesubject to the 10% capital gain rate.35.receive the benefits of the 10% rate employee (or IRA owner) and forSee chapter 17.
by completing a worksheet in the distributions after the death of thatInterest on student loans.You Election to recognize gain on
form instructions. may be able to deduct as an adjust-property held on January 1, individual. In most cases, these

Page 4 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
regulations reduce the minimum entitled. However, your exemption mation on Coverdell ESAs, have to file Form 1040X if you in-
required distribution. For informa- amount could be phased out if yousee Publication 970, Tax cluded these amounts in income on
tion on IRA distributions, see chap- have high income. See chapter 3.Benefits for Higher Education. your 2000 tax return or if you used
ter 18. For information on Limit on itemized deductions. the payments in any computation
distributions from certain qualifiedSome of your itemized deductions affecting your tax liability. For moreParent of a kidnapped child.
plans, see Publication 575, Pen- may be limited if your adjusted details, see chapter 13.The parent of a child who is pre-
sion and Annuity Income. gross income is more than sumed by law enforcement authori-Third party designee. Begin-$132,950 ($66,475 if you are mar-ties to have been kidnapped byCertain amounts increased. ning with your tax return for 2001,ried filing separately). See chaptersomeone who is not a family mem-Some tax items that are indexed for you can check the “Yes” box in the22. ber may be able to take the childinflation increased for 2001. “Third Party Designee” area of yourSocial security and Medicareinto account in determining his orEarned income credit. The return to authorize the IRS to dis-taxes. The maximum wages sub- her eligibility for the following.maximum amount of income you ject to social security tax (6.2%) is cuss your return with a friend, fam-
can earn and still get the earned • Head of household or qualify-increased to $80,400. All wages ily member, or any other person
income credit has increased. You ing widow(er) with dependentare subject to Medicare tax you choose. This allows the IRS tomay be able to take the credit if you child filing status.(1.45%). call the person you identified asearned less than $32,121 ($10,710 your designee to answer any ques-• Exemption for dependents.if you do not have any qualifyingNew names for certain tax provi- tions that may arise during thechildren). The maximum amount ofsions. The names used to refer • Child tax credit. processing of your return. It alsoinvestment income you can have to certain tax provisions have been allows your designee to perform• Earned income credit.and still be eligible for the credit haschanged. certain actions. See your incomeincreased to $2,450. See chapter See Publication 501, Exemptions, tax package for details.• Medical savings accounts37. Standard Deduction, and Filing In-(MSAs) are now ArcherStandard deduction.  The formation and Publication 596, Mailing your return.You may beMSAs. For information onstandard deduction for taxpayers Earned Income Credit (EIC). mailing your return to a differentArcher MSAs, see Publicationwho do not itemize deductions on address this year because the IRS969, Medical Savings Ac- Payments to Holocaust victims.Schedule A (Form 1040) is higher has changed the filing location forcounts (MSAs). Restitution payments received af-in 2001 than it was in 2000. The several areas. If you received an
ter 1999 (and certain interestamount depends on your filing sta-• Education individual retire- envelope with your tax package,earned on the payments) are nottus. See chapter 21. ment accounts (education please use it. Otherwise, see yourtaxable and do not affect the taxa-Exemption amount. You are IRAs) are now Coverdell ed- tax form instructions.bility of certain benefits, such asallowed a $2,900 deduction for ucation savings accounts
social security benefits. You mayeach exemption to which you are (Coverdell ESAs). For infor- I
Important Changes for 2002
This section summarizes important•  EIC will be based, in part, on an estimated tax penalty. See • Qualified education expenses
adjusted gross income (AGI), include elementary and sec-tax changes that take effect in 2002 chapter 5.
not modified AGI. ondary school expenses.and that could affect your esti-
Higher education expenses.mated tax payments for 2002. •  New rules will be used to de- • Age limits do not apply toYou may be able to deduct as anMore information on these and termine which person can “special needs” beneficiaries.adjustment to income up to $3,000other changes can be found in Pub-claim a qualifying child whenof qualified tuition and related ex-• Contributions may be madelication 553. two or more persons may be penses you paid. The expenses until April 15 of the followingable to claim the same child.Tax rates reduced.For tax years can be for you, your spouse, or year.
beginning in 2002, the income tax• The definition of an eligibleyour dependent. • Tax-free distributions can berates have been reduced. The fol- foster child will change. The used for special needs ser-Interest on student loans.Twolowing items highlight these child will have to live with you vices.changes apply to the deduction forchanges. for more than half of the year,
student loan interest.instead of the whole year.10% tax rate. The 10% tax rate
Employer-provided educationalis reflected in the tax tables and tax• EIC will no longer be reduced• The provision that limited assistance. The followingschedules. You do not have to by the amount of alternative your deduction to interest changes apply to employer-pro-make a separate computation or minimum tax shown on your paid during the first 60 vided educational assistance.figure a credit to get the benefits ofreturn. months is repealed.this rate. • Exclusion made permanent.
• The modified AGI phaseoutOther tax rates. The other tax Estimated tax safe harbor for • Exclusion applies to graduateamounts are increased.rates, 27.5%, 30.5%, 35.5%, andhigher income individuals.For level courses.39.1% are reduced to 27%, 30%, For more information on the deduc-estimated tax payments for tax35%, and 38.6%, respectively. tion for student loan interest, seeyears beginning in 2002, the esti- Qualified tuition programs.TheThese reduced rates should be re- Publication 970.mated tax safe harbor for higher qualified tuition program (formerlyflected in amounts withheld (suchincome individuals (other than qualified state tuition program) in-as backup withholding) on certain Coverdell education savings ac-farmers and fishermen) has been cludes programs established andpayments made after 2001. counts. The following changesmodified. If your 2001 adjusted maintained by one or more eligibleapply to Coverdell education sav-gross income is more thanEarned income credit (EIC). educational institutions. Two otherings accounts.$150,000 ($75,000 if you are mar-Significant changes to the EIC take changes affect this program.ried filing a separate return foreffect in 2002. • Contribution limit increases to2002), you will have to pay the • Distributions from a state pro-$2,000 per beneficiary.• Earned income will no longersmaller of 90% of your expected gram that are used to pay
• The income phase out in-include nontaxable employeetax for 2002 or 112% of the tax qualified higher education ex-
compensation. shown on your 2001 return to avoid creases for joint filers. penses are tax free. Other
Page 2

Page 5 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
distributions are subject toduty will generally be excluded other events beyond your reasona-• If you are under age 50, the10% additional tax. from the recipient’s income regard- ble control.most you can contribute is theless of the date of the officer’s• Tax-free distributions can be Limit on elective deferrals.smaller of $3,000, or your tax-death. Survivor benefits receivedused for special needs ser- able compensation. The maximum amount of electivebefore 2002 are excluded only ifvices. deferrals under a salary reduction• If you are age 50 or older, thethe officer died after 1996. See agreement that can be contributedmost you can contribute is thechapter 13.Tax benefits for adoption. to a qualified plan is increased tosmaller of $3,500, or your tax-Changes apply to the adoption $11,000 ($12,000 if you are age 50Foreign earned income exclu- able compensation.credit and to the exclusion for ben- or over). However, for SIMPLEsion. The amount of foreignefits under an employer-providedearned income that you can ex- plans, the amount is increased toRollovers of IRAs into quali-adoption assistance program. clude will increase to $80,000. See $7,000 ($7,500 if you are age 50 orfied plans. For distributions afterThese changes include the follow-Publication 54. December 31, 2001, you may be over).ing.
able to roll over tax free, a distribu-New credit for elective defer-Self-employed health insurance• The credit for children without tion from your IRA into a qualifiedrals and IRA contributions. Youdeduction. The part of yourspecial needs is made per- plan. may be able to take a credit of up toself-employed health insurancemanent. Rollovers of distributions $1,000 for qualified retirement sav-premiums that you can deduct as• The exclusion under an adop- from employer plans. For distri-an adjustment to income increases ings contributions.tion assistance program is butions after December 31, 2001,to 70%.made permanent. Meal expenses when subject toyou can roll over both the taxable
Retirement savings plans.The and nontaxable part of a distribu-“hours of service limits.”If you• The credit and exclusion
following paragraphs highlight tion from a qualified plan into aamounts increased to a maxi- are subject to the Department of
changes that affect individual re-traditional IRA.mum of $10,000. Transportation’s “hours of service”
tirement arrangements (IRAs) and limits, the percentage of yourHardship exception to the• The modified AGI phaseout pension plans. business-related meal expenses60-day rule. For distributions afteramounts increased.
that you can deduct has increased.Increased IRA contribution December 31, 2001, the IRS may
and deduction limit. Your maxi- waive the 60-day requirement toFor 2002 and 2003, you can deductBenefits for public safety
mum contribution (and any allowa- roll over distributions from your IRA65% if the meals take place duringofficer’s survivors. For tax
ble deduction) limit is increased. or your employer’s pension plan or incident to the period subject toyears beginning after 2001, a survi-
Previously, the limit was $2,000. where the failure to do so would bevor annuity received by the spouse, those limits. See chapter 28.
The new limit depends on your age against equity or good conscience,former spouse, or child of a public
safety officer killed in the line of at the end of the year. including casualty, disaster, or I
Important Reminders
Listed below are important remind- pealed. However, plan participants than $250,000 ($500,000 if married sources outside the United States
filing a joint return). See chapter 16.ers and other items that may helpcan continue to choose the 10-year (foreign income), you must report
you file your 2001 tax return. Manytax option or capital gain treatment all such income on your tax returnIndividual retirement arrange-of these items are explained infor a lump-sum distribution that unless it is exempt by U.S. law.ments (IRAs). The followingmore detail later in this publication.qualifies for the special treatment. This is true whether you reside in-paragraphs highlight important re-See chapter 11. side or outside the United Statesminders that relate to IRAs. SeeWrite in your social security and whether or not you receive achapter 18 for details.number. To protect your privacy,Tax from recapture of education Form W –2 or 1099 from the for-Individual retirement ar-social security numbers (SSNs) arecredits.You may owe this tax if eign payer. This applies to earnedrangement (IRA) for spouse. Anot printed on the peel-off label thatyou claimed an education credit in income (such as wages and tips)married couple filing a joint returncomes in the mail with your tax in-one year and in a later year you, as well as unearned income (suchcan contribute up to the maximumstruction booklet. This means youyour spouse if filing jointly, or your as interest, dividends, capitalamount each to their IRAs, even ifmust enter your SSN in the spacedependent received: gains, pensions, rents and royal-one spouse had little or no income.provided on your tax form. If you
ties).• A refund of qualified tuition Spouse covered by plan.filed a joint return for 2000 and are
and related expenses, or Even if your spouse is covered byfiling a joint return for 2001 with the If you reside outside the United
an employer-sponsored retirementsame spouse, enter your names States, you may be able to exclude• Tax-free educational assis-plan, you may be able to deductand SSNs in the same order as on part or all of your foreign sourcetance. contributions to your traditional IRAyour 2000 return. See chapter 1. earned income. For details, seeif you are not covered by an em-See chapter 36. Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.Taxpayer identification num- ployer plan. Citizens and Resident AliensAdvance earned income credit.bers. You must provide the tax-  Roth IRA. You may be able to Abroad.If a qualifying child lives with youpayer identification number for establish a Roth IRA. In this type of
and you expect to qualify for theeach person for whom you claim IRA, contributions are not deducti-Joint return responsibility.earned income credit in 2002, youcertain tax benefits. This applies ble but earnings grow tax free andGenerally, both spouses are re-may be able to get part of the crediteven if the person was born in qualified withdrawals are not taxa-sponsible for the tax and any inter-paid to you in advance throughout2001. Generally, this number is the ble. You may also be able to con-est or penalties on a joint tax return.the year (by your employer) insteadperson’s social security number vert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA,In some cases, one spouse may beof waiting until you file your tax re-(SSN). See chapter 1. but you must include all or part ofrelieved of that responsibility forturn. See chapter 37. the taxable converted amount in in-items of the other spouse that wereLump-sum distributions. The come. incorrectly reported on the joint re-Sale of your home. Generally,5-year tax option for figuring the tax
turn. For details, see Joint respon-you will only need to report the saleon a lump-sum distribution from a Foreign source income. If you
of your home if your gain is more sibility in chapter 2.qualified retirement plan is re- are a U.S. citizen with income from
Page 3

Page 6 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Include your phone number on You can use IRS e-file (electronic 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and1–800–366–4484 (1–800–877–
your return.To promptly resolvefiling). For details, see chapter 1.the Paperwork Reduction Act of 8339 for TTY/TDD users). You can
any questions we have in process-For details on these fast filing meth-1980 require that when we ask youremain anonymous.
ing your tax return, we would like toods, see chapter 1. for information we must first tell you
Photographs of missing chil-be able to call you. Please enter what our legal right is to ask for thePrivate delivery services.You dren. The Internal Revenue Ser-your daytime telephone number on information, why we are asking formay be able to use a designated vice is a proud partner with theyour tax form next to your signa- it, how it will be used, what couldprivate delivery service to mail yourture. National Center for Missing andhappen if we do not receive it, andtax returns and payments. See Exploited Children. Photographs ofwhether your response is volun-Payment of taxes. Make your chapter 1 for more information. missing children selected by thetary, required to obtain a benefit, orcheck or money order payable to Center may appear in this publica-mandatory under the law. A com-Refund on a late filed return.If“United States Treasury.” You can tion on pages that would otherwiseplete statement on this subject canyou were due a refund but you didpay your taxes by credit card or, if be blank. You can help bring thesebe found in your tax form instruc-not file a return, you generally mustyou file electronically, by electronic
children home by looking at thetion booklet.file within 3 years from the date thefunds withdrawal (direct debit). See
photographs and callingreturn was originally due to get thatchapter 1. Treasury Inspector General for 1 – 800 – THE – LOSTrefund. Tax Administration.If you wantFaster ways to file your return. (1–800–843–5678) if you recog-
to confidentially report misconduct,Privacy Act and paperwork re-The IRS offers fast, accurate ways nize a child.
waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRSduction information. The IRSto file your tax return information
without filing a paper tax return. Restructuring and Reform Act ofemployee, you can call I
Page 4

Page 7 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The five chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return—  such as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Direct Deposit of refund.Instead of getting a• What records you should keep and how
paper check, you may be able to have your long you should keep them, and
refund deposited directly into your account at a• How you can change a return you have1. bank or other financial institution. See Direct already filed.Deposit under Refunds, later.
Alternative payment methods. If you owe
additional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-Filing
cally. See How To Pay, later.
Do I Have ToInstallment agreement.If you cannot pay theInformation
full amount due with your return, you may ask toFile a Return?make monthly installment payments. See In-
stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You You must file a federal income tax return if youImportant Changes Owe. are a citizen or resident of the United States or a
resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filingService in combat zone.You are allowed ex-Who must file. Generally, the amount of in- requirements for any of the following categoriestra time to take care of your tax matters if you arecome you can receive before you must file a that apply to you.a member of the Armed Forces who served in areturn has been increased. See Table 1–1, Ta- combat zone, or if you served in the combatble 1– 2, and Table 1– 3 for the specific 1) Individuals in general. (There are specialzone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-amounts. rules for surviving spouses, executors, ad-viduals Serving in Combat Zone, later, under
ministrators, legal representatives, U.S.When Do I Have To File.Third party designee.You can now allow the citizens living outside the United States,IRS to discuss your 2001 tax return with a friend,Adoption taxpayer identification number.If residents of Puerto Rico, and individualsfamily member, or any other person you choosea child has been placed in your home for pur-with income from U.S. possessions.)by checking the “Yes” box in the “third partyposes of legal adoption and you will not be able2) Dependents.designee” area of your return. See Third Party to get a social security number for the child inDesignee. time to file your return, you may be able to get an3) Child under age 14.
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN).Mailing your return.You may be mailing your 4) Self-employed persons.For more information, see Social Security Num-return to a different address this year becauseber, later. 5) Aliens.the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-
eral areas. If you received an envelope with your The filing requirements for each category areTaxpayer identification number for aliens.
tax package, please use it. Otherwise, see your explained in this chapter.If you or your dependent is a nonresident or
form instructions for where to file. The filing requirements apply even if you doresident alien who does not have and is not
not owe tax.eligible to get a social security number, file FormSign your return electronically.Create your W –7 with the IRS to apply for an Individual Even if you do not have to file a return,own personal identification number (PIN) andTaxpayer Identification Number (ITIN). For more it may be to your advantage to do so.file a completely paperless tax return with IRSinformation, see Social Security Number, later. See Who Should File, later.e-file. See Does My Return Have To Be On
TIP
Paper. 1040PC format no longer accepted. The
1040PC format was a computer-generated pa-One return. File only one federal income taxper tax return. The availability of electronic filingreturn for the year regardless of how many jobsfor home computer users has reduced the needyou had, how many Forms W–2 you received,for this format. The IRS no longer accepts taxImportant Reminders or how many states you lived in during the year.returns in the 1040PC format. The IRS encour-
ages all former 1040PC filers to use IRS e-file.Alternative filing methods.Rather than filing Individuals— In Generala return on paper, you may be able to file elec-
tronically using IRS e-file. For more information, If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you
see Does My Return Have To Be On Paper, must file a return depends on three factors:Introductionlater.
1) Your gross income,This chapter discusses:Change of address. If you change your ad-
2) Your filing status, and• Whether you have to file a return,dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of
Address, later, under What Happens After I File. 3) Your age.• Which form to use,
Write in your social security number. You To find out whether you must file, see Table• How to file electronically,
must write your social security number (SSN) in 1–1, Table 1–2, and Table 1–3. Even if no• When, how, and where to file your return,the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file table shows that you must file, you may need to
a joint return, please write the SSNs in the same file to get money back. (See Who Should File,• What happens if you pay too little or too
order as the names. later.)much tax,
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 5

Page 8 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income than other taxpayers before youTable 1–1. 2001 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
must file. See Table 1–1. You are considered
65 on the day before your 65th birthday. ForTo use this table, first find your marital status at the end of 2001. Then, read across
example, if your 65th birthday was on January 1,the line that shows your filing status and age at the end of 2001. You must file a
2002, you are considered 65 for 2001.return if your gross income was at least the amount shown in the last column.
Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods,
property, and services that is not exempt from tax, including any income fromSurviving Spouses,sources outside the United States (even if you may exclude part or all of it).
Executors, Administrators,When using this table, do not include social security benefits as gross income
and Legal Representativesunless you are married filing a separate return and lived with your spouse at any
time in 2001. (If you must include the benefits, see chapter 12 for the amount to
You must file a final return for a decedent (ainclude.) person who died) if both of the following are true.Also, see Table 1–2 and Table 1–3 for other situations when you must file a
return. • You are the surviving spouse, executor,
administrator, or legal representative.Marital Status Filing Status Age * Gross Income
• The decedent met the filing requirementsSingle under 65  $7,450 at the date of death.Single (including 65 or older $8,550
divorced and legally For more information on rules for filing aHead of under 65  $9,550separated) decedent’s final return, see chapter 4.household 65 or older $10,650
Married, with a child,
U.S. Citizens Livingliving apart from your Head of under 65 $9,550
spouse during the last 6 household 65 or older $10,650 Outside the United States
months of 2001
If you are a U.S. citizen living outside the United
under 65 States, you must file a return if you meet the
(both spouses) $13,400 filing requirements. For information on special
Married, joint 65 or older tax rules that may apply to you, get PublicationMarried, living with yourreturn (one spouse) $14,300 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Residentspouse at the end of 65 or older Aliens Abroad. It is available at most U.S. em-2001 (or on the date (both spouses) $15,200 bassies and consulates. Also see How To Getyour spouse died)
Tax Help in the back of this publication.Married, separateany age  $2,900return
Residents of Puerto RicoMarried, not living with
your spouse at end of Married, joint or Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-any age  $2,9002001 (or on the date separate return dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. incomeyour spouse died) tax return if you meet the filing requirements.
This is in addition to any legal requirement youunder 65  $7,450Single may have to file an income tax return for Puerto65 or older  $8,550
Rico.
Widowed before 2001 If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for theunder 65  $9,550and not remarried in Head of household entire year, gross income does not include in-65 or older $10,6502001 come from sources within Puerto Rico, except
for amounts received as an employee of theQualifying under 65 $10,500 United States or a U.S. agency. If you receivewidow(er) with 65 or older $11,400 income from Puerto Rican sources that is notdependent child subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-
dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-
*If you turned age 65 on January 1, 2002, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2001.come you must have before you are required to
file a U.S. income tax return is lower than the
applicable amount in Table 1–1 or Table 1–2.Gross income. This includes all income you amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),
See U.S. taxation and its discussion, Standardreceive in the form of money, goods, property,Profit or Loss From Business, or line 1 of Sched-
deduction, under The Commonwealth of Puertoand services that is not exempt from tax. It also ule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi-
Rico in Publication 570, Tax Guide for Individu-includes income from sources outside the ness. See Self-Employed Persons, later, for
als With Income From U.S. Possessions, forUnited States (even if you may exclude all or more information about your filing requirements.
further information.part of it). Common types of income are dis- If you do not report all of your self-em-cussed in the chapters in Part Two of this publi- ployment income, you could causecation. your social security benefits to be lower
CAUTION
!
Individuals With IncomeCommunity property. If you are marriedwhen you retire. From U.S. Possessionsand your permanent home is in a community
property state, half of any income described byFiling status.Your filing status depends onIf you had income from Guam, the Common-state law as community income may be consid- whether you are single or married and on yourwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-ered yours. This affects your federal taxes, in- family situation. Your filing status is determinedcan Samoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rulescluding whether you must file if you do not file a on the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-may apply when determining whether you mustjoint return with your spouse. See Publication ber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for anfile a U.S. federal income tax return. In addition,555, Community Property, for more information. explanation of each filing status. you may have to file a return with the individual
island government. See Publication 570 forSelf-employed individuals. If you are Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the
more information.self-employed, your gross income includes the year, you generally can have a higher amount of
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1–2. 2001 Filing Requirements for Dependents Child Under Age 14See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim
If a child’s only income is interest and dividendsyou as a dependent.
(including Alaska Permanent Fund dividends)
and certain other conditions are met, a parentIf your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the
can elect to include the child’s income on thesituations below apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1–3 for other
parent’s return. If this election is made, the childsituations when you must file.)
does not have to file a return. See Parent’s
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees.Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-
It also includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarship and dends in chapter 32.
Fellowship Grants in chapter 13.) Unearned income includes investment-type
income such as interest, dividends, and capital gains. It also includes unemploymentSelf-Employed Personscompensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions
of unearned income from a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and
You are self-employed if you:
unearned income.
• Carry on a trade or business as a soleCaution: If your gross income was $2,900 or more, you generally cannot beproprietor,claimed as a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under
• Are an independent contractor,age 24. For details, see Gross Income Test in chapter 3.
• Are a member of a partnership, orSingle dependents—  Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
• Are in business for yourself in any other❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. way.
• Your unearned income was more than $750.
Self-employment can include work in addition• Your earned income was more than $4,550.
to your regular full-time business activities. It• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
also includes certain part-time work that you do1) $750, or at home or in addition to your regular job.2) Your earned income (up to $4,300) plus $250.
You must file a return if your gross income is
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. at least as much as the filing requirement
amount for your filing status and age (shown in• Your earned income was more than $5,650 ($6,750 if 65 or older and blind).
Table 1–1). Also, you must file Form 1040 and• Your unearned income was more than $1,850 ($2,950 if 65 or older and
Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employmentblind).
Tax, if: • Your gross income was more than:
1) The larger of $750, or your earned income (up to $4,300) plus $250, plus1) Your net earnings from self-employment
2) $1,100 ($2,200 if 65 or older and blind). (excluding church employee income) were
$400 or more, orMarried dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
2) You had church employee income of❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. $108.28 or more. (See Table 1–3.)
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate returnUse Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure yourand itemizes deductions. self-employment tax. Self-employment tax is
• Your earned income was more than $3,800. comparable to the social security and Medicare
• Your unearned income was more than $750. tax withheld from an employee’s wages. For
more information about this tax, get Publication• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
533, Self-Employment Tax.1) $750, or
2) Your earned income (up to $3,550) plus $250. Foreign governments or international or-
ganizations.If you are a U.S. citizen who❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. works in the United States for an international• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate returnorganization, a foreign government, or a whollyand itemizes deductions. owned instrumentality of a foreign government,
• Your earned income was more than $4,700 ($5,600 if 65 or older and blind). and your employer does not deduct social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your income,• Your unearned income was more than $1,650 ($2,550 if 65 or older and
you must include your earnings from servicesblind).
performed in the United States when figuring• Your gross income was more than: your net earnings from self-employment.1) The larger of $750 or your earned income (up to $3,550) plus $250, plus
Ministers.You must include income from2) $900 ($1,800 if 65 or older and blind).
services you performed as a minister when fig-
uring your net earnings from self-employment,
unless you have an exemption from self-em-a parent, guardian, or other legally responsibleDependents ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci-person must file it for the child. If the child cannot
ence practitioners and members of a religioussign the return, the parent or guardian must signIf you are a dependent (one who meets the order who have not taken a vow of poverty. Forthe child’s name followed by the words “By (sig-dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1–2 more information, get Publication 517, Socialnature), parent (or guardian) for minor child.”to find whether you must file a return. You also Security and Other Information for Members ofmust file if your situation is described in Table Child’s earnings.Amounts a child earns bythe Clergy and Religious Workers.1–3. performing services are his or her gross income.
This is true even if under local law the child’sResponsibility of parent.Generally, a child Aliens
parents have the right to the earnings and mayis responsible for filing his or her own tax return
actually have received them. If the child does notYour status as an alien— resident, nonresident,and for paying any tax on the return. But if a
pay the tax due on this income, the parent isor dual-status— determines whether and howdependent child who must file an income tax
you must file an income tax return.return cannot file it for any reason, such as age, liable for the tax.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) You (and your spouse if married filing aTable 1–3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2001 Return
joint return) were under age 65 on January
1, 2002, and not blind at the end of 2001.If any of the four conditions listed below apply, you must file a return, even if your
income is less than the amount shown in Table 1–1 or Table 1–2. 3) You do not claim any dependents.
1. You owe any special taxes, such as: 4) Your taxable income is less than $50,000.
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.5) Your income is only from wages, salaries,
(See chapter 7.) tips, unemployment compensation, Alaska
Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol-• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips youarship and fellowship grants, qualifiedreported to your employer. (See chapter 7.) state tuition program earnings, and taxable
interest of $400 or less.• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your
group-term life insurance. 6) You did not receive any advance earned
income credit (EIC) payments.• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 31.)
7) You do not claim any adjustments to in-• Tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement
come, such as a deduction for IRA contri-arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 18.)
butions or student loan interest.
• Tax on an Archer MSA. (See Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts
8) You do not claim any credits other than the(MSAs).)
earned income credit or the rate reduction
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See thecredit.
instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment Credit, or Form 8611, You must meet all of these requirements toRecapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.) use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a Form 1040A or Form 1040.
federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 16.)
Figuring tax.On Form 1040EZ, you can• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 38.)
only use the tax table to figure your tax. You
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 36.) cannot use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit.
Form 1040A2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your
employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (See If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, youchapter 37.) may be able to use Form 1040A.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed
Persons in this chapter.) You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-
ing apply.4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.1) Your income is only from wages, salaries,
(See Publication 533.) tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-
ties, taxable social security and railroad
retirement benefits, taxable scholarship
The rules used to determine your alien status 2) You qualify for the earned income credit.and fellowship grants, interest, ordinary
are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax dividends (including Alaska PermanentSee chapter 37 for more information.
Guide for Aliens. Fund dividends), capital gain distributions,3) You qualify for the additional child taxqualified state tuition program earnings,credit. See chapter 35 for more informa- and unemployment compensation.Resident alien.If you are a resident alien fortion.the entire year, you must file a tax return follow- 2) Your taxable income is less than $50,000.
ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.
3) Your adjustments to income are for onlyUse the forms discussed in this publication.
the following items.
Nonresident alien.If you are a nonresident a) The deduction for contributions to anWhich Formalien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you IRA.
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-Should I Use? b) The student loan interest deduction.zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 to
find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you andYou must use one of three forms to file your4) You do not itemize your deductions.which forms you should file. return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 5) Your taxes are from only the following1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be items.Dual-status taxpayer.If you were a residentOn Paper, later.)alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident a) Tax Table.alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual-sta-
Form 1040EZtus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each part b) Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter
of the year. For information on dual-status tax- 31.)
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use.payers, see Publication 519. c) Advance earned income credit (EIC)
payments, if you received any. (See
Who Should File You can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow- chapter 37.)
ing apply. d) Recapture of an education credit.Even if you do not have to file, you should file a
federal income tax return to get money back if e) Form 8615, Tax for Children Under Age1) Your filing status is single or married filingany of the following conditions apply. 14 Who Have Investment Income ofjointly. If you were a nonresident alien atMore Than $1,500.any time in 2001, your filing status must be1) You had income tax withheld from your
married filing jointly.pay. f) Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6) You claim only the following credits. year, it may be to your advantage to file Form refunds of state and local income taxes,
1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filingself-employment income (including farm
a) The credit for child and dependent careForm 1040 because you can take itemized de- income), and income received as a partner
expenses. (See chapter 33.) ductions and some adjustments to income and in a partnership, a shareholder in an S
credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Formcorporation, or a beneficiary of an estateb) The credit for the elderly or the dis-
1040EZ. or trust.abled. (See chapter 34.)
8) You are reporting original issue discount inc) The child tax credit. (See chapter 35.)You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-
an amount more or less than the amounting apply.d) The additional child tax credit. (See shown on Form 1099–OID.chapter 35.) 1) Your taxable income is $50,000 or more.9) You sold or exchanged capital assets ore) The education credits. (See chapter2) You itemize your deductions. business property.36.)
3) You received or paid interest on securities10) You claim adjustments to gross income forf) The earned income credit. (See chaptertransferred between interest payment other than contributions to an IRA or the37.) dates. student loan interest deduction. If these
are your only adjustments to gross in-g) The adoption credit. (See chapter 38.)4) You received nontaxable distributions re-
come, you may be able to file Formquired to be reported as capital gains.h) The rate reduction credit. (See chapter 1040A.38.) 5) You received capital gain distributions that
11) Your Form W–2 shows uncollected em-included 28% rate gain, qualified 5-year
You must meet all of the above requirements ployee tax (social security and Medicaregain, unrecaptured section 1250 gain, or
to use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use tax) on tips or group-term life insurance insection 1202 gain.
Form 1040. box 12. (See chapter 7.)6) You have to complete Part III of ScheduleIf you meet the above requirements, you can 12) You received $20 or more in tips in anyB (Form 1040) because:use Form 1040A even if you received one month and did not report all of them toemployer-provided adoption benefits or depen-a) You received a distribution from a for-your employer. (See chapter 7.)dent care benefits. eign trust, or
13) You must pay tax on self-employment in-If you receive a capital gain distributionb) You had a bank, securities, or other fi-come. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040),that includes 28% rate gain, qualified nancial account in a foreign country atSelf-Employment Tax.)5-year gain, unrecaptured section any time during the year.
CAUTION
!
14) You must pay household employment1250 gain, or section 1202 gain, you cannot use Note. If the combined value of the
taxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040).)Form 1040A. You must use Form 1040. foreign account(s) was $10,000 or
less during all of 2001, or if the15) You have to recapture an investmentaccount(s) was with a U.S. militarycredit, a low-income housing credit, a qual-Form 1040 banking facility operated by a U.S.ified electric vehicle credit, or an Indianfinancial institution, you may be ableemployment credit.If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, to use Form 1040A or Form
you must use Form 1040. You can use Form 16) You have to recapture tax on the disposi-1040EZ. 
1040 to report all types of income, deductions, tion of a home purchased with a
and credits. 7) You had income that cannot be reported federally-subsidized mortgage. (See chap-
You may have received Form 1040A or Form on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A. This in- ter 16.)
1040EZ in the mail because of the return youcludes gain from the sale of property, bar-17) You have to pay tax on an excess goldenfiled last year. If your situation has changed this ter income, alimony income, taxableparachute payment.
18) You claim any credits other than the cred-
its listed earlier under Form 1040A.Table 1–4. Benefits of IRS e-file
19) You have to file other forms with your re-Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is turn to report certain exclusions, taxes, or
significantly reduced. transactions. This includes the following
forms.Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic • Create your own Personal Identification Number (PIN) anda) Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
Signatures file a completely paperless return through your tax b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned In-preparation software or tax professional. There is nothing tocome Exclusion.mail!
c) Form 4563, Exclusion of Income forProof of • You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hoursBona Fide Residents of American Sa-Acceptance confirming that the IRS has accepted your return for moa.
processing.
d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri-
Fast Refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Directbution of Trusts.
Deposit— in as few as 10 days.
e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu-
FREE/Low Cost • Check out the IRS Web Site at www.irs.gov for IRS e-file tions. (See chapter 11.)
Filing partners offering free or low cost filing options to taxpayers
f) Form 5329, Additional Taxes on Quali-who qualify. fied Plans (Including IRAs) and Other
Electronic • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options areTax-Favored Accounts.
Payment Options available. e-file and pay in a single step. Schedule an Note. Do not file Form 1040 only
electronic funds withdrawal from your bank account (up to because you have to file Form 5329.
and including April 15, 2002) or pay by credit card. File Form 5329 by itself. (See chap-
ters 11 and 18.)Federal/State • Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together
Filing and double the benefits you get from e-file. g) Form 8271, Investor Reporting of Tax
Shelter Registration Number.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
h) Form 8814, Parents’ Election To ReportDeposit, you can receive your refund in as fewUsing a Tax Professional
Child’s Interest and Dividends. as 10 days.
Many tax professionals file returns electronicallyi) Form 8853, Archer MSAs and Offset against debts.As with a paper re-for their clients. You can prepare your own re-Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.turn, you may not get all of your refund if youturn and have a professional electronicallyowe certain past-due amounts, such as federaltransmit it, or you can have your return preparedtax, state tax, a student loan, or child support.and transmitted by a tax professional. In eitherSee Offset Against Debts under Refunds, later. situation, you can sign your return using your
PIN.Refund inquiries.If you do not receive your
Depending on the tax professional, and theDoes My Return Have refund within 4 weeks after your return was
specific services requested, a fee may beaccepted by IRS, you can call TeleTax Refund
charged. Look for the “Authorized IRS e-file Pro-To Be On Paper? Information. See What is TeleTax in your tax
vider” sign or search for a provider near you onforms package for information on how to use this
the IRS web site at www.irs.gov (click on Elec-IRS e-file (electronic filing) is the preferredservice.
tronic Services).method of filing. It’s so easy, 40 million peopleIf TeleTax has no information about your
use it. You may be able to file a paperless return,return, contact your tax professional or elec-Form 8453. Your tax professional may askor a return with less paper. This section explainstronic return transmitter for the date IRS ac-you to sign Form 8453, U.S. Individual IncomeIRS e-file: cepted your return. If your return was acceptedTax Declaration for an IRS e-file Return. Both
more than 6 weeks ago, contact the IRS. Explainspouses must sign if a joint return is being filed.• Using a tax professional, that you filed your return electronically and thatYour tax professional will file the Form 8453 with
• Using your personal computer, or TeleTax has no information on it. Also, providethe IRS. Your tax professional is required to give
the first social security number shown on youryou the preparer-signed copy of your return,• Using a telephone (TeleFile). return and the date the IRS accepted your re-including a copy of the completed Form 8453.
turn. This material is for your records. Do not mail this
copy to the IRS.IRS e-file Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it
by April 15, 2002, to avoid late-payment penal-
ties and interest. You can make your payment
Using a Personal Computerelectronically by scheduling an electronic funds
withdrawal from your checking or savings ac-A computer with a modem and/or Internet ac-
count or by credit card. cess is all you need to file your tax return usingSee How To Pay, later, for information onTable 1–4 lists the benefits of IRS e-file. IRS IRS e-file. You can buy tax preparation softwarehow to pay the balance due.e-file uses automation to replace most of the at various electronic stores or computer andmanual steps needed to process paper returns. office supply stores. You can download softwareVITA or TCE. The IRS Volunteer Income TaxAs a result, the processing of e-file returns is from the Internet or prepare and file your taxAssistance (VITA) and Tax Counseling for thefaster and more accurate than the processing of return completely on-line by using a tax prepara-Elderly (TCE) programs may be able to help youpaper returns. However, errors on the return or tion software package on the Internet (nothing tofile your return electronically. For information onproblems with its transmission can delay buy or install). Best of all, you can e-file your taxthese programs, call the IRS.processing. return from the comfort of your home any time of
As with a paper return, you are responsiblePersonal identification number (PIN).If you day or night. Sign your return electronically us-
for making sure your return contains accuratee-file your return, you can sign your return elec-ing your PIN to complete the process. To find a
information and is filed on time. tronically by creating your own Personal Identifi-list of software companies that participate in the
Using e-file does not affect your chances ofcation Number (PIN). This PIN serves as yourIRS e-file program, visit our web site at
an IRS examination of your return. signature and can only be used if you file elec-www.irs.gov.
tronically using tax preparation software orForm 8453 –OL. After the IRS has acceptedState returns.In most states, you can file anthrough a tax professional. (It can even be usedyour return, you may have to send the IRS Formelectronic state return simultaneously with yourby first-time filers who were 16 or older on De-8453–OL, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-federal return. For more information, check withcember 31, 2001.) To create a PIN, you musttion for an IRS efile On-line Return. Formyour local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-know your adjusted gross income and total tax8453–OL is available through your electronicfessional, or the IRS web site at www.irs.gov. from your 2000 tax return (prior to any adjust-return transmitter.ment). These amounts, along with your name,
Refunds. You can have a refund check mailedsocial security number, and date of birth, will be
to you, or you can have your refund depositedused to verify your identity. Using a Telephone (TeleFile) directly to your checking or savings account.If you are not eligible or choose not to use a
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half PIN to sign your return electronically, you mustIf you receive a TeleFile tax package, you maythe time as when filing on paper. Most refunds complete Form 8453 or Form 8453–OL, which- be able to file your Form 1040EZ informationare issued within 3 weeks. If you choose Direct ever applies. over the phone. If you are eligible to use
TeleFile, IRS will send you the TeleFile tax pack-
Table 1–5. When To File Your 2001 Return age automatically. You can use TeleFile only if
 (For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns you receive the package. You cannot order it.
To file using TeleFile, follow the instructions on a calendar year)
in the TeleFile tax package. The call takes about
10 minutes and is free. You must use a
For Most Taxpayers For Certain Taxpayers
touch-tone phone.Outside the U.S.
No extension requested April 15, 2002 June 17, 2002
Automatic extension August 15, 2002 August 15, 2002
When Do IForm 4868 filed, or credit card
payment made
Have To File?2nd extension October 15, 2002 October 15, 2002
Form 2688 filed after getting April 15, 2002, is the due date for filing your
automatic extension 2001 income tax return if you use the calendar
year. For a quick view of due dates for filing a
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return with or without an extension of time to file If you were due a refund but you did not file a see Electronic payment by electronic filer, under
(discussed later), see Table 1–5. return, you generally must file within 3 yearsHow To Pay, later in this chapter.
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the from the date the return was originally due to getE-file using your personal computer or alast day of any month except December, or a that refund. tax professional. You can use a tax software52–53 week year), your income tax return is package with your personal computer or a taxNonresident alien.If you are a nonresidentdue by the 15th day of the 4th month after the professional to file Form 4868 electronically.alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income taxclose of your fiscal year. You will need to provide certain information fromwithholding, your 2001 U.S. income tax returnWhen the due date for doing any act for tax your tax return for 2000. If you wish to make a(Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR–EZ) is due by:purposes— filing a return, paying taxes, etc.— payment by electronic funds withdrawal, seefalls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the• April 15, 2002, if you use a calendar year,Electronic payment by electronic filer, underdue date is delayed until the next business day.or How To Pay, later in this chapter.
• The 15th day of the 4th month after theFiling on time.Your paper return is filed on E-file and pay by credit card.You can getend of your fiscal year if you use a fiscaltime if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly an extension by paying part or all of your esti-year.addressed and postmarked by the due date. mate of tax due by using a credit card. You canThe envelope must have enough postage. If you do this by phone or over the Internet. You do notIf you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in-send your return by registered mail, the date of file Form 4868. See Payment by credit card,come tax withholding, your return is due by:the registration is the postmark date. The regis- under How To Pay, later in this chapter.tration is evidence that the return was delivered.• June 17, 2002, if you use a calendar year,If you send a return by certified mail and have Filing a paper Form 4868.You can get anoryour receipt postmarked by a postal employee, extension of time to file by filing a paper Form
• The 15th day of the 6th month after thethe date on the receipt is the postmark date. The 4868. Mail it to the address shown in the form
end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscalpostmarked certified mail receipt is evidence instructions.
year.that the return was delivered. If you want to make a payment with the form,
make your check or money order payable to theGet Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens,Private delivery services.If you use a pri- “United States Treasury.” Write your social se-for more filing information.vate delivery service designated by the IRS to curity number, daytime phone number, andsend your return, the postmark date generally is “2001 Form 4868” on your check or money or-Filing for a decedent.If you must file a finalthe date the private delivery service records in der.income tax return for a taxpayer who died duringits database or marks on the mailing label. The
the year (a decedent), the return is due by theprivate delivery service can tell you how to get When to file.You must request the automatic
15th day of the 4th month after the end of thewritten proof of this date. extension by the due date for your return. You
decedent’s normal tax year. In most cases, for aThe following are designated private delivery can file your return any time before the 4-month
2001 return, this will be April 15, 2002. See Finalservices. extension period ends.
Return for the Decedent in chapter 4.• Airborne Express (Airborne): Overnight Air When you file your return.Enter any pay-Express Service, Next Afternoon Service, ment you made related to the extension of timeExtensions of Time To Fileand Second Day Service. to file on line 64, Form 1040. If you file Form
1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in• DHL Worldwide Express (DHL): DHL You may be able to get an extension of time toyour total payments on line 10 of Form 1040EZ“Same Day ” Service and DHL USA Over- file your return. Special rules apply if you were:or line 41 of Form 1040A. Also print “Form 4868”night.
• Outside the United States, or and the amount paid in the space to the left of• Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priority line 10 or line 41.• Serving in a combat zone.Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight,
and FedEx 2Day. Extension beyond 4 months. If you get theThese rules are discussed separately.
4-month extension and you later find that you• United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next are not able to file within the 4-month extensionAutomatic extension.If you cannot file yourDay Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS period, you may be able to get 2 more months to2001 return by the due date, you may be able to2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M, UPS file, for a total of 6 months.get an automatic 4-month extension of time toWorldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- You can apply for an extension beyond thefile.wide Express. 4-month extension either by writing a letter to the
IRS or by filing Form 2688,Application for Addi-Example. If your return is due on April 15,
Private delivery services cannot deliver tional Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual2002, you will have until August 15, 2002, to file.
items to P.O. boxes. You must use the Income Tax Return. You should ask for the ex-
How to get the automatic extension.YouU.S. Postal Service to mail any item to tension early so that, if it is not approved, youCAUTION
!
can get the automatic extension by:an IRS P.O. box address. still will be able to file on time. Except in cases of
undue hardship, a request for additional time will1) Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), orElectronically filed returns.If you use IRS not be approved unless you have first used the
e-file, your return is considered filed on time if2) Filing a paper form. automatic 4-month extension. Form 2688 or
the authorized electronic return transmitter post- your letter will not be considered if you file it after
marks the transmission by the due date. AnE-file options. There are three options for us-the extended due date.
authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-ing e-file to get an extension of time to file. If youTo get an extension beyond the automatic
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmitse-file, you will get a confirmation number when4-month extension, you must give all the follow-
electronic tax return information directly to theyou complete the transaction. Keep the numbering information.
IRS. with your records. • The reason for requesting the extension.The electronic postmark is a record of whenComplete Form 4868, Application for Auto-
the authorized electronic return transmitter re-matic Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual• The tax year to which the extension ap-
ceived the transmission of your electronicallyIncome Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If plies.
filed return on its host system. The date and timeyou think you may owe tax when you file your• The length of time needed for the exten-in your time zone controls whether your elec-return, use Part III of the form to estimate your sion.tronically filed return is timely. balance due. Do not send Form 4868 to the IRS.
• Whether another extension of time to fileFiling late.If you do not file your return by theE-file by phone.You can file Form 4868 by has already been requested for this taxdue date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file phone any time from March 1 through April 15,year.penalty and interest. For more information, see 2002. You will need to provide certain informa-
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount tion from your tax return for 2000. If you wish to You must sign the request for this extension, or it
You Owe. make a payment by electronic funds withdrawal, may be signed by your attorney, CPA, enrolled
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
agent, or a person with a power of attorney. If qualified you for the extension. (See the situa- the combat zone. For example, you have 31/2
you are unable to sign the request because of tions listed under (2), earlier.) months (January 1 – April 15) to file your tax
illness or for another good reason, a person with return. Any days left in this period when youExtensions beyond 2 months. If you cannota close personal or business relationship to you entered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2
file your return within the automatic 2-monthcan sign for you, stating why you could not sign months if you entered it before the beginning ofextension period, you may be able to get anthe request. the year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten-additional 2-month extension, for a total of 4sion of Deadline in Publication 3 for more infor-E-file.Refer to your tax software package ormonths. Generally, you must file a paper Formmation.tax preparer for ways to file Form 2688 electroni-4868 by the end of the automatic extension
cally. You will need to provide certain informa-period (usually June 15) to get this additional
tion from your tax return for 2000. Do not mail2-month extension.
the Form 2688 if you file electronically. This additional 2-month extension of time to
How Do Ifile is not an extension of time to pay. SeeExtension approved. If your application forPayment of tax, earlier.this extension is approved, you will be notified by Prepare My Return?the IRS. Extension beyond 4 months. If you are still
If the IRS later determines that the state-unable to file your return within the 4-monthThis section explains how to get ready to fill inments made on your request for this extensionextension period, you may be able to get anyour tax return and when to report your incomeare false or misleading and an extension wouldextension for 2 more months, for a total of 6and expenses. It also explains how to completenot have been approved at the time based onmonths. See Extension beyond 4 months, ear- certain sections of the form. You may find Tablethe true facts, the extension is null and void. Youlier. 1–6 helpful when you prepare your return.will have to pay the failure-to-file penalty (dis- In most cases, the IRS will mail you FormNo further extension.An extension of morecussed later). 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with relatedthan 6 months will generally not be granted.instructions, or a TeleFile package, based onExtension not approved. If your applica-However, if you are outside the United Stateswhat you filed last year. Before you fill in thetion for this extension is not approved, you mustand meet certain tests, you may be granted aform, look it over to see if you need additionalfile your return by the extended due date of thelonger extension. See When To File and Pay in forms or schedules. You may also want to readautomatic extension. You may be allowed to filePublication 54 for more information. Does My Return Have To Be On Paper, earlier.within 10 days of the date of the notice you get
If you do not receive a tax return package infrom the IRS if the end of the 10-day period is
the mail, or if you need other forms, you canlater than the due date. The notice will tell you ifIndividuals Serving order them. See How To Get Tax Help in thethe 10-day grace period is granted. in Combat Zone back of this publication.
No further extensions.An extension of moreThe deadline for filing your tax return, payingthan 6 months will not be approved if you are in Table 1–6. Six Steps for Preparingany tax you may owe, and filing a claim forthe United States. Your Returnrefund is automatically extended if you serve in a
combat zone. This applies to members of the
1— Get your records together forArmed Forces, as well as Red Cross personnel,Individuals Outside accredited correspondents, and civilians underincome and expenses.the United States the direction of the Armed Forces in support of2— Get the forms, schedules, andthe Armed Forces.You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten- publications you need.
sion (until June 17, 2002, if you use the calendarCombat zone. For purposes of the automatic3— Fill in your return.year) to file your 2001 return and pay any federalextension, the term “combat zone” includes the
income tax due if: following areas. 4— Check your return to make sure it is
correct.1) You are a U.S. citizen or resident, and1) The Persian Gulf Area, effective August 2,
5— Sign and date your return.1990.2) On the due date of your return:
6— Attach all required forms and2) The qualified hazardous duty area of Bos-a) You are living outside of the United schedules.nia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Mace-States and Puerto Rico, and your main donia, effective November 21, 1995.place of business or post of duty is
outside the United States and 3) The qualified hazardous duty area of theSubstitute tax forms.You cannot use yourPuerto Rico, or Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/own version of a tax form unless it meets theMontenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea,requirements explained in Publication 1167,b) You are in military or naval service onand the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral-Substitute Printed, Computer-Prepared, andduty outside the United States and lel, effective March 24, 1999. Computer-Generated Tax Forms and Sched-Puerto Rico.
ules.See Publication 3, Armed Forces ’ Tax
However, if you pay the tax due after the dueGuide, for information about other tax benefitsForm W –2. If you are an employee, youdate (generally, April 15), interest will beavailable to military personnel serving in a com-should receive Form W–2 from your employer.charged from that date until the date the tax isbat zone. You will need the information from this formpaid.
before you prepare your return.Extension period.The deadline for filing yourSee When To File and Pay in Publication 54
If you do not receive Form W–2 by Januaryreturn, paying any tax due, and filing a claim forfor more information.
31, 2002, contact your employer. If you still dorefund is extended for at least 180 days after theIf you served in a combat zone, see Individu-
not get the form by February 15, the IRS canlater of:als Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special
help you by requesting the form from your em-rules that apply to you. 1) The last day you are in a combat zone (orployer. For more information, see Form W –2
the last day the area qualifies as a combatunder Credit for Withholding and Estimated TaxMarried taxpayers.If you file a joint return,
zone), or in chapter 5.only one spouse has to qualify for this automatic
extension. If you and your spouse file separate2) The last day of any continuous qualifiedForm 1099. If you received certain types ofreturns, this automatic extension applies only tohospitalization for injury from service in theincome, you may receive a Form 1099. Forthe spouse who qualifies. combat zone. example, if you received taxable interest of $10
How to get the extension.To use this special In addition to the 180 days, your deadline is or more, the payer generally must give you a
automatic extension, you must attach a state- also extended by the number of days you had Form 1099–INT. If you have not received it by
ment to your return explaining what situation left to take action with the IRS when you entered January 31, 2002, contact the payer. If you still
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
do not get the form by February 15, call the IRS If you are filing a joint return, write the SSNs
1) You do not withdraw the earnings,for help. in the same order as the names. Please use this
same order in submitting other forms and docu-2) The credit balance in the account may be
ments to the IRS.reduced or eliminated by losses in laterWhen Do I Report My
years, or Name change. If you changed your name be-Income and Expenses? cause of marriage, divorce, etc., immediately3) Current profits are used to reduce or elimi-
notify your Social Security Administration (SSA)nate a debit balance from previous years.You must figure your taxable income on the
office so the name on your tax return is the samebasis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual
as the one the SSA has on its records. This mayDebts paid for you. If another personaccounting period used for keeping records and
prevent delays in issuing your refund and safe-cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift orreporting income and expenses. You must ac-
guard your future social security benefits.loan), you have constructively received thecount for your income and expenses in a way
amount and generally must include it in yourthat clearly shows your taxable income. The way Dependent ’s social security number.You
gross income for the year. See Canceled Debtsyou do this is called an accounting method. This must provide the SSN of each dependent you
in chapter 13 for more information.section explains which accounting periods and claim, regardless of the dependent’s age. This
methods you can use. requirement applies to all dependents (not justPayment to third party.If a third party is
your children) claimed on your tax return.paid income from property you own, you have
constructively received the income. It is theException. If your child was born and diedAccounting Periods same as if you had actually received the incomein 2001 and you do not have an SSN for the
and paid it to the third party. child, you may attach a copy of the child’s birthMost individual tax returns cover a calendar
certificate instead. If you do, enter “DIED ” inyear— the 12 months from January 1 through Payment to an agent.Income an agent re-
column 2 of line 6c.December 31. If you do not use a calendar year,ceives for you is income you constructively re-
your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regu- ceived in the year the agent receives it. If youNo social security number.File Form SS –5lar fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends onindicate in a contract that your income is to bewith your local SSA office to get an SSN forthe last day of any month except December. Apaid to another person, you must include theyourself or your dependent. It usually takes52–53 week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53amount in your gross income when the otherabout 2 weeks to get an SSN. If you or yourweeks and always ends on the same day of theperson receives it. dependent is not eligible for an SSN, see Individ-week. ual taxpayer identification number, later.Check received or available.A valid checkYou must choose your accounting period If you are a U.S. citizen, you must show proofyou received or that was made available to youwhen you file your first income tax return. It of age, identity, and citizenship with your Formbefore the end of the tax year is constructivelycannot be longer than 12 months. SS –5. If you are 18 or older, you must appear inreceived by you in that year, even if you do notperson with this proof at an SSA office.More information. For more information oncash the check or deposit it in your account untilForm SS –5 is available at any SSA office. Ifaccounting periods, including how to changethe next year. you have any questions about which documentsyour accounting period, see Publication 538,
No constructive receipt.There may be you can use as proof of age, identity, or citizen-Accounting Periods and Methods.
facts to show that you did not constructivelyship, contact your SSA office.
receive income. If your dependent does not have an SSN by
the time your return is due, you may want to askAccounting Methods
Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreedfor an extension of time to file, as explained
to her school board’s condition that, in her ab-Your accounting method is the way you account earlier under When Do I Have To File.
sence, she would receive only the differencefor your income and expenses. Most taxpayers If you do not provide a required SSN or if you
between her regular salary and the salary of ause either the cash method or an accrual provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in-
substitute teacher hired by the school board.method. You choose a method when you file creased and any refund may be reduced.
Therefore, Alice did not constructively receiveyour first income tax return. If you want to Adoption taxpayer identification numberthe amount by which her salary was reduced tochange your accounting method after that, you (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting apay the substitute teacher.generally must get IRS approval. child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannot
Cash method. If you use this method, report get an SSN for the child until the adoption isAccrual method. If you use an accrualall items of income in the year in which you final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead ofmethod, you generally report income when youactually or constructively receive them. Deduct an SSN. earn it, rather than when you receive it. Youall expenses in the year you actually pay them. File Form W –7A with the IRS to get an ATINgenerally deduct your expenses when you incurThis is the method most individual taxpayers if all of the following are true. them, rather than when you pay them.use. • You have a child living with you who wasIncome paid in advance. Prepaid incomeConstructive receipt.You constructively placed in your home for legal adoption byis generally included in gross income in the yearreceive income when it is credited to your ac- an authorized placement agency.you receive it. Your method of accounting doescount or set apart in any way that makes itnot matter as long as the income is available to• You cannot get the child’s existing SSNavailable to you. You do not need to have physi-you. Prepaid income includes rents or interesteven though you have made a reasonablecal possession of it. For example, interestyou receive in advance and pay for services youattempt to get it from the birth parents, thecredited to your bank account on December 31,will perform later. placement agency, and other persons.2001, is taxable income to you in 2001 if you
could have withdrawn it in 2001 (even if the • You cannot get an SSN for the child fromAdditional information.For more informationamount is not entered in your passbook or with- the SSA because, for example, the adop-on accounting methods, including how todrawn until 2002). tion is not final.change your accounting method, get Publication
Garnisheed wages. If your employer uses • You cannot get an Individual Taxpayer538.
your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages Identification Number (ITIN) (discussed
are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is later) for the child.Social Security Numberconstructively received by you. You must in- • You are eligible to claim the child as aclude these wages in income for the year youYou must enter your social security number dependent on your tax return.would have received them. (SSN) in the space provided on your return. BeAfter the adoption is final, you must apply for ansure the SSN on your return is the same as theBrokerage and other accounts. Profits SSN for the child. You cannot continue using theSSN on your social security card. If you arefrom a brokerage account, or similar account, ATIN.married, enter the SSNs for both you and yourare fully taxable in the year you earn them. This
spouse, whether you file jointly or separately.is true even if: See Form W –7A for more information.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident alien spouse.If your spouse is would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 = 2) The designee to:
a nonresident alien and you file a joint or sepa- $23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).
a) Give information that is missing fromrate return, your spouse must have either anEqual amounts. If you are asked to enter the your return to the IRS,SSN or an ITIN. If your spouse is not eligible forsmaller or larger of two equal amounts, enteran SSN, see the next discussion. b) Call the IRS for information about thethat amount. processing of your return or the statusIndividual taxpayer identification number of your refund or payments, andExample. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.(ITIN).The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are
Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.c) Respond to certain IRS notices that youa nonresident or resident alien and you do not
Enter $500 on line 5. have shown the designee. These no-have and are not eligible to get an SSN. To
tices about math errors, offsets (seeapply for an ITIN, file Form W –7 with the IRS. ItNegative amounts. If you need to enter a Refunds, later), and return preparationusually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an ITIN.negative amount, put the amount in parentheses will be sent to you, not the designee.Enter this number on your tax return whereverrather than using a minus sign. To combine
your SSN is requested. positive and negative amounts, add all the posi-The authorization cannot be revoked. How-tive amounts together and then subtract theAlien dependent. If your dependent is a ever, it will automatically end no later than thenegative amounts.nonresident or resident alien who does not have due date (without any extensions) for filing yourand is not eligible to get a social security number 2002 tax return. This is April 15, 2003, for most(SSN), file Form W–7 with the IRS to apply forAttachments people.an ITIN. Enter this number on your return wher- See your form instructions for more informa-ever the dependent’s SSN is requested. Depending on the form you file and the itemstion.
reported on your return, you may have to com-An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not If you want to allow the paid preparerplete additional schedules and forms and attachentitle you or your dependent to social who signed your return to discuss itthem to your return.security benefits or change the em-CAUTION
!
with the IRS, just enter “Preparer” in
TIP
ployment or immigration status of either of you IRS e-file is paperless. There’s nothing the space for the designee’s name.under U.S. law. to sign, attach, or mail, not even your
Forms W –2.
TIP
SignaturesPenalty for not providing social security
number. If you do not include your SSN or theForm W –2. Form W –2, Wage and Tax State-
You must sign and date your return. If you file aSSN of your spouse or dependent as required,ment, is a statement from your employer of
joint return, both you and your spouse must signyou may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-wages and other compensation paid to you and
the return, even if only one of you had income.sion on Penalties, later, for more information.taxes withheld from your pay. You should have a
Form W –2 from each employer. Be sure to If you file a joint return, both spousesSSN on correspondence. If you write to theattach a copy of Form W–2 in the place indi- are generally liable for the tax, and theIRS about your tax account, be sure to includecated on the front page of your return. Attach itentire tax liability may be assessedCAUTION
!
your SSN (and the name and SSN of your only to the front page of your return, not to anyagainst either spouse. See chapter 2.spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-attachments. For more information, see Form
If you are due a refund, it cannot be issuedspondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-W –2 in chapter 5.
unless you have signed your return.tify your account, this helps the IRS respond toIf you received a Form 1099–R, Distribu-
Enter your occupation in the space providedyour correspondence promptly. tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
in the signature section. If you file a joint return,Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
enter both your occupation and your spouse’stracts, etc., showing federal income tax with-Presidential Election occupation. Entering your daytime telephoneheld, attach a copy of that form in the place
Campaign Fund number may help speed the processing of yourindicated on the front page of your return.
return.
Form 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-This fund was set up to help pay for presidential
ules to file with Form 1040EZ. When someone can sign for you. You canelection campaigns. You may have $3 of your
appoint an agent to sign your return if you are:tax liability go to this fund by checking the Yes Form 1040A. Attach the additional schedulesbox on Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form and forms that you had to complete behind the1) Unable to sign the return because of dis-1040EZ. If you are filing a joint return, yourForm 1040A in order by number. If you are filingease or injury,spouse may also have $3 go to the fund. If youSchedule EIC, put it last. Do not attach itemscheck Yes, it will not change the tax you pay or 2) Absent from the United States for a contin-unless required to do so.the refund you will receive. uous period of at least 60 days before the
Form 1040. Attach any forms and schedules due date for filing your return, or
behind Form 1040 in order of the “AttachmentComputations 3) Given permission to do so by the IRS of-Sequence Number ” shown in the upper right fice in your area.corner of the form or schedule. Put forms withoutThe following information on entering numbers
an attachment sequence number next. Thenon your tax return may be useful in making the Power of attorney.A return signed by anarrange all other statements or attachments inreturn easier to complete. agent in any of these cases must have a powerthe same order as the forms and schedules theyof attorney (POA) attached that authorizes therelate to and attach them last. Do not attachRounding off dollars.You may round off agent to sign for you. You can use a POA thatitems unless required to do so.cents to whole dollars on your return and sched- states that the agent is granted authority to signules. If you do round to whole dollars, you must the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power ofround all amounts. To round, drop amountsThird Party Designee Attorney and Declaration of Representative.under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 to Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39You can authorize the IRS to discuss your returngranted authority to sign the return.becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3. with a friend, family member, or any other per-
Unable to sign.If the taxpayer is mentallyIf you have to add two or more amounts toson you choose. If you check the “Yes” box in
incompetent and cannot sign the return, it mustfigure the amount to enter on a line, includethe third party designee area of your 2001 tax
be signed by a court-appointed representativecents when adding the amounts and round offreturn and provide the information required, you
who can act for the taxpayer.only the total. are authorizing:
If the taxpayer is mentally competent but
Example. You receive two W–2 forms: one 1) The IRS to call the designee to answer physically unable to sign the return or POA, a
showing wages of $5,000.55 and one showing any questions that arise during the valid “signature” is defined under state law. It
wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, you processing of your return, and can be anything that clearly indicates the
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxpayer’s intent to sign. For example, theCashing your refund check.Cash your tax If you do not pay your tax when due,
taxpayer’s “X” with the signatures of two wit- refund check soon after you receive it. Checksyou may have to pay a failure-to-pay
nesses might be considered a valid signature not cashed within 12 months of the date they arepenalty. See Penalties, later. For moreCAUTION
!
under a state’s law. issued will be canceled and the proceeds re- information about your balance due, see Publi-
turned to the IRS. cation 594, The IRS Collection Process.
Spouse unable to sign.If your spouse is una-If your check has been canceled, you can
ble to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint If the amount you owe for 2001 is large,apply to the IRS to have it reissued.
return in chapter 2. you may want to increase the amount
of income tax withheld from your pay orRefund more or less than expected.If you
TIP
Child’s return.If a child has to file a tax return make estimated tax payments for 2002. Seereceive a check for a refund you are not entitled
but cannot sign the return, the child’s parent, chapter 5 for more information.to, or for an overpayment that should have been
guardian, or another legally responsible personcredited to estimated tax, do not cash the check.
must sign the child’s name, followed by the Call the IRS.
words “By (signature), parent (or guardian) forIf you receive a check for more than theHow To Payminor child.” refund you claimed, do not cash the check until
you receive a notice explaining the difference.If you have an amount due on your tax return,
Paid Preparer If your refund check is for less than youyou can pay by check, money order, or credit
claimed, it should be accompanied by a noticecard. If you filed electronically, you also may be
Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist inexplaining the difference. Cashing the checkable to make your payment by electronic funds
preparing, or review your tax return must sign itdoes not stop you from claiming an additionalwithdrawal.
and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer’s amount of refund. You do not have to pay if the amountarea of your return. Signature stamps and labelsIf you did not receive a notice and you have you owe is less than $1.are not acceptable. any questions about the amount of your refund,
If the preparer is self-employed (that is, not
TIP
you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not
employed by any person or business to preparereceived a notice, call the IRS.
the return), he or she should check the self-em- Payment by check or money order. If you
ployed box in the Paid Preparer’s Use Only pay by check or money order, make it out to theOffset against debts.If you are due a refund
space on the return. “United States Treasury.” Please show your cor-but have not paid certain amounts you owe, all
 The preparer must give you a copy of your rect name, address, social security number,or part of your refund may be used to pay all or
return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS. daytime telephone number, and the tax year andpart of the past-due amount. This includes
If you prepare your own return, leave this form number on the front of your check or moneypast-due federal income tax, other federal debts
area blank. If another person prepares your re- order.(such as student loans), state income tax, and
turn and does not charge you, that person For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2001child and spousal support payments. You will be
should not sign your return. and you owe additional tax, show your name,notified if the refund you claimed has been offset
If you have questions about whether a address, social security number, daytime tele-against your debts.
preparer must sign your return, please contact phone number, and “2001 Form 1040” on theJoint return and injured spouse.When aany IRS office. front of your check or money order. If you file anjoint return is filed and only one spouse owes aamended return (Form 1040X) for 2000 and youpast-due amount, the other spouse can be con-owe tax, show your name, address, social se-Refunds sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse curity number, daytime telephone number, andcan get a refund for his or her share of the“2000 Form 1040X” on the front of your check orWhen you complete your return, you will deter-overpayment that would otherwise be used tomoney order.mine if you paid more income tax than youpay the past-due amount. Enclose your payment with your return, butowed. If so, you can get a refund of the amountTo be considered an injured spouse, youdo not attach it to the form. If you filed Formyou overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Formmust: 1040, please complete Form 1040–V, Payment1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of the Voucher, and enclose it with your payment andoverpayment to your next year’s (2002) esti- 1) File a joint return, return. Form 1040–V will help us process yourmated tax. You cannot have your overpayment payment more accurately and efficiently. Follow2) Have reported income (such as wages, in-applied to your 2002 estimated tax if you file the instructions that come with the form.terest, etc.),Form 1040EZ. Do not mail cash with your return. If you pay3) Have made and reported tax paymentsIf you choose to have a 2001 overpay- cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part of(such as federal income tax withheld fromment applied to your 2002 estimated your records.wages or estimated tax payments), ortax, you cannot change your mind andCAUTION
!
Payment not honored. If your check orclaimed the earned income credit or otherhave any of it refunded to you after the due date
money order is not honored by your bank (orrefundable credit, andof your 2001 return.
other financial institution) and the IRS does not4) Have an overpayment, all or part of whichFollow the form instructions to complete the receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi-may be applied against the past-dueentries to claim your refund and/or to apply your tion, you may be subject to a dishonored checkamount.overpayment to your 2002 estimated tax. penalty.
If you are an injured spouse, you can obtainIf your refund for 2001 is large, you Payment by credit card.You can use youryour portion of the joint refund by completingmay want to decrease the amount of American Express , Discover , or Master-Form 8379, Injured Spouse Claim and Alloca-income tax withheld from your pay in Card credit card.
TIP
tion. Follow the instructions on the form.2002. See chapter 5 for more information. To pay by credit card, call a service provider
and follow the recorded instructions. You can
also pay by credit card over the Internet using a
Amount You OweDirect Deposit.Instead of getting a paper
service provider’s web site.check, you may be able to have your refund
When you complete your return, you will deter-The service providers charge a conveniencedeposited directly into your account at a bank or
mine if you have paid the full amount of tax thatfee based on the amount you are paying. Feesother financial institution. Follow the form in-
you owe. If you owe additional tax, you shouldmay vary between the providers. You will be toldstructions to request Direct Deposit.
pay it with your return. what the fee is during the transaction and willIf the Direct Deposit cannot be done, the IRS
If the IRS figures your tax for you, you will have the option to continue or end the transac-will send a check instead.
receive a bill for any tax that is due. You should tion. You may also obtain the convenience fee
Overpayment less than one dollar.If your pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of by calling the service provider’s automated cus-
overpayment is less than one dollar, you will not your return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in tomer service telephone number or visiting their
get a refund unless you ask for it in writing. chapter 31. respective web site.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Do not add the convenience fee to your If the IRS figures your tax for you, inter-
1) Your total taxes (not counting interest,tax payment. est cannot start earlier than the 31st
penalties, additions to the tax, or additionalday after the IRS sends you a bill. ForCAUTION
! TIP
amounts) do not exceed $10,000,information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter
If you pay by credit card, write the confirma-31. 2) In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse iftion number you were given at the end of the the liability relates to a joint return) havetransaction and the tax payment amount in the not:Interest on penalties.Interest is charged onupper left corner of page 1 of your tax return.
the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-relateda) Failed to file any required income taxService Providers penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due datereturn,
of the return (including extensions) to the date of
b) Failed to pay any tax shown on anyPhoneCharge payment. Interest on other penalties starts on
such return, orInc. the date of notice and demand, but is not
charged on penalties paid within 21 calendarc) Entered into an installment agreementTo make a
days from the date of the notice (or within 10 for the payment of any income tax,payment,
business days if the notice is for $100,000 orcall.... 1 –888–ALL –TAXX
more).o r ..... 1–888–255–8299 3) You show you cannot pay your income tax
For in full when due,
Customer Interest due to IRS error or delay.All or part 4) The tax will be paid in full in 3 years orService 1 –877–851–9964 of any interest you were charged can be forgivenless, andWeb if the interest is due to an unreasonable error orAddress www.1888ALLTAXX.com 5) You agree to comply with the tax lawsdelay by an officer or employee of the IRS in
while your agreement is in effect.performing a ministerial or managerial act.
Official A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-
Payments cal act that occurs during the processing of your
Gift To ReduceCorporation case. A managerial act includes personnel
transfers and extended personnel training. Athe Public DebtTo make a decision concerning the proper application ofpayment,
federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerialcall.... 1 –800–2PAY –TAX You can make a contribution (gift) toact.o r ..... 1–800–272–9829 reduce the public debt. If you wish to do
For The interest can be forgiven only if you are so, make a separate check payable to
Customer not responsible in any important way for the“Bureau of the Public Debt.” You can send it to:Service 1 –877–754–4413 error or delay and the IRS has notified you inBureau of the Public DebtWeb writing of the deficiency or payment. For moreDepartment GAddress www.officialpayments.com information, get Publication 556, Examination of P.O. Box 2188
Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund.Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188.Electronic payment by electronic filer.If Interest and certain penalties may also be
you file your tax return electronically, you cansuspended for a limited period if you filed your
make your payment electronically. Or, you can enclose the check in the envelopereturn by the due date (including extensions)
You can file and pay in a single step by with your income tax return. Please do not addand the IRS does not provide you with a notice
authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal from this gift to any tax you owe.specifically stating your liability and the basis foryour checking or savings account. This option isit before the close of the 18-month period begin-You can deduct this gift as a charitable con-available through tax software packages, taxning on the later of: tribution on next year’s tax return if you itemizeprofessionals, and TeleFile. If you select this your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).payment option, you will need to have your ac-• The date the return is filed, or
count number, your financial institution’s routing • The due date of the return without regardtransit number, and account type (checking or Peel-Off Address Labelto extensions.savings). You can schedule the payment for any
After you have completed your return, peel offfuture date up to and including the return dueFor more information, get Publication 556.
the label with your name and address from thedate (April 15, 2002).
inside of your tax return package and place it inInstallment AgreementBe sure to check with your financial the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Forminstitution to make sure that an elec- 1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. IfIf you cannot pay the full amount due with yourtronic funds withdrawal is allowed andCAUTION
!
you have someone prepare your return, givereturn, you can ask to make monthly installmentto get the correct routing and account numbers. that person your label to use on your tax return.payments. However, you will be charged inter-
To pay by electronic funds withdrawal fromest and may be charged a late payment penalty If you file electronically (and Form 8453 is
your checking or savings account when you file required), use your label on Form 8453. (Moreon the tax not paid by April 15, 2002, even if your
by TeleFile, fill in lines E, F, G, and H on the information on electronic filing is found earlier inrequest to pay in installments is granted. If your
TeleFile Tax Record. this chapter.)request is granted, you must also pay a fee. To
You can also file and pay in a single step bylimit the interest and penalty charges, pay asThe label helps the IRS to correctly identify
authorizing a credit card payment. This option ismuch of the tax as possible with your return. Butyour account. It also saves processing costs and
available through some tax software packagesbefore requesting an installment agreement,speeds up processing so that refunds can be
and tax professionals. you should consider other less costly alterna-issued sooner.
tives, such as a bank loan. You must write your SSN in the spacesEstimated tax payments.Do not include any To ask for an installment agreement, use provided on your tax return.2002 estimated tax payment in the payment forForm 9465, Installment Agreement Request.your 2001 income tax return. See chapter 5 for CAUTION
!
You should receive a response to your requestinformation on how to pay estimated tax. within 30 days. But if you file your return after
March 31, it may take longer for a reply.Correcting the label.Make necessary name
and address changes on the label. If you haveInterest
Guaranteed availability of installment agree-an apartment number that is not shown on the
ment. The IRS must agree to accept the pay-Interest is charged on tax you do not pay by the label, please write it in. If you changed your
ment of your tax liability in installments if, as ofdue date of your return. Interest is charged even name, see the discussion under Social Security
the date you offer to enter into the agreement:if you get an extension of time for filing. Number, earlier.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
No label. If you did not receive a tax return If you file a claim for refund, you must be able• Filing status,
package with a label, print or type your name to prove by your records that you have overpaid• Federal income tax withheld,and address in the spaces provided at the top of your tax.
• Tax shown on return,Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are married
How long to keep records. You must keepfiling a separate return, do not enter your • Adjusted gross income,your records for as long as they are important forspouse’s name in the space at the top. Instead,
the federal tax law. • Taxable income,enter his or her name in the space provided on
Keep records that support an item of incomeline 3. • Self-employment tax,or a deduction appearing on a return until theIf you file Form 1040EZ and you do not have
• Number of exemptions,period of limitations for the return runs out. (Aa label, print (do not type) this information in the
period of limitations is the period of time afterspaces provided. • Refund,which no legal action can be brought.) For as-P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver • Earned income credit, andsessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3mail to your street address and you have a P.O.years from the date you filed the return. For filing• Mortgage interest deduction or real estatebox, print your P.O. box number on the line fora claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3tax deduction.your present home address instead of youryears from the date you filed the original return,street address. or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-
ever is later. Returns filed before the due dateMore information. For more information onForeign address. If your address is outside
are treated as filed on the due date. recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-the United States or its possessions or territo-
If you did not report income that you shouldkeeping for Individuals.ries, enter the information on the line for “City,
have reported on your return, and it is more thantown or post office, state, and ZIP code” in the
25% of the income shown on the return, thefollowing order: Interest on Refundsperiod of limitations does not run out until 6
1) City, years after you filed the return. If a return is falseIf you are due a refund, you may get interest onor fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no2) Province or state, and it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.return is filed, an action can generally be broughtIf the refund is made within 45 days after the3) Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi- at any time. due date of your return, no interest will be paid. Ifate the name of the country.) You may need to keep records relating to theyou file your return after the due date (includingbasis of property longer than the period of limita-Follow the country’s practice for entering the extensions), no interest will be paid if the refundtions. Keep those records as long as they arepostal code. is made within 45 days after the date you filed. Ifimportant in figuring the basis of the original or
the refund is not made within this 45-day period,replacement property. Generally, this means for
interest will be paid from the due date of theas long as you own the property and, after you
return or from the date you filed, whichever isdispose of it, for the period of limitations that
Where Do I File? later.applies to you. See chapter 14 for information on
basis. Accepting a refund check does not changeAfter you complete your return, you must send it your right to claim an additional refund and inter-to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able toNote. If you receive a Form W–2, keep est. File your claim within the period of time thatfile it electronically. See Does My Return Have Copy C until you begin receiving social securityapplies. See Amended Returns and Claims forTo Be On Paper, earlier. benefits. This will help protect those benefits,Refund, later. If you do not accept a refundjust in case there is a question about your workMailing your return.If an addressed envel- check, no more interest will be paid on the over-record or earnings in a particular year. The So-ope came with your tax forms package, you payment included in the check.cial Security Administration suggests that youshould mail your return in that envelope.
confirm your work record with them from time toIf you do not have an addressed envelope or Interest on erroneous refund.All or part oftime.if you moved during the year, mail your return to any interest you were charged on an erroneousthe Internal Revenue Service Center for the refund generally will be forgiven. Any interestCopies of returns.You should keep copies ofarea where you now live. A list of Service Center charged for the period before demand for repay-tax returns you have filed and the tax formsaddresses is shown in your tax forms package. ment was made will be forgiven unless:package as part of your records. They may beIf you are making a payment, follow anyhelpful in amending filed returns or preparingadditional instructions in your tax forms pack- 1) You, or a person related to you, causedfuture ones.age. the erroneous refund in any way, orIf you need a copy of a prior year tax return,
you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506 , 2) The refund is more than $50,000.
Request for Copy or Transcript of Tax Form.
For example, if you claimed a refund of $100There is a charge for a copy of a return, which
What Happens on your return, but the IRS made an error andyou must pay with Form 4506.
sent you $1,000, you would not be chargedTranscript.You can also use Form 4506 toAfter I File? interest for the time you held the $900 differ-ask for a transcript of your return filed this yearence. You must, however, repay the $900 whenor during the 3 preceding years. It will show mostAfter you send your return to IRS, you may have the IRS asks.lines from your original return, including accom-some questions. This section discusses con-
panying forms and schedules.cerns you may have about recordkeeping, your
Past-Due Refundrefund, and what to do if you move.
Tax account information.If you need a state-
If you do not get your refund within 4 weeks afterment of your tax account showing any later
What Records changes that you or the IRS made to the originalfiling your return, you can call TeleTax. For de-
return, you will need to ask for tax account infor-tails on how to use this telephone service, seeShould I Keep?
mation. What Is TeleTax? in your tax forms package.
Do not use Form 4506 for tax account infor-Please wait at least 4 weeks after filing yourYou must keep records so that you canmation. Instead, contact the IRS. You should2001 tax return before using this service. Inprepare a complete and accurate in-have your name and address, social securitysome cases, TeleTax may not have refund infor-come tax return. The law does not re-RECORDS
number or employer identification number (if ap-mation until 6 weeks after you file.quire any special form of records. However, youplicable), tax period, and form number available.See IRS e-file, earlier, for information aboutshould keep all receipts, canceled checks orYou will get the following information: refund inquiries when you file an electronic re-other proof of payment, and any other records to
support any deductions or credits you claim.• Type of return filed, turn.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment payments. See Installment Agreement,the date you filed your original return, the refundChange of Address earlier. was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part ofyears plus the 4-month extension period imme-If you have moved, file your return using yourthe overpayment refunded to you, or you candiately before you filed the claim. The estimatednew address. apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If youtax of $500 paid before that period cannot beIf you move after you filed your return, youchoose to get a refund, it will be sent separatelyrefunded or credited.should give the IRS clear and concise writtenfrom any refund shown on your original return.notification of your change of address. The noti- If you file a claim more than 3 years after
fication should be sent to the Internal RevenueFiling Form 1040X. After you finish youryou file your return,the credit or refund can-
Service Center serving your old address or toForm 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com-not be more than the tax you paid within the 2
the Customer Service Division in the local areaplete. Do not forget to show the year of youryears immediately before you file the claim.
office. You can use Form 8822, Change of Ad- original return and explain all changes you
dress. If you are expecting a refund, also notifymade. Be sure to attach any forms or schedulesExample. You filed your 1998 tax return on
the post office serving your old address. This willneeded to explain your changes. Mail your FormApril 15, 1999. You paid taxes of $500. On
help in forwarding your check to your new ad-1040X to the Internal Revenue Service CenterNovember 1, 2000, after an examination of your
dress (unless you chose Direct Deposit of yourserving the area where you now live (as shown1998 return, you had to pay an additional tax of
refund). in the instructions to the form). $200. On May 13, 2002, you file a claim for a
Be sure to include your social security num-File a separate form for each tax year in-refund of $300. However, because you filed your
ber (and the name and social security number ofvolved. claim more than 3 years after you filed your
your spouse, if you filed a joint return) in any return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you
Time for filing a claim for refund.Generally,correspondence with the IRS. paid during the 2 years immediately before you
you must file your claim for a credit or refundfiled your claim.
within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
nal return or within 2 years after the date youFinancially disabled.The time periods arepaid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filedsuspended for the period in which you are finan-What If I Made before the due date (without regard to exten-cially disabled. You are financially disabled ifsions) are considered filed on the due dateyou are unable to manage your financial affairsa Mistake? (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, orbecause of a medically determinable physical orlegal holiday). These time periods are sus-mental impairment which can be expected toErrors may delay your refund or result in noticespended while you are financially disabled, dis-result in death or which has lasted or can bebeing sent to you. If you discover an error, youcussed later. expected to last for a continuous period of notcan file an amended return or claim for refund.If the last day for claiming a credit or refund isless than 12 months. However, you are nota Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you cantreated as financially disabled during any periodfile the claim on the next business day.Amended Returns and your spouse or any other person is authorized toIf you do not file a claim within this period,act on your behalf in financial matters.Claims for Refund you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.To claim that you are financially disabled,
You should correct your return if, after you haveLate-filed return.If you were due a refundyou must send in the following written state-
filed it, you find that: but you did not file a return, you generally mustments with your claim for refund.
file within 3 years from the date the return was
1) You did not report some income, 1) A statement from your qualified physicianoriginally due to get that refund.
that includes:2) You claimed deductions or credits youLimit on amount of refund.If you file yourshould not have claimed, a) The name and a description of yourclaim within 3 years after the date you filed your
physical or mental impairment,3) You did not claim deductions or creditsreturn, the credit or refund cannot be more than
you could have claimed, or the part of the tax paid within the 3-year periodb) The physician’s medical opinion that(plus any extension of time for filing your return)the impairment prevented you from4) You should have claimed a different filingimmediately before you filed the claim. This timemanaging your financial affairs,status. (You cannot change your filing sta-period is suspended while you are financiallytus from married filing jointly to married c) The physician’s medical opinion thatdisabled, discussed later.filing separately after the due date of the the impairment was or can be expectedoriginal return. However, an executor mayTax paid. Payments made before the due to result in death, or that its durationbe able to make this change for a de-date (without regard to extensions) of the origi-has lasted, or can be expected to last,ceased spouse.) nal return are considered paid on the due date.at least 12 months,Examples include federal income tax withheldIf you need a copy of your return, see Copies of d) The specific time period (to the best offrom wages and estimated income tax.returns under What Records Should I Keep, the physician’s knowledge), andearlier in this chapter. Example 1. You made estimated tax pay- e) The following certification signed by thements of $500 and got an automatic extension ofphysician: “I hereby certify that, to theForm 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amended time to August 16, 1999, to file your 1998 in- best of my knowledge and belief, theU.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct come tax return. When you filed your return on above representations are true, correct,the return you have already filed. An amendedthat date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On and complete.”tax return cannot be filed electronically underAugust 15, 2002, you filed an amended returnthe e-file system. and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed2) A statement made by the person signingCompleting Form 1040X. On Form 1040X, your claim within 3 years after you filed yourthe claim for credit or refund that no per-write your income, deductions, and credits asoriginal return, you can get a refund of up toson, including your spouse, was author-you originally reported them on your return, the$700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus theized to act on your behalf in financialchanges you are making, and the corrected4-month extension period immediately before matters during the period of disability (oramounts. Then figure the tax on the correctedyou filed the claim. the exact dates that a person was author-amount of taxable income and the amount you ized to act for you).owe or your refund. Example 2. The situation is the same as in
If you owe tax, pay the full amount with FormExample 1, except you filed your return on Octo-
1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from Exceptions for special types of refunds.Ifber 29, 1999, 21/2 months after the extension
any amount you had credited to your estimated you file a claim for one of the items listed below,period ended. You paid an additional $200 on
tax. the dates and limits discussed earlier may notthat date. On October 29, 2002, you filed an
apply. These items, and where to get more infor-If you cannot pay the full amount due with amended return and claimed a refund of $700.
mation, are as follows.your return, you can ask to make monthly install- Although you filed your claim within 3 years from
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
debts to another federal agency, or for state tax. penalty if you can show that you had a good• A bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts The refund procedures discussed in this chapterreason for not paying your tax on time.in chapter 15.) will not be available to you to get back the
• A worthless security. (See Worthless se- reduction. See Offset against debts, earlier. Combined penalties. If both the failure-to-file
curities in chapter 15.) penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis-Effect on state tax liability.If your return iscussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-changed for any reason, it may affect your state15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by thetion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu-income tax liability. This includes changes madefailure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file yourals.) as a result of an examination of your return byreturn more than 60 days after the due date orthe IRS. Contact your state tax agency for more• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi- extended due date, the minimum penalty is theinformation.cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) smaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.)
Penalties Accuracy-related penalty.You may have to• Carryback of certain business tax credits.
pay an accuracy-related penalty if:(See Form 3800, General Business The law provides penalties for failure to file re-Credit.) turns or pay taxes as required. 1) You underpay your tax because of either
• A claim based on an agreement with the “negligence” or “disregard” of rules or reg-
IRS extending the period for assessment ulations, or
of tax. Civil Penalties 2) You substantially understate your income
• An injured spouse claim. (See Offset tax.If you do not file your return and pay your tax byagainst debts, earlier.) the due date, you may have to pay a penalty.The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-
You may also have to pay a penalty if youment. The penalty will not be figured on any part
Processing claims for refund.Claims are substantially understate your tax, file a frivolousof an underpayment on which the fraud penaltyusually processed shortly after they are filed.return, or fail to supply your social security num-(discussed later) is charged.Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal-ber. If you provide fraudulent information on
Negligence or disregard.The term “negli-lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim isyour return, you may have to pay a civil fraud
gence” includes a failure to make a reasonableexamined, the procedures are the same as inpenalty.
attempt to comply with the tax law or to exercisethe examination of a tax return.
Filing late.If you do not file your return by theordinary and reasonable care in preparing aIf your claim is disallowed, you will receive an
due date (including extensions), you may havereturn. Negligence also includes failure to keepexplanation of why it was disallowed.
to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty isadequate books and records. You will not have
Taking your claim to court.You can sue for abased on the tax not paid by the due date (with-to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea-
refund in court, but you must first file a timelyout regard to extensions). The penalty is usuallysonable basis for a position you took.
claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your5% for each month or part of a month that aThe term “disregard” includes any careless,
claim or does not act on your claim within 6return is late, but not more than 25%. reckless, or intentional disregard.
months after you file it, you can then take yourFraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,Adequate disclosure. You can avoid theclaim to court. For information on the burden ofthe penalty is 15% for each month or part of apenalty for disregard of rules or regulations ifproof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556,month that your return is late, up to a maximumyou adequately disclose on your return a posi-Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, andof 75%. tion that has at least a reasonable basis. SeeClaims for Refund.
Disclosure statement, later.The IRS provides a fast method to move yourReturn over 60 days late.If you file your
claim to court if: return more than 60 days after the due date orSubstantial understatement of income tax.
extended due date, the minimum penalty is theYou understate your tax if the tax shown on your• You are filing a claim for a credit or refundsmaller of $100 or 100% of the unpaid tax.return is less than the correct tax. The under-based solely on contested income tax or
statement is substantial if it is more than theon estate tax or gift tax issues consideredException. You will not have to pay the
larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-in your previously examined returns, andpenalty if you show that you failed to file on time
ever, the amount of the understatement is re-because of reasonable cause and not because• You want to take your case to court in- duced to the extent the understatement is dueof willful neglect.stead of appealing it within the IRS. to:
Paying tax late. You will have to pay aWhen you file your claim with the IRS, you get 1) Substantial authority, orfailure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of yourthe fast method by requesting in writing that yourunpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month,2) Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-claim be immediately rejected. A notice of claimafter the due date that the tax is not paid. Thissis.disallowance will then be promptly sent to you.penalty does not apply during the automaticYou have 2 years from the date of mailing of4-month extension of time to file period, if youSubstantial authority.Whether there is orthe notice of disallowance to file a refund suit inpaid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on orwas substantial authority for the tax treatment ofthe United States District Court having jurisdic-before the due date of your return and pay thean item depends on the facts and circum-tion or in the United States Court of Federalbalance when you file the return. stances. Consideration will be given to courtClaims. The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penaltyopinions, Treasury regulations, revenue rulings,
is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if anInterest on refund.If you receive a refund revenue procedures, and notices and an-
installment agreement is in effect for that month.because of your amended return, interest will be nouncements issued by the IRS and published
You must have filed your return by the due datepaid on it from the due date of your original in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that involve the
(including extensions) to qualify for this reducedreturn or the date you filed your original return, same or similar circumstances as yours.
penalty.whichever is later, to the date you filed the Disclosure statement.To adequately dis-If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rateamended return. However, if the refund is not close the relevant facts about your tax treatmentwill increase to 1% at the start of the first monthmade within 45 days after you file the amended of an item, use  Form 8275, Disclosure State-beginning at least 10 days after the day that thereturn, interest will be paid up to the date the ment. You must also have a reasonable basisnotice is issued. If a notice and demand forrefund is paid. for treating the item the way you did.immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
In cases of substantial understatement only,Reduced refund. Your refund may be re- crease to 1% at the start of the first month
items that meet the requirements of Revenueduced by an additional tax liability that has been beginning after the day that the notice and de-
Procedure 2001–11 (or later update) are con-assessed against you. mand is issued.
sidered adequately disclosed on your returnAlso, your refund may be reduced by This penalty cannot be more than 25% of
without filing Form 8275.amounts you owe for past-due child support, your unpaid tax. You will not have to pay the
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Page 22 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Form 8275 –R, Regulation Disclosure Joint return.The fraud penalty on a joint transfers) to you an interest in a tax shelter must
Statement, to disclose items or positions con- give you the tax shelter registration number orreturn does not apply to a spouse unless some
trary to regulations. be subject to a $100 penalty. If you claim anypart of the underpayment is due to the fraud of
deduction, credit, or other tax benefit because ofthat spouse.Reasonable cause. You will not have to the tax shelter, you must attach  Form 8271,pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea- Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter Registrationsonable cause) for the way you treated an item.Failure to supply social security number.If Number, to your return to report this number.You must also show that you acted in good faith.you do not include your social security numberYou will have to pay a penalty of $250 for each
(SSN) or the SSN of another person where re-Frivolous return.You may have to pay a pen- failure to report a tax shelter registration number
quired on a return, statement, or other docu-alty of $500 if you file a frivolous return. A frivo- on your return. The penalty can be excused if
ment, you will be subject to a penalty of $50 forlous return is one that does not include enough you have a reasonable cause for not reporting
each failure. You will also be subject to a penaltyinformation to figure the correct tax or that con- the number.
of $50 if you do not give your SSN to anothertains information clearly showing that the tax
person when it is required on a return, state-you reported is substantially incorrect.
ment, or other document.You will have to pay the penalty if you filed Criminal Penalties
this kind of return because of a frivolous positionFor example, if you have a bank account thatYou may be subject to criminal prosecutionon your part or a desire to delay or interfere withearns interest, you must give your SSN to the(brought to trial) for actions such as:the administration of federal income tax laws.bank. The number must be shown on the FormThis includes altering or striking out the1099–INT or other statement the bank sends1) Tax evasion,preprinted language above the space providedyou. If you do not give the bank your SSN, youfor your signature. 2) Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also mayThis penalty is added to any other penalty mation, or pay any tax due,be subject to “backup” withholding of incomeprovided by law. tax. See chapter 5.) 3) Fraud and false statements, orThe penalty must be paid in full upon notice
You will not have to pay the penalty if you areand demand from IRS even if you protest the 4) Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.
able to show that the failure was due to reasona-penalty.
ble cause and not willful neglect.Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on
your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the
Failure to furnish tax shelter registrationunderpayment due to fraud will be added to your
number. A person who sells (or otherwisetax.
Page 20 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 23 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each other in the next tax year, you and your
spouse must file as married individuals. Single
Annulled marriages. If you obtain a court2. Your filing status is single if, on the last day ofdecree of annulment, which holds that no valid
the year, you are unmarried or legally separatedmarriage ever existed, you are considered un-
from your spouse under a divorce or separatemarried even if you filed joint returns for earlier
maintenance decree, and you do not qualify foryears. You must file amended returns (FormFiling Status another filing status. To determine your marital1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
status on the last day of the year, see MaritalReturn) claiming single or head of household
Status, earlier.status for all tax years affected by the annulment
Your filing status may be single if you wereIntroduction that are not closed by the statute of limitations
widowed before January 1, 2001, and did notfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitationsThis chapter discusses which filing status you remarry in 2001. However, you might be able togenerally does not expire until 3 years after yourshould use. There are five filing statuses. They use another filing status that will give you a loweroriginal return was filed.are: tax. See Head of Household and Qualifying
Head of household or qualifying widow(er)Widow(er) With Dependent Child to see if you• Single, with dependent child.If you are consideredqualify.• Married Filing Jointly, unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a• Married Filing Separately, How to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if you
dependent child. See Head of Household and have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,• Head of Household, and Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to and meet other requirements), Form 1040A, or
see if you qualify.• Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form
Child. 1040, show your filing status as single by check-
Married persons. If you are considered mar-ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of
ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canthe Tax Table or Schedule X of the Tax RateIf more than one filing status applies to Schedules to figure your tax.file a joint return, or you can file separate re-you, choose the one that will give youturns.the lowest tax.
TIP
Considered married. You are consideredYou use your filing status in determining yourmarried for the whole year if on the last day offiling requirements (chapter 1), standard deduc- Married Filing Jointlyyour tax year you and your spouse meet any onetion (chapter 21), and correct tax (chapter 31).of the following tests.You also use your filing status in determining You can choose married filing jointly as yourwhether you are eligible to claim certain deduc- filing status if you are married and both you and1) You are married and living together astions and credits. your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a jointhusband and wife.
return, you report your combined income and2) You are living together in a common lawUseful Items deduct your combined allowable expenses.marriage that is recognized in the stateYou may want to see: If you and your spouse decide to file a jointwhere you now live or in the state wherereturn, your tax may be lower than your com-the common law marriage began.Publication bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your
standard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-3) You are married and living apart, but not❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for taxlegally separated under a decree of di-and Filing Information benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.vorce or separate maintenance.
❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens You can file a joint return even if one of you had4) You are separated under an interlocutoryno income or deductions.❏ 555 Community Property (not final) decree of divorce. For purposes
If you and your spouse each have in-of filing a joint return, you are not consid-
come, you may want to figure your taxered divorced.
both on a joint return and on separate
TIP
returns (using the filing status of married filingSpouse died. If your spouse died during the
separately). Choose the method that gives theMarital Status year, you are considered married for the whole
two of you the lower combined tax.year for filing status purposes.In general, your filing status depends on If you did not remarry before the end of thewhether you are considered unmarried or mar-tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfHow to file.If you file as married filing jointly,ried. A marriage means only a legal union be-and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youtween a man and a woman as husband and have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,years, you may be entitled to the special benefitswife. and meet other requirements, you can file Formdescribed later under Qualifying Widow(er) With
1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Dependent Child.Unmarried persons. You are considered un-
show this filing status by checking the box onIf you remarried before the end of the taxmarried for the whole year if, on the last day of
line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theyear, you can file a joint return with your newyour tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-
Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax Raterated from your spouse under a divorce or aspouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status isSchedules to figure your tax.separate maintenance decree. State law gov-married filing separately for that year.
erns whether you are married or legally sepa-Married persons living apart.If you liveSpouse died during the year.If your spouserated under a divorce or separate maintenanceapart from your spouse and meet certain tests,died during the year, you are considered mar-decree. you may be considered unmarried. If this ap-ried for the whole year and can choose married
Divorced persons. If you are divorced plies to you, you can file as head of householdfiling jointly as your filing status. See Spouse
under a final decree by the last day of the year,even though you are not divorced or legallydied, earlier, for more information.
you are considered unmarried for the wholeseparated. If you qualify to file as head of house-
year. hold instead of as married filing separately, yourDivorced persons. If you are divorced under
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxa final decree by the last day of the year, you areDivorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
may be lower, and you may be able to claim theconsidered unmarried for the whole year anddivorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
you cannot choose married filing jointly as yourearned income credit. See Head of Household,tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
filing status.later.time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Signing as guardian of spouse.If you arewould on a joint return because the tax rate isFiling a Joint Return the guardian of your spouse who is mentallyhigher for married persons filing separately.
incompetent, you can sign the return for yourBoth you and your spouse must include all ofspouse as guardian. How to file.If you file a separate return, youyour income, exemptions, and deductions on
generally report only your own income, exemp-your joint return. Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse is
tions, credits, and deductions. You can claim anunable to sign the return because he or she is
exemption for your spouse if your spouse had noAccounting period.Both of you must use theserving in a combat zone, such as the Persian
gross income and was not a dependent of an-same accounting period, but you can use differ-Gulf Area or Yugoslavia, or a qualified hazard-
other person. However, if your spouse had anyent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-ous duty area (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croa-
gross income, or was the dependent of some-ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1. tia, and Macedonia), and you do not have a
one else, you cannot claim an exemption for himpower of attorney or other statement, you can
or her on your separate return.sign for your spouse. Attach a signed statementJoint responsibility.Both of you may be held If you file as married filing separately, youto your return that explains that your spouse isresponsible, jointly and individually, for the tax can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisserving in a combat zone. For more informationand any interest or penalty due on your joint filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofon special tax rules for persons who are servingreturn. One spouse may be held responsible for either form. You must also write your spouse’sin a combat zone, get Publication 3, Armedall the tax due even if all the income was earned social security number and full name in theForces’ Tax Guide.by the other spouse. spaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-
Other reasons spouse cannot sign. IfDivorced taxpayer.You may be held jointly rately column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–2
your spouse cannot sign the joint return for anyand individually responsible for any tax, interest, of the Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax.
other reason, you can sign for your spouse onlyand penalties due on a joint return filed before
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legalyour divorce. This responsibility may apply even Special Rulesdocument giving you permission to act for yourif your divorce decree states that your former
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copyspouse will be responsible for any amounts due Special rules apply if your filing status is marriedof it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848,on previously filed joint returns. filing separately.Power of Attorney and Declaration of Represen-Relief from joint liability.In some cases, tative. Community property states.If you live in Ari-one spouse may be relieved of joint liability for zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,tax, interest, and penalties on a joint return forNonresident alien or dual-status alien.A New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsinitems of the other spouse that were incorrectlyjoint return generally cannot be filed if eitherand file separately, your income may be consid-reported on the joint return. You can ask forspouse is a nonresident alien at any time duringered separate income or community income forrelief no matter how small the liability.the tax year. However, if one spouse was aincome tax purposes. See Publication 555.There are three types of relief available.nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was
Deductions, credits, and certain income.Ifmarried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies to all your filing status is married filing separately:the year, the spouses can choose to file a jointjoint filers. return. If you do file a joint return, you and your
1) You should itemize deductions if yourspouse are both treated as U.S. residents for the2) Separation of liability, which applies to joint spouse itemizes deductions, because youentire tax year. For information on this choice,filers who are divorced, widowed, legally cannot claim the standard deduction.see chapter 1 of Publication 519.separated, or have not lived together for
the past 12 months. 2) You cannot deduct interest paid on a quali-
fied student loan.3) Equitable relief, which applies to all joint
filers who do not qualify for innocent 3) You cannot take the credit for child and
Married Filingspouse relief or separation of liability and dependent care expenses in most in-
to married couples filing separate returns stances, and the amount that you can ex-
Separatelyin community property states. clude from income under an employer’s
dependent care assistance program is lim-You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-You can choose married filing separately as ited to $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if youcent Spouse Relief, to request any of theseyour filing status if you are married. This methodfiled a joint return).kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouse may benefit you if you want to be responsibleRelief, explains these kinds of relief and who 4) You cannot take the earned income credit.only for your own tax or if this method results inmay qualify for them. less tax than a joint return. If you and your5) You cannot exclude any interest income
spouse do not agree to file a joint return, youfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds that youSigning a joint return.For a return to be may have to use this filing status. used for higher education expenses.considered a joint return, both husband and wifeIf you live apart from your spouse and meetmust generally sign the return. If your spouse 6) You cannot take the credit for the elderlycertain tests, you may be considered unmar-died before signing the return, see Signing the or the disabled unless you lived apart fromried and may be able to file as head of house-return in chapter 4. your spouse for the entire year.hold. This can apply to you even if you are not
Spouse away from home. If your spouse is divorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file7) You cannot take the education credits (the
away from home, you should prepare the return, as head of household, instead of as marriedHope credit and the lifetime learning
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that filing separately, your tax may be lower, you maycredit).
it can be filed on time. be able to claim the earned income credit and 8) You cannot take the exclusion or credit forcertain other credits, and your standard deduc-Injury or disease prevents signing.If your adoption expenses in most instances.tion will be higher. The head of household filingspouse cannot sign because of disease or injurystatus allows you to choose the standard deduc- 9) You will become subject to the limit on theand tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’s tion even if your spouse chooses to itemize child tax credit, the limit on itemized de-name in the proper space on the return followeddeductions. See Head of Household, later, for ductions, and the phaseout of the deduc-by the words “By (your name), Husband (or more information. tion for personal exemptions at incomeWife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro- levels that are half of those for a joint re-vided for your signature. Attach a dated state- Unless you are required to file sepa-turn.ment, signed by you, to the return. The rately, you should figure your tax both
statement should include the form number of the ways (on a joint return and on separate10) You may have to include in income more
TIP
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonreturns). This way you can make sure you areof your social security benefits (or
your spouse cannot sign, and a statement thatusing the method that results in the lowest com-equivalent railroad retirement benefits)
your spouse has agreed to your signing for himbined tax. However, you will generally pay morethan you would on a joint return. For infor-
or her. combined tax on separate returns than you mation on social security and railroad re-
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2–1. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
You can claim an exemption for him or A qualifying person.Parent, Grandparent, Brother,
her2Sister, Stepbrother, Stepsister,
Stepmother, Stepfather,
Mother-in-law, Father-in-law, Half
brother, Half sister, Brother-in-law,You cannot claim an exemption for him orNOT  a qualifying person.Sister-in-law, Son-in-law, or herDaughter-in-law
He or she is related to you by blood and A qualifying person.Uncle, Aunt, Nephew, or Niece
you can claim an exemption for him or
her
2, 3
He or she is not related to you by blood3 NOT  a qualifying person.
You cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
He or she is single A qualifying person. 4Child, Grandchild, Stepchild, or
Adopted child He or she is married, and you can claim A qualifying person
an exemption for him or her2
He or she is married, and you cannotNOT  a qualifying person.5
claim an exemption for him or her
The child lived with you all year, and you A qualifying person.Foster child6
can claim an exemption for him or her2
The child lived with you all year, and youNOT  a qualifying person.
cannot claim an exemption for him or her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying person.
See Multiple Support Agreement.
3You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by blood to a
nephew or niece if he or she is the child or your brother or sister.
4This child is a qualifying person even if you cannot claim an exemption for the child.
5This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child’s other parent claims the exemption
under the special rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Divorced or Separated Parents in chapter 3.
6The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents in chapter 3.
tirement benefits, see Publication 915, produced a loss, you generally can deduct theSeparate Returns After
Social Security and Equivalent Railroadloss from your nonpassive income, up to Joint ReturnRetirement Benefits. $25,000. This is called a special allowance.
Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseHowever, married persons filing separate re-11) You cannot roll over amounts from a tradi- to file separate returns for that year after the dueturns who lived together at any time during thetional IRA into a Roth IRA during the year, date of the return.year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-unless you did not live with your spouse at
ried persons filing separate returns who livedany time during the year.
Exception. A personal representative for aapart at all times during the year are each al-12) Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 decedent can change from a joint return electedlowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance(instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re- by the surviving spouse to a separate return forfor losses from passive real estate activities.turn). the decedent. The personal representative hasSee Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 10.
1 year from the due date of the return to make
the change. See chapter 4 for more informationIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
on filing a return for a decedent.You may not be able to deduct all or part of yourJoint Return After
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yourSeparate Returnsspouse were covered by an employee retire-
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-You can change your filing status by filing an
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income isamended return using Form 1040X. Head of Householdmore than a certain amount. This amount is If you or your spouse (or both of you) file alower for married individuals who file separately You may be able to file as head of household ifseparate return, you generally can change to aand lived together at any time during the year. you meet all of the following requirements.joint return any time within 3 years from the dueFor more information, see How Much Can I
date of the separate return or returns. This doesDeduct? in Publication 590, Individual Retire- 1) You are unmarried or considered unmar-not include any extensions. A separate returnment Arrangements (IRAs). ried on the last day of the year.includes a return filed by you or your spouse
claiming married filing separately, single, or2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-Rental activity losses.If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that head of household filing status. ing up a home for the year.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) A qualifying person lived with you in theNonresident alien spouse.You are consid- Qualifying Personhome for more than half the year (exceptered unmarried for head of household purposes
for temporary absences, such as school).if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anySee Table 2–1 to see who is a qualifying per-However, your dependent parent does nottime during the year and you do not choose toson.have to live with you. See Special rule fortreat your nonresident spouse as a residentAny person not described in Table 2–1 is notparent, later, under Qualifying Person. A a qualifying person.alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingfoster child must live with you all year.person for head of household purposes. You
Home of qualifying person.Generally, themust have another qualifying person and meetIf you qualify to file as head of house- qualifying person must live with you for morethe other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofhold, your tax rate usually will be lower than half of the year.household.than the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
Special rule for parent.You may be eligi-ing separately. You will also receive a higherEarned income credit.Even if you are con-ble to file as head of household even if thestandard deduction than if you file as single orsidered unmarried for head of household pur-parent for whom you can claim an exemptionmarried filing separately. poses because you are married to a nonresidentdoes not live with you. You must pay more thanalien, you are still considered married for pur-half the cost of keeping up a home that was theKidnapped children.A child may qualify youposes of the earned income credit (unless youmain home for the entire year for your father orto file as head of household, even if the child hasmeet the five tests listed earlier). You are notmother. You are keeping up a main home forbeen kidnapped. For more information, seeentitled to the credit unless you file a joint returnyour father or mother if you pay more than halfPublication 501. with your spouse and meet other qualifications.the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
home for the elderly.See Publication 596, Earned Income Credit, forHow to file.If you file as head of household,
more information.you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040. Temporary absences. You and your quali-
Indicate your choice of this filing status by fying person are considered to live togetherChoice to treat spouse as resident.You
checking the box on line 4 of either form. Use the even if one or both of you are temporarily absentare considered married if you choose to treatHead of a household column of the Tax Table or from your home due to special circumstancesyour spouse as a resident alien.Schedule Z of the Tax Rate Schedules to figure such as illness, education, business, vacation,
your tax. or military service. It must be reasonable to
Keeping Up a Home assume that the absent person will return to the
household after the temporary absence. YouConsidered Unmarried To qualify for head of household status, youmust continue to keep up the home during themust pay more than half of the cost of keepingabsence.You are considered unmarried on the last day ofup a home for the year. You can determinethe year if you are legally separated from your Death or birth.You may be eligible to file aswhether you paid more than half of the cost ofspouse, according to your state law, under a head of household if the individual who qualifieskeeping up a home by using the Cost of Keepingdivorce or separate maintenance decree. you for this filing status is born or dies during theUp a Home worksheet, shown later.You are also considered unmarried on the year. You must have provided more than half oflast day of the tax year if you meet all of the the cost of keeping up a home that was thefollowing tests. individual’s main home for more than half theCosts you include.Include in the cost of up-
year or, if less, the period during which thekeep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,1) You file a separate return. individual lived.real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-
2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.ing up your home for the tax year. Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in3) Your spouse did not live in your home dur-Costs you do not include.Do not include inan apartment by herself. She died on Septem-ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Yourthe cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentspouse is considered to live in your homeeducation, medical treatment, vacations, life in-for the year until her death was $6,000. You paideven if he or she is temporarily absent duesurance, or transportation. Also, do not include$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Yourto special circumstances. See Temporary brother made no other payments toward yourthe rental value of a home you own or the valueabsences, later. mother’s support. Your mother had no income.of your services or those of a member of your
4) Your home was the main home of your Because you paid more than half the cost ofhousehold.
child, stepchild, or adopted child for more keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu-
than half the year or was the main home of ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an
your foster child for the entire year. (See exemption for her, you can file as a head ofCost of Keeping Up a HomeHome of qualifying person, later, for rules household.
applying to a child’s birth, death, or tempo- Amountrary absence during the year.) You Total
5) You must be able for to claim an exemp- Paid Cost
tion for the child. However, you can still Qualifying Widow(er)Property taxes $ $meet this test if you cannot claim the ex-Mortgage interest expenseemption only because the noncustodial With Dependent ChildRentparent is allowed to claim the exemptionUtility charges If your spouse died in 2001, you can use marriedfor the child. See Exception under Support Upkeep and repairs filing jointly as your filing status for 2001 if youTest for Child of Divorced or SeparatedProperty insurance
otherwise qualify to use that status. The year ofParents in chapter 3 for situations whereFood consumed on the
death is the last year for which you can file jointlythe noncustodial parent is allowed to claimpremises
with your deceased spouse. See Married Filingthe exemption for the child. Other household expenses
Jointly, earlier.Totals $ $The general rules for claiming an exemption You may be eligible to use qualifying(for a dependent are explained in chapter 3. widow(er) with dependent child as your filingMinus total amount you paid )
Amount others paid $If you were considered married for part status for 2 years following the year of death of
of the year and lived in a community your spouse. For example, if your spouse died in
If the total amount you paid is more than theproperty state (listed earlier under Mar- 2000, and you have not remarried, you may beCAUTION
!
amount others paid, you meet the requirementried Filing Separately), special rules may apply able to use this filing status for 2001 and 2002.
of paying more than half the cost of keeping upin determining your income and expenses. See This filing status entitles you to use joint
the home.Publication 555 for more information. return tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 27 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tion amount (if you do not itemize deductions). 2) You did not remarry before the end ofExample.  John Reed’s wife died in 1999.
This status does not entitle you to file a joint 2001. John has not remarried. During 2000 and 2001,
return. he continued to keep up a home for himself and3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted child,his child (for whom he can claim an exemption).How to file.If you file as qualifying widow(er) or foster child for whom you can claim anFor 1999 he was entitled to file a joint return forwith dependent child, you can use either Form exemption. himself and his deceased wife. For 2000 and1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status4) You paid more than half the cost of keep-2001 he can file as qualifying widower with aby checking the box on line 5 of either form.ing up a home that is the main home fordependent child. After 2001 he can file as headWrite the year your spouse died in the spaceyou and that child for the entire year, ex-of household if he qualifies.provided on line 5. Use the Married filing jointlycept for temporary absences. See Tempo-column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–1 of the Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as arary absences and Keeping Up a Home,Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax. qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if thediscussed earlier under Head of House- child who qualifies you for this filing status isEligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourhold. born or dies during the year. You must have2001 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de- provided more than half of the cost of keeping upAs mentioned earlier, this filing statuspendent child if you meet all of the following a home that was the child’s main home duringis only available for 2 years followingtests. the entire part of the year he or she was alive.the year of death of your spouse.
CAUTION
!
1) You were entitled to file a joint return with
your spouse for the year your spouse died.
It does not matter whether you actually
filed a joint return.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 25

Page 28 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your adjusted gross income is moreexemption under the rules just explained under
than $99,725, see Phaseout of Exemp- Joint return and Separate return.
tions, later. If you remarried during the year, you cannotCAUTION
!
3. take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross
income and you remarry in the year your spouseUseful Items
died, you can be claimed as an exemption onYou may want to see:
Personal both the final separate return of your deceased
spouse and the separate return of your newPublication
spouse for that year. If you file a joint return withExemptions and ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, your new spouse, you can be claimed as anand Filing Information exemption only on that return.
Dependents Form (and Instructions) Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
tained a final decree of divorce or separate❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration maintenance by the end of the year, you cannot
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption fortake your former spouse’s exemption. This ruleImportant Changes Child of Divorced or Separated applies even if you provided all of your former
Parents spouse’s support.Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
Exemptions for$2,800 in 2000 to $2,900 in 2001.
DependentsExemption phaseout. You will lose all or partExemptions
of the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted You are allowed one exemption for each person
gross income is above a certain amount. The you can claim as a dependent. To claim theThere are two types of exemptions: personal
amount at which this phaseout begins depends exemption for a dependent, you must meet allexemptions and exemptions for dependents.
on your filing status. For 2001, the phaseout five of the dependency tests, discussed later.While these are both worth the same amount,
begins at $99,725 for married persons filing sep- You can claim an exemption for your dependentdifferent rules apply to each type.
arately, $132,950 for unmarried individuals, even if your dependent files a return. But that
$166,200 for heads of household, and $199,450 dependent cannot claim his or her own personalPersonal Exemptions exemption if you are entitled to do so. However,for married persons filing jointly. See Phaseout
see Joint Return Test, later in this chapter.of Exemptions, later. You are generally allowed one exemption for
yourself and, if you are married, one exemptionKidnapped children. You may be eligible to
for your spouse. These are called personal ex-claim the exemption for a child, even if the child
emptions. has been kidnapped. For more information, see
Publication 501.Introduction
This chapter discusses exemptions. The follow- Child born alive.If your child was born aliveYour Own Exemption
during the year, and the dependency tests areing topics will be explained.
met, you can claim the exemption. This is trueYou can take one exemption for yourself unless• Personal exemptions —  You generally even if the child lived only for a moment. State oryou can be claimed as a dependent by anothercan take one for yourself and, if you are local law must treat the child as having beentaxpayer.
married, one for your spouse. born alive. There must be proof of a live birth
Single persons.If another taxpayer is entitledshown by an official document, such as a birth• Exemptions for dependents —  You must to claim you as a dependent, you cannot take ancertificate.meet five exemption tests for each exemp-exemption for yourself. This is true even if thetion you claim. If you are entitled to claim Stillborn child.You cannot claim an exemp-other taxpayer does not actually claim your ex-an exemption for a dependent, that depen- tion for a stillborn child.emption.dent cannot claim a personal exemption
Death of dependent. If your dependent diedon his or her own tax return. Married persons. If you file a joint return, youduring the year and otherwise met the depen-can take your own exemption. If you file a sepa-• Phaseout of exemptions —  You get less dency tests, you can claim the exemption forrate return, you can take your own exemptionof a deduction when your adjusted gross your dependent.only if another taxpayer is not entitled to claimincome goes above a certain amount. you as a dependent. Example. Your dependent mother died on• Social security number (SSN) requirement January 15. The five dependency tests are met.for dependents —  You must list the social You can claim the exemption for her on yourYour Spouse’s Exemptionsecurity number of any dependent for return.whom you claim an exemption.
Your spouse is never considered your depen-Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If thesedent. You may be able to take one exemption forExemptions reduce your taxable income. people work for you, you cannot claim exemp-your spouse only because you are married.Generally, you can deduct $2,900 for each ex- tions for them.
emption you claim in 2001. How you claim anJoint return.On a joint return you can claimChild tax credit.You may be entitled to a childexemption on your tax return depends on whichone exemption for yourself and one for yourtax credit for each of your qualifying children forform you file. spouse. whom you can claim an exemption. For more
If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemption information, see chapter 35.Separate return.If you file a separate return,amount is combined with the standard deduction
you can claim the exemption for your spouseDependency tests. The following five testsamount and entered on line 5.
only if your spouse had no gross income and must be met for you to claim an exemption for aIf you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, followwas not the dependent of another taxpayer. This dependent.the instructions for the form. The total number ofis true even if the other taxpayer does not actu-exemptions you can claim is the total in the box 1) Member of Household or Relationshipally claim your spouse’s exemption. This is alsoon line 6d. Also complete line 24 (Form 1040A) Test.true if your spouse is a nonresident alien.or line 38 (Form 1040) by multiplying the total 2) Citizen or Resident Test.number of exemptions shown in the box on lineDeath of spouse. If your spouse died during
6d by $2,900. the year, you can generally claim your spouse’s 3) Joint Return Test.
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4) Gross Income Test. adoption by an authorized placement agency. Example. You supported your daughter for
Also, the child must have been a member of the entire year while her husband was in the5) Support Test. your household. An authorized placement Armed Forces. The couple files a joint return.
agency includes any person authorized by state Even though all the other tests are met, you
law to place children for legal adoption. cannot take an exemption for your daughter.
Member of Household If the child was not placed with you by an
Exception. The joint return test does not applyor Relationship Test authorized agency, the child will meet this test
if a joint return is filed by the dependent and hisonly if he or she was a member of your house-
or her spouse merely as a claim for refund andTo meet this test, a person must either: hold for your entire tax year.
no tax liability would exist for either spouse on
1) Live with you for the entire year as a mem-Foster child.A foster child must live with youseparate returns.
ber of your household, or as a member of your household for the entire
year to qualify as your dependent. Example. Your son and his wife each had2) Be related to you in one of the ways listed
less than $2,000 of wages and no unearnedlater under Relatives who do not have toCousin. You can claim an exemption for yourincome. Neither is required to file a tax return.live with you. cousin only if he or she lives with you as aTaxes were taken out of their pay, so they file amember of your household for the entire year. AIf at any time during the year the person was joint return to get a refund. You are allowed tocousin is a descendant of a brother or sister ofyour spouse, that person cannot be your depen- take exemptions for your son andyour father or mother.dent. However, see Personal Exemptions, ear- daughter-in-law if the other dependency tests
lier. are met.Joint return.If you file a joint return, you do
not need to show that a person is related to bothTemporary absences. A person lives with
you and your spouse. You also do not need toyou as a member of your household even if Gross Income Test
show that a person is related to the spouse whoeither (or both) of you are temporarily absent
provides support.due to special circumstances. Temporary ab- Generally, you cannot take an exemption for a
For example, your spouse’s uncle who re-sences due to special circumstances include dependent if that person had gross income of
ceives more than half his support from you mayabsences because of illness, education, busi- $2,900 or more for 2001. This test does not
be your dependent, even though he does notness, vacation, or military service. apply if the person is your child and is either:
live with you. However, if you and your spouseIf the person is placed in a nursing home for
1) Under age 19 at the end of the year, orfile separate returns, your spouse’s uncle canan indefinite period of time to receive constant
be your dependent only if he is a member of yourmedical care, the absence is considered tempo- 2) A student under age 24 at the end of the
household and lives with you for your entire taxrary. year.
year.Death or birth.A person who died during the The exceptions for children under age 19 and
year, but was a member of your household until students under age 24 are discussed in detail
Citizen or Resident Testdeath, will meet the member of household test. later.
The same is true for a child who was born during If you file on a fiscal year basis, the grossTo meet the citizen or resident test, a personthe year and was a member of your household income test applies to the calendar year in whichmust be a U.S. citizen or resident, or a residentfor the rest of the year. The test is also met if a your fiscal year begins.of Canada or Mexico, for some part of the calen-child would have been a member except for any
dar year in which your tax year begins. Gross income defined.All income in the formrequired hospital stay following birth.
of money, property, and services that is notChildren’s place of residence.Children usu-Local law violated.A person does not meet exempt from tax is gross income.ally are citizens or residents of the country ofthe member of household test if at any time In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-their parents.during your tax year the relationship between ing business, gross income is the total net salesIf you were a U.S. citizen when your childyou and that person violates local law. minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al-neous income from the business.Relatives who do not have to live with you.though the other parent was a nonresident alienGross receipts from rental property are grossA person related to you in any of the followingand the child was born in a foreign country. If so,income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., toways does not have to live with you for the entireand the other dependency tests are met, youdetermine the gross income from rental prop-year as a member of your household to meetcan take the exemption. It does not matter if theerty.this test. child lives abroad with the nonresident alienGross income includes a partner’s share ofparent.• Your child, grandchild, great grandchild, the gross, not a share of the net, partnershipIf you are a U.S. citizen who has legallyetc. (a legally adopted child is considered income.adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen oryour child). Gross income also includes all unemploy-resident, and the other dependency tests arement compensation and certain scholarship and• Your stepchild. met, you can take the exemption if your home isfellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-the child’s main home and the child is a member• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,of your household for your entire tax year.ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. supplies, books, and equipment required for
particular courses are not included in gross in-• Your parent, grandparent, or other directForeign students’ place of residence.For-
come. For more information, see chapter 13.ancestor, but not foster parent. eign students brought to this country under a
Tax-exempt income, such as certain socialqualified international education exchange pro-• Your stepfather or stepmother. security payments, is not included in gross in-gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
come.• A brother or sister of your father orporary period generally are not U.S. residents
mother. and do not meet the citizen or resident test. YouDisabled dependents. For this gross in-cannot claim exemptions for them. However, ifcome test, gross income does not include in-• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.you provided a home for a foreign student, youcome received by a permanently and totally• Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, may be able to take a charitable contributiondisabled individual for services performed at ason-in-law, daughter-in-law, deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Liv-sheltered workshop. The availability of medicalbrother-in-law, or sister-in-law. ing With You in chapter 26. care must be the main reason the individual is at
Any of these relationships that were established the workshop. Also, the income must come
by marriage are not ended by death or divorce. solely from activities at the workshop that are
Joint Return Test
incident to this medical care. A sheltered work-
Adoption. Even if your adoption of a child is Even if the other dependency tests are met, you shop is a school operated by certain tax-exempt
not yet final, the child is considered to be your are generally not allowed an exemption for your organizations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,
child if he or she was placed with you for legal dependent if he or she files a joint return. a political subdivision of a state or possession,
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the United States, or the District of Columbia, allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-Support Test ance for quarters are both considered as pro-that provides special instruction or training de-
vided by you for support.signed to alleviate the disability of the individual.Generally, you must provide more than half of a
person’s total support during the calendar yearTax-exempt income. In figuring a person’sChild defined.For purposes of the gross in-to meet the support test. However, there aretotal support, include tax-exempt income, sav-come test, your child is your son, stepson,special rules that apply in the following two situa-ings, and borrowed amounts used to supportdaughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted child,tions. that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-or a child who was placed with you by an author- tain social security benefits, welfare benefits,1) Two or more persons provide support, butized placement agency for your legal adoption. nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedno one person provides more than half ofA foster child who was a member of your house- Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,a person’s total support. See Multiple Sup-hold for your entire tax year is also considered and tax-exempt interest.port Agreement, later.your child.
2) The person supported is the child of di-Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward
Child under age 19.If your child is under 19 atvorced or separated parents. See Support your mother’s support during the year. She has
the end of the year, the gross income test doesTest for Child of Divorced or Separatedearned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
Parents, later.not apply. Your child can have any amount of curity benefit payments of $4,800, and tax-ex-
income and you can still claim an exemption if empt interest of $200. She uses all these for herYou figure whether you have provided morethe other dependency tests, including the sup- support. You cannot claim an exemption for yourthan half of a person’s total support by compar-mother because the $4,000 you provide is notport test, are met. ing the amount you contributed to that person’s more than half of her total support of $9,600.support with the entire amount of support thatExample. Marie, 18, earned $3,000. Her fa-person received from all sources. This includesExample 2. Your daughter takes out a stu-ther provided more than half her support. Be-support the person provided from his or her owndent loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her col-cause Marie is under 19, the gross income testfunds. lege tuition. She is personally responsible for thedoes not apply. If the other dependency testsYou may find Table 3–1 helpful in figuringloan. You provide $2,000 toward her total sup-were met, Marie’s father can claim an exemptionwhether you provided more than half of a port. You cannot claim an exemption for yourfor her. person’s support. daughter because you provide less than half of
her support.Person’s own funds not used for support.Student under age 24.The gross income test
A person’s own funds are not support unlessdoes not apply if your child is a student who is Social security benefit payments.If athey are actually spent for support.under age 24 at the end of the calendar year. husband and wife each receive payments that
The other dependency tests must still be met. are paid by one check made out to both of them,Example. Your mother received $2,400 inhalf of the total paid is considered to be for theStudent defined.To qualify as a student,social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shesupport of each spouse, unless they can showyour child must be, during some part of each of 5paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.otherwise.calendar months during the calendar year (notEven though your mother received a total ofIf a child receives social security benefits andnecessarily consecutive): $2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-uses them toward his or her own support, theport. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-payments are considered as provided by the1) A full-time student at a school that has aport and no other support was received, youchild.regular teaching staff, course of study, andhave provided more than half of her support.
regularly enrolled body of students in at- Support provided by the state (foodChild’s wages used for own support. Youtendance, or stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits provided bycannot include in your contribution to yourthe state to a needy person generally are con-2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-child’s support any support that is paid for by thesidered to be used for support. However, pay-ing course given by a school described inchild with the child’s own wages, even if you paidments based on the needs of the recipient will(1) above or a state, county, or local gov-the wages. not be considered as used entirely for thaternment. person’s support if it is shown that part of theYear support is provided.The year you pro-
payments were not used for that purpose.vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifFull-time student defined.A full-time stu-
you do so with borrowed money that you repaydent is a person who is enrolled for the number Foster care payments and expenses.Pay-in a later year.of hours or courses the school considers to be ments you receive for the support of a fosterIf you use a fiscal year to report your income,full-time attendance. child from a child placement agency are consid-you must provide more than half of the ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,School defined.  The term “school” in- dependent’s support for the calendar year inpayments you receive for the support of a fostercludes elementary schools, junior and seniorwhich your fiscal year begins. child from a state or county are considered sup-high schools, colleges, universities, and techni- port provided by the state or county.Armed Forces dependency allotments.Thecal, trade, and mechanical schools. It does not If you are not in the trade or business ofpart of the allotment contributed by the govern-include on-the-job training courses, correspon- providing foster care to a child and your un-ment and the part taken out of your military paydence schools, and night schools. reimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in caring forare both considered provided by you in figuring
a foster child were mainly to benefit an organiza-whether you provide more than half of the sup-Example. James, 22, attends college as a tion qualified to receive deductible charitableport. If your allotment is used to support personsfull-time student. During the summer, James contributions, the expenses are deductible asother than those you name, you can take theearned $3,000. If the other dependency tests charitable contributions, but are not consideredexemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.are met, his parents can take the exemption for support you provided. For more informationJames. about the deduction for charitable contributions,Example. You are in the Armed Forces.
Vocational high school students.People see Publication 526. If your unreimbursed ex-You authorize an allotment for your widowed
penses are not deductible as charitable contri-who work on “co-op” jobs in private industry as amother that she uses to support herself and your
butions, they are considered support youpart of the school’s prescribed course of class-sister. If the allotment provides more than half of
provided.room and practical training are consideredtheir support, you can take an exemption for
If you are in the trade or business of provid-full-time students. each of them, if they otherwise qualify, even
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expensesthough you authorize the allotment only for yourNight school. Your child is not a full-time are not considered support provided by you.mother.student while attending school only at night.
However, full-time attendance at a school canTax-exempt military quarters allowances.Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
include some attendance at night as part of aThese allowances are treated the same way as advance payment to a home for the aged to take
full-time course of study. dependency allotments in figuring support. The care of your relative for life and the payment is
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3–1. Worksheet for Determining Support
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1) Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and
nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year $
2) Amount used for support $
3) Amount used for other purposes $
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at the end of the year $
(The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1) $
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
5) Lodging (Complete item a or b)
a) Rent paid $
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the home,
include the amount in line 19. $
6) Food $
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b) $
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b) $
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real estate
taxes, and insurance. $
10) Total household expenses (Add lines 5 through 9) $
11) Total number of persons who lived in household
Expenses for the Person You Supported
12) Each person’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11) $
13) Clothing $
14) Education $
15) Medical, dental $
16) Travel, recreation $
17) Other (specify)
$
18) Total cost of support for the year (Add lines 12 through 17) $
Did You Provide More Than Half?
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you supported
owned the home) $
20) Amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local, and
other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. $
21) Amount you provided for the person’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20) $
22) 50% of line 18 $
Is line 21 more than line 22?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other exemption tests are met, you may claim an exemption for
the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can
do so under a multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement in this chapter.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 3–A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship
Test.)
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $2,900 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child? (See Child defined.)
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24. )
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund  of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. Se e Disabled dependents.
based on that person’s life expectancy, the Generally, the amount of an item of support tion, and recreation. Your total food expense for
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-amount of support you provide each year is the the household is $6,000. Your heat and utility
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportlump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life bills amount to $1,200. Your mother has hospital
is the fair rental value of the lodging.expectancy. The amount of support you provide and medical expenses of $600, which you pay
also includes any other amounts that you pro- during the year. Figure your parents’ total sup-Expenses that are not directly related to any
vided during the year. port as follows:one member of a household, such as the cost of
food for the household, must be divided among
Support Provided Father Motherthe members of the household.
Total Support Fair rental value of lodging . . . $1,000 $1,000
Example. Your parents live with you, yourPension spent for their support 2,100 2,100To figure if you provided more than half of thespouse, and your two children in a house youShare of food (1/6 of $6,000) . . 1,000 1,000support of a person, you must first determine theown. The fair rental value of your parents’ share Medical expenses for mother . . 600
total support provided for that person. Total sup-of lodging is $2,000 a year, which includes fur-Parents’ total support $4,100 $4,700
port includes amounts spent to provide food,nishings and utilities. Your father receives a
You must apply the support test separatelylodging, clothing, education, medical and dentalnontaxable pension of $4,200, which he spends
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-equally between your mother and himself for
cessities. items of support such as clothing, transporta- lodging, $1,000 food) of your father ’s total sup-
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
port of $4,100 —  less than half. You provideExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawn 4) Funeral expenses.  
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is5) Scholarships received by your child if yourfood, $600 medical) —  more than half of her given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.child is a full-time student.total support of $4,700. You meet the support Because a lawn mower is ordinarily an item you
test for your mother, but not your father. Heat buy for personal and family reasons that bene- 6) Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational
and utility costs are included in the fair rental fits all members of the household, you cannotAssistance payments used for support of
value of the lodging, so these are not considered include the cost of the lawn mower in the supportthe child who receives them.
separately. of your child.
Lodging defined. Lodging is the fair rentalExample 2. You buy a $150 television setMultiple Support
value of the room, apartment, or house in whichas a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.Agreementthe person lives. It includes a reasonable allow-The television set is placed in your child’s bed-
ance for the use of furniture and appliances androom. You can include the cost of the televisionSometimes no one provides more than half offor heat and other utilities. set in the support of your child. the support of a person. Instead, two or more
persons, each of whom would be able to takeFair rental value defined.This is the Example 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andthe exemption but for the support test, togetheramount you could reasonably expect to receiveregister it in your name. You and your provide more than half of the person’s support.from a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-used in place of rent or taxes, interest, deprecia- When this happens, you can agree that anycause you own the car and do not give it to yourtion, paint, insurance, utilities, cost of furniture one of you who individually provides more thandaughter but merely let her use it, you cannotand appliances, etc. In some cases, fair rental 10% of the person’s support, but only one, caninclude the cost of the car in your daughter’svalue may be equal to the rent paid. claim an exemption for that person. Each of thetotal support. However, you can include in yourIf you provide the total lodging, the amount of others must sign a written statement agreeingdaughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensessupport you provide is the fair rental value of the not to claim the exemption for that year. Theof operating the car for her benefit.room the person uses, or a share of the fair statements must be filed with the income tax
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person return of the person who claims the exemption.Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, usinghas use of your entire home. If you do not pro- Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, canpersonal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value be used for this purpose.vide all the rest of your son’s support —  $4,000.must be divided depending on how much of theSince the car is bought and owned by your son,total lodging you provide. If you provide only a Example 1. You, your sister, and your twothe car’s fair market value ($4,500) must bepart and the person supplies the rest, the fair brothers provide the entire support of yourincluded in his support. The $4,000 support yourental value must be divided between both of mother for the year. You provide 45%, yourprovide is less than half of his total support ofyou according to the amount each provides. sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide$8,500. You cannot claim an exemption for your
10%. Either you or your sister can claim anson.Example. Your parents live rent free in a exemption for your mother. The other must sign
house you own. It has a fair rental value ofMedical insurance premiums.Medical insur-a Form 2120 or a similar statement agreeing not
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairance premiums you pay, including premiums forto take an exemption for her. Because neither
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800supplementary Medicare coverage, are in- brother provides more than 10% of the support,
for the furniture. This does not include heat andcluded in the support you provide. neither can take the exemption. Your brothers
utilities. The house is completely furnished with do not have to sign a Form 2120 or the writtenMedical insurance benefits.Medical in-furniture belonging to your parents. You pay statement.surance benefits, including basic and supple-$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usuallymentary Medicare benefits, are not part ofincluded in rent for houses in the area where Example 2. You and your brother each pro-support.your parents live. Therefore, you consider the vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 The remaining 60% of her support is providedTuition payments and allowances under the
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished equally by two persons who are not related toGI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under the
house, $1,800 allowance for furnishings pro- her. She does not live with them. Because moreGI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while
vided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) than half of her support is provided by personsthey attend school are included in total support.
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one
($3,600 + $600). can take the exemption.Example. During the year, your son re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the GIPerson living in his or her own home.The
Example 3. Your father lives with you andBill. He uses this amount for his education. Youtotal fair rental value of a person’s home that he
receives 25% of his support from social security,provide the rest of his support —  $2,000. Be-or she owns is considered support contributed
40% from you, 24% from his brother, and 11%cause GI benefits are included in total support,by that person.
your son is not your dependent. from a friend. Either you or your uncle can take
Living with someone rent free.If you live the exemption for your father. A Form 2120 or aOther support items. Other items may bewith a person rent free in his or her home, you similar statement from the one not taking theconsidered as support depending on the facts inmust reduce the amount you provide for support exemption must be attached to the return of theeach case. For example, if you pay someone toby the fair rental value of lodging he or she one who takes the exemption.provide child care or disabled dependent care,provides you.
you can include these payments as support,
Support Test forProperty. Property provided as support iseven if you claim a credit for them. For informa-
measured by its fair market value. Fair markettion on the credit, see chapter 33. Child of Divorced orvalue is the price that property would sell for on
Separated Parentsthe open market. It is the price that would be
agreed upon between a willing buyer and aDo Not Include in Total Support The support test for a child of divorced or sepa-willing seller, with neither being required to act,
rated parents is based on the special rules ex-The following items are not included in totaland both having reasonable knowledge of the
plained here and shown in Figure 3– B .support.relevant facts.
However, these special rules apply only if all of
Capital expenses. Capital items, such as 1) Federal, state, and local income taxes paidthe following are true.
furniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtby persons from their own income.
for a person during the year can be included in 1) The parents are divorced or legally sepa-2) Social security and Medicare taxes paid bytotal support under certain circumstances. rated under a decree of divorce or sepa-persons from their own income. rate maintenance, or separated under aThe following examples show when a capital
written separation agreement, or liveditem is or is not support. 3) Life insurance premiums.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
apart at all times during the last 6 months without regard to any condition, such asPaid in a later year.If you fail to pay child
of the calendar year. payment of support, or support in the year it is due, but pay it in a later
year, your payment of the overdue amount is not2) One or both parents provide more than 3) A decree or agreement executed beforeconsidered paid for the support of your child,half of the child’s total support for the cal-1985 provides that the noncustodial parenteither for the year the payment was due or forendar year. is entitled to the exemption, and he or shethe year it is paid. It is payment of an amount youprovides at least $600 for the child’s sup-3) One or both parents have custody of the owed to the custodial parent, but it is not consid-port during the year, unless the pre-1985child for more than half of the calendar ered paid by you for the support of your child.decree or agreement is modified afteryear. 1984 to specify that this provision will notExample. You owed but failed to pay child“Child” is defined earlier under Gross Income apply. support last year. This year, you pay all of theTest.
amount owed from last year and the full amountThis discussion does not apply if the supportNoncustodial parent. The noncustodial
due for this year. Your payment of this year’sof the child is determined under a multiple sup-parent is the parent who has custody of the child
child support counts as support for this year, butport agreement, discussed earlier. for the shorter part of the year or who does not
your payment of the amount owed from last yearhave custody at all.
General rule.The parent who has custody of does not count as support either for this year or
the child for the greater part of the year (the for last year.Example. Under the terms of your 1984 di-
custodial parent) is generally treated as thevorce decree, your former spouse has custody
parent who provides more than half of the child’s of your child. The decree specifically states thatThird-party support.Support provided by asupport. It does not matter whether the custodialyou are entitled to the exemption. You provide atthird party for a divorced or separated parent isparent actually provided more than half of theleast $600 in child support during the calendarnot included as support provided by that parent.support. year. You are considered to have provided moreHowever, see Remarried parent, later.than half of the child’s support.Custody. Custody is usually determined by
the terms of the most recent decree of divorce or Example. You are divorced. During the en-Written declaration.The custodial parentseparate maintenance, or a later custody de- tire year, you and your child live with yourmay use either Form 8332 or a similar state-cree. If there is no decree, use the written sepa- mother in a house she owns. The fair rentalment to make the written declaration to releaseration agreement. If neither a decree nor value of the lodging provided by your mother forthe exemption to the noncustodial parent. Theagreement establishes custody, then the parent your child is $3,000. The home provided by yournoncustodial parent must attach the form orwho has the physical custody of the child for the mother is not included in the amount of supportstatement to his or her tax return.greater part of the year is considered to have you provide.The exemption can be released for a singlecustody of the child. This also applies if the
year, for a number of specified years (for exam-validity of a decree or agreement awarding cus- Remarried parent.If you remarry, the sup-
ple, alternate years), or for all future years, astody is uncertain because of legal proceedings port provided by your new spouse is treated as
specified in the declaration. If the exemption ispending on the last day of the calendar year. provided by you.released for more than one year, the originalIf the parents are divorced or separated dur-
release must be attached to the return of theing the year and had joint custody of the child Example. You have two children from a for-
noncustodial parent for the first year of suchbefore the separation, the parent who has cus- mer marriage who live with you. You have re-
release, and a copy must be attached for eachtody for the greater part of the rest of the year is married and are living in a home owned by your
later year.considered to have custody of the child for the new spouse. The fair rental value of the home
tax year. provided to the children by your new spouse isDivorce decree or separation agreement.
treated as provided by you.If your divorce decree or separation agreementExample 1. Under the terms of your di-went into effect after 1984 and it states you canvorce, you have custody of your child for 10claim the child as your dependent without regardHome jointly owned. If you and your formermonths of the year. Your former spouse hasto any condition, such as payment of support,spouse have the right to use and live in thecustody for the other 2 months. You and youryou can attach a copy of the following pageshome, each of you is considered to provide halfformer spouse provide the child’s total support.from the decree or agreement instead of Formof your child’s lodging. However, if the divorceYou are considered to have provided more than8332. decree gives only you the right to use and live inhalf of the support of the child. However, see
the home, you are considered to provide yourException, later. 1) Cover page. (Write the other parent’s so- child’s entire lodging. It does not matter if thecial security number on this page.)Example 2. You and your former spouse legal title to the home remains in the names of
2) The page that states you can claim theprovided your child’s total support for 2001. For both parents.
child as your dependent.the first 8 months of the year, you had custody of
your child under your 1994 divorce decree (the3) Signature page with the other parent’s sig- Parents who never married. These specialmost recent decree at the time). On August 31,nature and the date of the agreement.rules for divorced or separated parents do not2001, a new custody decree granted custody to apply to parents who never married each other.your former spouse. Because you had custody If your divorce decree or separationIf this is your situation, you must provide morefor the greater part of the year, you are consid-agreement went into effect after 1984than half the support of your child or enter into aered to have provided more than half of your and it states that you can claim theCAUTION
!
multiple support agreement, as discussed ear-child’s support, unless the exception describedchild as your dependent if you meet certainlier, to satisfy the support test.next applies. conditions, you must attach to your return Form
8332 or a similar statement from the custodialExample. You never married the father ofException. The noncustodial parent will be parent releasing the exemption. your child and do not live with him, but he pro-treated as providing more than half of the child’s
vides the home you and your child live in. Thesupport if:
fair rental value of the lodging he provides toChild support.All child support payments ac-1) The custodial parent signs a written decla- your child is $3,000 a year. You provide the resttually received from the noncustodial parent areration that he or she will not claim the of your child’s support for the year, which isconsidered used for the support of the child.exemption for the child, and the noncus- $1,200. The special rules for a child of divorced
todial parent attaches this written declara- or separated parents do not apply because youExample. The noncustodial parent providestion to his or her return, and the child’s father never married. As a result,$1,200 for the child’s support. This amount is
you cannot claim an exemption for your childconsidered support provided by the noncus-2) A decree or agreement went into effect
because you did not provide more than half oftodial parent even if the $1,200 was actuallyafter 1984 and states the noncustodial par-
spent on things other than support. the child ’s support.ent can claim the child as a dependent
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 3–B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
after 1984 that
unconditionally entitles
the noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Start Here
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the child ’s
total support?
Is the child in the custody of
one or both parents for more
than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a Form 8332 or similar
statement releasing the
exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided over
half of the child ’s support meets
the support test.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent to
the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child ’s
support during the
year?
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
The custodial parent meets the
support test.
The noncustodial parent meets
the support test.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the
Form 1040A. child ’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enterPhaseout of “DIED ” in column (2) of line 6c of your FormIf you do not list the dependent’s SSN 1040 or Form 1040A.Exemptions when required or if you list an incorrect
SSN, the exemption may be disal- Taxpayer identification numbers for aliens.CAUTION
!
The amount you can claim as a deduction forlowed. If your dependent is a resident or nonresident
exemptions is phased out once your adjusted alien who does not have and is not eligible to get
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain level an SSN, the IRS will issue your dependent anNote. If your dependent does not have andfor your filing status. These levels are as follows: individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN)cannot get an SSN, you must list the individualinstead of an SSN. Write the number in columntaxpayer identification number (ITIN) or adop-AGI Level (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.tion taxpayer identification number (ATIN) in-Which To apply for an ITIN, use Form W –7, Applica-stead of an SSN. See Taxpayer identificationReduces tion for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identificationnumbers for aliens or Taxpayer identificationExemption Number.number for adoptees, later.Filing Status Amount It usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get an
No social security number.If a person forMarried filing separately..... $99,725 ITIN.
Single................. 132,950 whom you expect to claim an exemption on yourTaxpayer identification numbers forHead of household......... 166,200 return does not have an SSN, either you or thatadoptees. If you have a child who was placedMarried filing jointly........ 199,450 person should apply for an SSN as soon aswith you by an authorized placement agency,Qualifying widow(er)........ 199,450 possible by filing Form SS –5, Application for ayou may be able to claim an exemption for theSocial Security Card, with the Social SecurityIf your AGI exceeds the level for your filing child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or anAdministration (SSA). Information about apply-status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work- ITIN for the child, you must get an adoptioning for an SSN and Form SS–5 is available atsheet in the instructions for Form 1040 to figure taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for theyour local SSA office.the amount of your deduction for exemptions. child from the IRS. See Form W –7A, Applica-It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN.You must reduce the dollar amount of your tion for Taxpayer Identification Number forIf you do not have a required SSN by the filingexemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of Pending U.S. Adoptions, for details.due date, you can file Form 4868 for an exten-$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-sion of time to file.rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount
shown for your filing status. If your AGI exceedsBorn and died in 2001.If your child was
the amount shown by more than $122,500 born and died in 2001, and you do not have an
($61,250 if married filing separately), the
amount of your deduction for exemptions is re-
duced to zero.
Social Security
Numbers for
Dependents
You must list the social security number (SSN)
of any person for whom you claim an exemption
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return (Form 706). For information, see Form 4) Provide the payers of any interest and divi-
706 and its instructions. dends the name(s) and identification
number(s) of the new owner(s). (See Inter-
4. est and Dividend Income (Forms 1099),Useful Items
later.)You may want to see:
For more information on the duties and re-
Publication sponsibilities of the personal representative, seeDecedents Duties under Personal Representative in Publi-❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and cation 559.Administrators
Notifying the IRS.File a written notice (orImportant Changes Form (and Instructions) Form 56) with the IRS office where the returns
are filed for the person (or estate) for whom you❏ 56 Notice Concerning FiduciaryRollovers by surviving spouses.For distri- are acting. See the instructions for Form 56 forRelationshipbutions after 2001, an employee’s surviving more information.spouse who receives an eligible rollover distri-❏ 1310 Statement of Person Claiming
bution may roll it over into an eligible retirementRefund Due a Deceased Taxpayer
plan, including an IRA, a qualified plan, a section❏ 4810 Request for Prompt Assessment403(b) annuity, or a section 457 plan. For distri-Under Internal Revenue Code Final Returnbutions before 2002, surviving spouses could Section 6501(d)only roll the distribution over into an IRA.
for the Decedent
Assets held on January 1, 2001.If the estate
held certain assets on January 1, 2001, you can The same filing requirements that apply to indi-
treat the assets as being sold and reacquired on viduals determine if a final income tax returnPersonalthe same date. Any gain on the deemed sale must be filed for the decedent. Filing require-
must be recognized and included in income. ments are discussed in chapter 1.RepresentativeThis treatment allows future gains on those as-
sets to be taxed at a rate of 18% (instead of Filing to get a refund.A return should be filedA personal representative of an estate is an20%) if the asset is held by the estate for more to obtain a refund if tax was withheld from sala-executor, administrator, or anyone who is inthan 5 years from the reacquired date. For more ries, wages, pensions, or annuities, or if esti-charge of the decedent’s property.information, see the instructions for Schedule D mated tax was paid, even if a return is not
of Form 1041. required to be filed. See Claiming a refund, later.Executor. Generally, an executor (or execu-Also, the decedent may be entitled to other cred-trix) is named in a decedent’s will to administerEstate tax return.Generally, if the decedent its that result in a refund. See chapters 37 andthe estate (property and debts left by the dece-died during 2001, an estate tax return (Form 38 for additional information on refundable cred-dent) and distribute properties as the decedent706) must be filed if the gross estate is more its and see chapter 35 for information on thehas directed.than $675,000. If death occurs in 2002, Form child tax credit.706 must be filed if the gross estate is more than
Administrator.An administrator (or adminis-$1,000,000. Determining income and deductions. Thetratrix) is usually appointed by the court if no willmethod of accounting regularly used by the de-Estate tax repeal.The estate tax is repealedexists, if no executor was named in the will, or ifcedent before death generally determines whatfor decedents dying after 2009. the named executor cannot or will not serve.income you must include and what deductions
you can take on the final return. Generally, indi-Personal representative.In general, an ex-viduals use one of two methods of accounting:ecutor and an administrator perform the samecash or accrual.duties and have the same responsibilities. Be-Important Reminder Cash method. If the decedent used thecause a personal representative for a
cash method of accounting, include only thedecedent’s estate can be an executor, adminis-
Consistent treatment of estate items.Bene- items of income actually or constructively re-trator, or anyone in charge of the decedent’s
ficiaries must generally treat estate items the ceived before death and deduct only the ex-property, the term personal representative will
same way on their individual returns as they are penses the decedent paid before death. For anbe used throughout this chapter.
treated on the estate’s return. For more informa- exception for certain medical expenses not paidThe surviving spouse may or may not be thetion, see How and When To Report under Distri- before death, see Decedents in chapter 23.personal representative, depending on thebutions to Beneficiaries From an Estate in terms of the decedent’s will or the court appoint-Accrual method. If the decedent used anPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Ad-ment. accrual method of accounting, report only thoseministrators.
items of income that the decedent accrued, or
earned, before death. Deduct those expensesDuties
the decedent was liable for before death, re-
gardless of whether the expenses were paid.The primary duties of a personal representative
Introduction are to collect all of the decedent’s assets, pay Additional information.For more informa-
This chapter discusses the tax responsibilities ofthe creditors, and distribute the remaining as-tion on the cash and accrual methods, see Ac-
the person who is in charge of the propertysets to the heirs or other beneficiaries.counting Methods in chapter 1.
(estate) of an individual who has died (dece-The personal representative also must per-
dent). It also covers the following topics. Who must file the return?The personal rep-form the following duties.
resentative (defined earlier) must file the final• Filing the decedent’s final return. 1) Notify the IRS (as discussed below) that income tax return (Form 1040) of the decedent
• Tax effects on survivors. he or she is acting as the personal repre- for the year of death and any returns not filed for
sentative. preceding years. A surviving spouse, under cer-
This chapter does not discuss the require- tain circumstances, may have to file the returns2) File any income tax and estate tax returnments for filing an income tax return of an estate for the decedent. See Joint Return, later.when due. (See Final Return for the Dece-(Form 1041). For information on Form 1041, seedent, next.)Income Tax Return of an Estate— Form 1041 in Example. Samantha Smith died on March
Publication 559. This chapter also does not dis- 3) Pay any tax determined up to the date of 21, 2001, before filing her 2000 tax return. Her
cuss the requirements for filing an estate tax discharge from duties. personal representative must file her 2000 re-
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 35

Page 38 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
turn by April 16, 2001. Her final tax return is due curred. The final return for a decedent who wasEven if the executor is discharged from
April 15, 2002. a calendar year taxpayer is generally due April personal liability, the IRS still will be
15 following the year death occurred. However, able to assess tax deficiencies againstCAUTION
!
Filing the return.The word “DECEASED, ” when the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday,the executor to the extent that he or she still hasthe decedent’s name, and the date of deathor legal holiday, the due date is delayed until theany of the decedent’s property.should be written across the top of the tax return.next business day.In the name and address space, you should Generally, you must file the final income taxJoint return.Generally, the personal repre-write the name and address of the decedentreturn of the decedent with the Internal Revenuesentative and the surviving spouse can file aand, if a joint return, the surviving spouse. If aService Center for the place where you live. Ajoint return for the decedent and the survivingjoint return is not being filed, the decedent’s tax return for a decedent cannot be electroni-spouse. However, the surviving spouse alonename should be written in the name space andcally filed. can file the joint return if no personal representa-the personal representative’s name and ad-
tive has been appointed before the due date fordress should be written in the remaining space.Request for prompt assessment (charge) offiling the final joint return for the year of death.tax. The IRS ordinarily has 3 years from theThis also applies to the return for the precedingExample. John Stone died in early 2001. Hedate an income tax return is filed, or its due date,year if the decedent died after the close of thewas survived by his wife Jane. The top of theirwhichever is later, to charge any additional taxpreceding tax year and before the due date forfinal joint return on Form 1040, which includesthat is due. However, as a personal representa-filing that return. The income of the decedentthe required information, is illustrated on thetive, you may request a prompt assessment ofthat was includible on his or her return for thenext page. tax after the return has been filed. This reducesyear up to the date of death (as explained underthe time for making the assessment to 18Signing the return.If a personal representa- Determining income and deductions, earlier)months from the date the written request fortive has been appointed, that person must sign and the income of the surviving spouse for theprompt assessment was received. This requestthe return. If it is a joint return, the surviving entire year must be included in the final jointcan be made for any income tax return of thespouse must also sign it. return.decedent and for the income tax return of theIf no personal representative has been ap- A final joint return with the decedent cannotdecedent’s estate. This may permit a quickerpointed, the surviving spouse (on a joint return) be filed if the surviving spouse remarried beforesettlement of the tax liability of the estate and anshould sign the return and write in the signature the end of the year of the decedent’s death. Theearlier final distribution of the assets to the bene-area “Filing as surviving spouse.” See Joint re- filing status of the decedent in this instance isficiaries.turn, later. “married filing separate return.”If no personal representative has been ap-You can request prompt assessment of any
pointed and if there is no surviving spouse, theof the decedent’s taxes (other than federal es-Personal representative may revoke joint
person in charge of the decedent’s property tate taxes) for any years for which the statutoryreturn election.A court-appointed personal
must file and sign the return as “personal repre-period for assessment is open. This appliesrepresentative may revoke an election to file a
sentative.” even though the returns were filed before thejoint return that was previously made by the
decedent’s death. surviving spouse alone. This is done by filing a
Example. Assume in the previous example separate return for the decedent within one yearForm 4810. You can use Form 4810 tothat no personal representative has been ap- from the due date of the return (including anymake this request. It must be filed separatelypointed. The bottom of the final joint return, extensions). The joint return made by the surviv-from any other document. The request shouldwhich shows that Jane is filing the return as the ing spouse will then be regarded as the separatebe filed with the IRS office where the return wassurviving spouse, is illustrated on the next page. return of that spouse by excluding thefiled. If Form 4810 is not used, you must clearlydecedent’s items and refiguring the tax liability.Beginning with your tax return for 2001,indicate that you are making a request for
you can check the “Yes” box in the prompt assessment under section 6501(d) of
“Third Party Designee” area of your How To Reportthe Internal Revenue Code. You must identify
TIP
return to authorize the IRS to discuss your returnthe type of tax and the tax period for which theCertain Incomewith a friend, family member, or any other per-prompt assessment is requested.
son you choose. This allows the IRS to call the This section explains how to report certain typesFailure to report income.If you or the de-person you identified as your designee to an- of income on the final return. The rules on in-cedent failed to report substantial amounts ofswer any questions that may arise during the come discussed in the other chapters of thisgross income (more than 25% of the gross in-processing of your return. It also allows your publication also apply to a decedent’s final re-come reported on the return) or filed a false ordesignee to perform certain actions. See your turn. See chapters 6 through 17, if they apply.fraudulent return, your request for prompt as-income tax package for details. sessment will not shorten the period during
which the IRS may assess the additional tax.Claiming a refund.Generally, a person who Interest and Dividend IncomeHowever, such a request may relieve you ofis filing a return for a decedent and claiming apersonal liability for the tax if you did not have(Forms 1099)refund must file Form 1310 with the return. How-knowledge of the unpaid tax.ever, if the person claiming the refund is a sur- A Form 1099 should be received for the dece-viving spouse filing a joint return with the dent to report interest and dividends earnedRequest for discharge from personal liabilitydecedent, or a court-appointed or certified per- before death. These amounts must be includedfor tax.An executor can make a written re-sonal representative filing an original return for on the decedent’s final return. A separate Formquest for a discharge from personal liability for athe decedent, Form 1310 is not needed. The 1099 should show the interest and dividendsdecedent’s income and gift taxes. The requestpersonal representative must attach to the re- earned after the date of the decedent’s deathmust be made after the returns for those taxesturn a copy of the court certificate showing that and paid to the estate or other recipient thatare filed. It must clearly indicate that the requesthe or she was appointed the personal represen- must include those amounts on its return. Youis for discharge from personal liability under sec-tative. can request corrected Forms 1099 if thesetion 6905 of the Internal Revenue Code. For this
forms do not properly reflect the right recipient orpurpose, an executor is an executor or adminis-Example. Mr. Green died before filing his amounts.trator that is appointed, qualified, and actingtax return. You were appointed the personalwithin the United States. For example, a Form 1099–INT reportingrepresentative for Mr. Green’s estate and you Within 9 months after receipt of the request, interest payable to the decedent may includefile his Form 1040 showing a refund due. You dothe IRS will notify the executor of the amount of income that should be reported on the final in-not need Form 1310 to claim the refund if youtaxes due. If this amount is paid, the executor come tax return of the decedent, as well asattach a copy of the court certificate showing youwill be discharged from personal liability for any income that the estate or other recipient shouldwere appointed the personal representative.future deficiencies. If the IRS has not notified the report, either as income earned after death or as
When and where to file.The final income tax executor, he or she will be discharged from income in respect of the decedent (discussed
return is due at the same time the decedent’s personal liability at the end of the 9-month pe-later). For income earned after death, you
return would have been due had death not oc- riod. should ask the payer for a Form 1099 that prop-
Page 36 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 39 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
DECEASED FEBRUARY 28, 2001JOHN S. STONE
765 00 4321
123 00 4567
Department of the Treasury — Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1 –Dec. 31, 2001, or other tax year beginning , 2001, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 19.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse ’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 19. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 19.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status 2 Married filing joint return (even if only one had income)
Form
/H17075
Label
IRS Use Only— Do not write or staple in this space.
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
2001
(See page 19.)
(99)
I
R
S
CAR-RT SO RT**CR01
LP S29 30
JOHN S & JANE M STONE
1 9 92 OAK ST 1 03
SHERIDAN WY 82801
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Joint return?
See page 19.
Daytime phone number
()
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2001)
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 53)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
Jane M. Stone
Filing as surviving spouse
4/1/02 Engineer
/H12011
erly identifies the recipient (by name and identifi- spouse. See General Instructions for Formsfigured as if the partnership’s tax year ended on
cation number) and the proper amount. If that is the date the partner died. To avoid an interim1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G, for more infor-
not possible, or if the form includes an amount closing of the partnership books, the partnersmation on filing forms 1099.
that represents income in respect of the dece- can agree to estimate the decedent ’s distributive
dent, report the interest, as shown next under share by prorating the amounts the partner
How to report. would have included for the entire partnership
Accelerated Death Benefits
See U.S. savings bonds acquired from dece- tax year.
Accelerated death benefits are amounts re-dent in Publication 559 for information on sav- On the decedent ’s final return, include the
ceived under a life insurance contract before theings bond interest that may have to be reported decedent’s distributive share of partnership
death of the insured individual. These benefitson the final return. items for the following periods.
also include amounts received on the sale or
1) The partnership’s tax year that endedHow to report. If you are preparing the assignment of the contract to a viatical settle-
within or with the decedent’s final tax yeardecedent’s final return and you have received ament provider.
(the year ending on the date of death).Form 1099–INT for the decedent that includesGenerally, if the decedent received acceler-
amounts belonging to the decedent and to an-ated death benefits either on his or her own life2) The period, if any, from the end of theother recipient (the decedent’s estate or anotheror on the life of another person, those benefitspartnership’s tax year in (1) to thebeneficiary), report the total interest shown onare not included in the decedent’s income. This decedent’s date of death.Form 1099–INT on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) orexclusion applies only if the insured was a termi-
on Schedule B (Form 1040). Next, enter a sub-nally or chronically ill individual. For more infor-S corporation income.If the decedent was atotal of the interest shown on Forms 1099 andmation, see Accelerated death benefits under shareholder in an S corporation, include on thethe interest reportable from other sources forGifts, Insurance, and Inheritances in Publicationfinal return the decedent’s share of the Swhich you did not receive Forms 1099. Then,559. corporation’s items of income, loss, deduction,show any interest (including any interest you and credit for the following periods.receive as a nominee) belonging to another re-
cipient separately and subtract it from the sub-Business Income 1) The corporation’s tax year that ended
total. Identify this adjustment as a “Nominee within or with the decedent’s final tax year
Distribution” or other appropriate designation.This section discusses some of the business (the year ending on the date of death).
Report dividend income for which you re-income which may have to be included on the
2) The period, if any, from the end of theceived a Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distri-final return.
corporation’s tax year in (1) to thebutions, on the appropriate schedule using the
decedent’s date of death.Partnership income. The death of a partnersame procedure.
closes the partnership’s tax year for that partner.
Generally, it does not close the partnership’s taxNote. If the decedent received amounts as a Self-employment income. Include self-em-
year for the remaining partners. The decedent’snominee, you must give the actual owner a Form ployment income actually or constructively re-
distributive share of partnership items must be1099, unless the owner is the decedent’s ceived or accrued, depending on the decedent ’s
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 37

Page 40 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
accounting method. (See Constructive receipt ofinterest, the fair market value of the assets in theDeduction for Losses
income, under Income To Include, in Publication account on the date of death is included in in-
A decedent’s net operating loss deduction from559 for an explanation of the concept.) For come on the decedent’s final return. The estate
a prior year and any capital losses (includingself-employment tax purposes only, the tax deduction, discussed later, does not apply to
capital loss carryovers) can be deducted only ondecedent’s self-employment income will include this amount.
the decedent’s final income tax return. A netthe decedent ’s distributive share of a If a beneficiary acquires the interest, see the
operating loss on the decedent’s final incomepartnership’s income or loss through the end of discussion under Income in Respect of the De-
tax return can be carried back to prior years. Youthe month in which death occurred. For thiscedent, later. For more information on Archer
cannot deduct any unused net operating loss orpurpose, the partnership income or loss is con- MSAs, see Publication 969, Medical Savings
capital loss on the estate’s income tax return.sidered to be earned ratably over the Accounts (MSAs).
partnership’s tax year. For more information on
how to compute self-employment income, seeExemptions, Deductions, CreditsPublication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
and Credits
Any of the tax credits discussed in this publica-
tion also apply to the final return if the decedentGenerally, the rules for exemptions, deductions,Roth IRA
was eligible for the credits at the time of death.and credits allowed to an individual also apply to
These credits are discussed in chapters 33the decedent’s final income tax return. Show onAny amount not previously reported must be
through 38.the final return deductible items the decedentincluded on the decedent’s final return, if the
paid (or accrued, if the decedent reported de-decedent:
Tax withheld and estimated payments.ductions on an accrual method) before death.• Died in 2001, There may have been income tax withheld from
the decedent’s pay, pensions, or annuities• Withdrew an amount from a traditional IRA
before death, and the decedent may have paidin 1998, Exemptions
estimated income tax. To get credit for these tax• Converted the amount to a Roth IRA, andYou can claim the decedent’s personal exemp- payments, you must claim them on the
tion on the final income tax return. If the dece- decedent’s final return. For more information,• Included the taxable conversion amount in
dent was another person’s dependent (for see Credit for Withholding and Estimated Tax inincome over the 4-year period beginning
example, a parent’s), you cannot claim the per- chapter 5.in 1998.
sonal exemption on the decedent’s final return.
For more information on Roth IRAs, see Publi-
cation 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements
Standard Deduction(IRAs). Tax Effect on Others
If you do not itemize deductions on the finalThis section contains information about the ef-return, the full amount of the appropriate stan-Coverdell Education Savings fect of an individual’s death on the income taxdard deduction is allowed regardless of the dateliability of the survivors (including the widow orAccount (ESA) of death. For information on the appropriatewidower and any beneficiaries) and the estate.standard deduction, see chapter 21.Generally, the balance in a Coverdell ESA must A survivor should coordinate the filing of his or
be distributed within 30 days after the individual her own tax return with the personal representa-
for whom the account was established reaches tive handling the decedent’s estate. The per-Itemized Deductionsage 30, or dies, whichever is earlier. The treat- sonal representative can coordinate filing
ment of the Coverdell ESA at the death of an status, exemptions, income, and deductions soIf the total of the decedent’s itemized deductionsindividual under age 30 depends on who ac- that the decedent’s final return and the incomeis more than the decedent’s standard deduction,quires the interest in the account. If the tax returns of the survivors and the estate are allthe federal income tax will generally be less ifdecedent’s estate acquires the interest, the filed correctly.you claim itemized deductions on the final re-earnings on the account must be included on theturn. See chapters 23 through 30 for the types offinal income tax return of the decedent. The Gifts and inheritances.Property received asexpenses that are allowed as itemized deduc-estate tax deduction, discussed later, does not a gift, bequest, or inheritance is not included intions.apply to this amount. If a beneficiary acquires your income. However, if property you receive in
the interest, see the discussion under Income in Medical expenses. Medical expenses paid this manner later produces income, such as
Respect of the Decedent, later. before death by the decedent are deductible,interest, dividends, or rent, that income is taxa-
subject to limits, on the final income tax return ifble to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance youFor tax years beginning after 2001, thedeductions are itemized. This includes ex-receive is the income from property, that incomeage 30 limit does not apply if the indi-penses for the decedent as well as for theis taxable to you.vidual for whom the account was es-CAUTION
!
decedent’s spouse and dependents. If you inherited the right to receive income intablished or the beneficiary that acquires the respect of the decedent, see Income in Respectaccount is an individual with special needs. ThisQualified medical expenses are not de-of the Decedent, later.includes an individual who because of a physi- ductible if paid with a tax-free distribu-
cal, mental, or emotional condition (including tion from an Archer MSA.CAUTION
!
Joint return by surviving spouse.A surviv-learning disability) requires additional time to ing spouse can file a joint return for the year ofFor information on certain medical expensescomplete his or her education. death and may qualify for special tax rates forthat were not paid before death, see Decedents
the following 2 years. For more information, seeFor more information on Coverdell ESAs,in chapter 23.
Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child insee Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Higher
Unrecovered investment in pension.If the chapter 2.Education.
decedent was receiving a pension or annuity
and died without a surviving annuitant, you canDecedent as your dependent. If the dece-
take a deduction on the decedent’s final return dent qualified as your dependent for the part ofArcher MSA
for the amount of the decedent’s investment in the year before death, you can claim the exemp-
The treatment of an Archer MSA (medical sav- the pension or annuity contract that remained tion for the dependent on your tax return, regard-
ings account), including a Medicare+Choice unrecovered at death. The deduction is a mis- less of when death occurred during the year.
MSA, at the death of the account holder de- cellaneous itemized deduction that is not subject If the decedent was your qualifying child, you
pends on who acquires the interest in the ac- to the 2% limit on adjusted gross income. See may be able to claim the child tax credit. See
count. If the decedent’s estate acquires the chapter 30. chapter 35.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 41 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value (FMV).FMV is the price Greg’s death, was distributed to Mark in a lumpIncome in Respect at which the property would change hands be- sum. Mark must include the total amount re-
of the Decedent tween a buyer and a seller, neither having to buyceived in his income. The portion of the
or sell, and both having reasonable knowledge lump-sum distribution that equals the amount of
All gross income that the decedent would haveof all necessary facts. the balance in the IRA at Greg ’s death, including
received had death not occurred and that was the income earned before death, is income inGiving your right to income as a gift.Ifnot properly includible on the final return, dis- respect of the decedent. Mark may take a de-you give your right to receive income in respectcussed earlier, is income in respect of the dece- duction for any federal estate taxes that wereof a decedent as a gift, you must include in yourdent. paid on that portion.income the fair market value of the right at the
time you make the gift. Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
How To Report Example 1, except that some of Greg’s contribu-Type of income. The character or type of in-
tions to the IRA had been nondeductible contri-come that you receive in respect of a decedentIncome in respect of a decedent must be in- butions. To determine the amount to include inis the same as it would be to the decedent if hecluded in the income of one of the following. income, Mark must subtract the total nondeduct-or she were alive. If the income would be a
ible contributions made by Greg from the total• The decedent’s estate, if the estate re- capital gain to the decedent, it will be a capital
amount received (including the income that wasceives it. gain to you.
earned in the IRA both before and after Greg’s• The beneficiary, if the right to income isInterest accrued on savings certificates.death). Income in respect of the decedent is thepassed directly to the beneficiary and theThe interest accrued on savings certificates (re-total amount included in income less the incomebeneficiary receives it. deemable after death without forfeiture of inter-earned after Greg’s death.
est) that is for the period from the date of the lastFor more information on inherited IRAs, see• Any person to whom the estate properlyinterest payment to the date of the decedent’s Publication 590.distributes the right to receive it. death, but not received as of that date, is income
Roth IRAs. Qualified distributions from a Rothin respect of the decedent. Interest for a period
If you have to include income in re- IRA are not subject to tax. A distribution made toafter the decedent’s death that becomes pay-
spect of the decedent in your gross a beneficiary or to the Roth IRA owner’s estateable on the certificates after death is not income
income, you may be able to claim a on or after the date of death is a qualified distri-in respect of the decedent, but is taxable income
TIP
deduction for the estate tax paid on that income. bution if it is made after the 5-year tax periodincludible in the income of the respective recipi-
For more information, see Estate Tax Deduc- beginning with the first tax year in which a contri-ents.
tion, later. bution was made to any Roth IRA of the owner.
Installment obligations.If the decedent had
A distribution cannot be a qualified dis-sold property using the installment method and
Example 1. Frank Johnson owned and op- tribution unless it is made after 2002.you have the right to collect the payments, use
erated an apple orchard. He used the cash CAUTION
!
the same gross profit percentage the decedent
method of accounting. He sold and deliveredwould have used to figure the part of each pay-Generally, the entire interest in the Roth IRA1,000 bushels of apples to a canning factory forment that represents profit. Include in your in-must be distributed by the end of the fifth calen-$2,000, but did not receive payment before hiscome the same profit the decedent would havedar year after the year of the owner’s deathdeath. The proceeds from the sale are income inincluded had death not occurred. For more infor-unless the interest is payable to a designatedrespect of the decedent. When the estate wasmation on installment sales, see Publicationbeneficiary over his or her life or life expectancy.settled, payment had not been made and the537, Installment Sales. If paid as an annuity, the distributions must be-estate transferred the right to the payment to hisIf you dispose of an installment obligationgin before the end of the calendar year followingwidow. When Frank’s widow collects the $2,000,acquired from a decedent (other than by transferthe year of death. If the sole beneficiary is theshe must include that amount in her return. It isto the obligor), the rules explained in Publicationdecedent’s spouse, the spouse can delay thenot to be reported on the final return of the537 for figuring gain or loss on the dispositiondistributions until the decedent would havedecedent or on the return of the estate. apply to you. reached age 701/2 or can treat the Roth IRA as
his or her own Roth IRA.Inherited IRAs.If a beneficiary receives aExample 2. Assume the same facts as in
Part of any distribution to a beneficiary that islump-sum distribution from a traditional IRA heExample 1, except that Frank used the accrual
not a qualified distribution may be includible inor she inherited, all or some of it may be taxable.method of accounting. The amount accrued
the beneficiary’s income. Generally, the part in-The distribution is taxable in the year receivedfrom the sale of the apples would be included on
cludible is the earnings in the Roth IRA. Earn-as income in respect of a decedent up to thehis final return. Neither the estate nor the widow
ings attributable to the period ending with thedecedent’s taxable balance. This is thewill realize income in respect of the decedent
decedent’s date of death are income in respectdecedent’s balance at the time of death, includ-when the money is later paid.
of the decedent. Additional earnings are theing unrealized appreciation and income accrued
income of the beneficiary.to date of death, minus any basis (nondeductibleExample 3. Cathy O’Neil was entitled to a
For more information on Roth IRAs, seecontributions). Amounts distributed that arelarge salary payment at the date of her death.
Publication 590.more than the decedent’s entire IRA balanceThe amount was to be paid in five annual install-
(including taxable and nontaxable amounts) atments. The estate, after collecting two install- Coverdell education savings account (ESA).the time of death are the income of the benefi-ments, distributed the right to the remaining Generally, the balance in a Coverdell ESA mustciary.installments to you, the beneficiary. The pay- be distributed within 30 days after the individualIf the beneficiary of a traditional IRA is thements are income in respect of the decedent. for whom the account was established reachesdecedent’s surviving spouse who properly rollsNone of the payments were includible in Cathy’s age 30 or dies, whichever is earlier. The treat-over the distribution into another traditional IRAfinal return. The estate must include in its in- ment of the Coverdell ESA at the death of anor into a Roth IRA, the distribution is not cur-come the two installments it received, and you individual under age 30 depends on who ac-rently taxed. For distributions after 2001, a sur-must include in your income each of the three quires the interest in the account. If theviving spouse can also roll over tax free theinstallments as you receive them. decedent’s estate acquires the interest, see thetaxable part of the distribution into a qualifieddiscussion under How To Report Certain In-Transferring your right to income.If you plan, section 403 annuity, or section 457 plan.come, earlier.transfer your right to income in respect of a
decedent, you must include in your income theExample 1. At the time of his death, Greg For tax years beginning after 2001, the
greater of: owned a traditional IRA. All of the contributionsage 30 limit does not apply if the indi-
by Greg to the IRA had been deductible contri- vidual for whom the account was es-CAUTION
!
1) The amount you receive for the right, orbutions. Greg’s nephew, Mark, was the sole tablished or the beneficiary that acquires the
2) The fair market value of the right at the beneficiary of the IRA. The entire balance of theaccount is an individual with special needs. This
time of the transfer. IRA, including income accruing before and after includes an individual who because of a physi-
Chapter 4 Decedents Page 39

Page 42 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cal, mental, or emotional condition (includingclude in income the fair market value of the death, if the estate was not liable for the
learning disability) requires additional time toassets in the account on the decedent’s date of obligation.
complete his or her education. death. This amount must be reported for the
beneficiary’s tax year that includes theIf the decedent’s spouse or other family Estate Tax Deductiondecedent’s date of death. The amount includedmember is the designated beneficiary of the
in income is reduced by any qualified medicaldecedent’s account, the Coverdell ESA be- Income that a decedent had a right to receive isexpenses for the decedent that are paid by thecomes that person’s Coverdell ESA. It is subject included in the decedent’s gross estate and isbeneficiary within 1 year after the decedent’sto the rules discussed in Publication 970. subject to estate tax. This income in respect of aAny other beneficiary (including a spouse ordate of death. An estate tax deduction, dis-decedent is also taxed when received by thefamily member who is not the designated benefi-cussed later, applies to the amount included in
recipient (estate or beneficiary). However, anciary) must include in income the earnings por-income by a beneficiary other than the
income tax deduction is allowed to the recipienttion of the distribution. Any balance remaining atdecedent’s spouse.
for the estate tax paid on the income.the close of the 30-day period is deemed to be
distributed at that time. The amount included in The deduction for estate tax can be claimedOther income. For examples of other incomeincome is reduced by any qualified higher edu- only for the same tax year in which the income insituations concerning decedents, see Specificcation expenses of the decedent that are paid by respect of the decedent must be included in theTypes of Income in Respect of a Decedent inthe beneficiary within 1 year after the decedent’s recipient’s income. (This also is true for incomePublication 559.date of death. An estate tax deduction, dis- in respect of a prior decedent.)cussed later, applies to the amount included in
You can claim the deduction only as a mis-income by a beneficiary other than the Deductions in Respectdecedent’s spouse or family member. cellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule A
of the Decedent (Form 1040). This deduction is not subject to theArcher MSA. The treatment of an Archer 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductionsMSA, including a Medicare+Choice MSA, at theItems such as business expenses, income-pro-as discussed in chapter 30.death of the account holder depends on whoducing expenses, interest, and taxes, for whichacquires the interest in the account. If the If the income in respect of the decedent isthe decedent was liable but that are not properlydecedent’s estate acquires the interest, see the capital gain income, the gain must be reduced,allowable as deductions on the decedent’s finalearlier discussion under How To Report Certain but not below zero, by any estate tax deductionincome tax return will be allowed as a deductionIncome. attributable to that gain when figuring the maxi-to one of the following when paid.If the decedent’s spouse is the designated mum capital gain tax, the 50% exclusion for gainbeneficiary of the account, the account becomes• The estate. on small business stock, or any net capital lossthat spouse’s Archer MSA. It is subject to the limitation.• The person who acquired an interest inrules discussed in Publication 969.
For more information, see Estate Tax De-the decedent’s property (subject to suchAny other beneficiary (including a spouse
obligations) because of the decedent’sthat is not the designated beneficiary) must in- duction in Publication 559.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Decedents

Page 43 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment Compensation under Withholding, later, Useful Items
for more information. You may want to see:
5. Federal payments. You can choose to have Publication
income tax withheld from certain federal pay-
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxments you get. These payments include social
security and tier 1 railroad retirement benefits.❏ 553 Highlights of 2001 Tax ChangesTax Withholding For more information, see Federal Payments
❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Taxunder Withholding, later.
Withholding?and Estimated
Claiming withholding and estimated tax pay-
Form (and Instructions)ments. When you file a federal income tax
Tax return, be sure to take credit for all federal in-❏ W –4 Employee’s Withholding Allowancecome tax and excess social security or railroad Certificateretirement taxes withheld from your salary,
❏ W –4P Withholding Certificate forwages, pensions, etc., and any backup with-Important Change Pension or Annuity Paymentsholding shown on Forms 1099. Also, take credit
for all estimated tax payments you made for thatfor 2001 ❏ W –4S Request for Federal Income Tax
year. For example, all estimated tax payments Withholding From Sick Pay
made for 2001 should be claimed on the taxEstimated tax safe harbor for higher income ❏ W –4V Voluntary Withholding Requestreturn you file for the 2001 tax year. You shouldtaxpayers. For installment payments for tax
❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individualsfile a return and claim these credits even if youyears beginning in 2001, the estimated tax safe
harbor for higher income individuals (other thando not owe tax. See Credit for Withholding and❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax byfarmers and fishermen) has been modified. IfEstimated Tax, later, in this chapter. Individuals, Estates, and Trustsyour adjusted gross income was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if you are married filing a
separate return), you must have deposited the
smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2001 or
Introduction110%  of the tax shown on your 2000 return to
Withholdingavoid an estimated tax penalty. This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as
you earn or receive income during the year. InThis chapter discusses withholding on these
general, the federal income tax is a pay-as-types of income:
you-go tax. There are two ways to pay as you• Salaries and wages,Important Changes go.
• Tips,
• Withholding. If you are an employee,for 2002 • Taxable fringe benefits,your employer probably withholds income
tax from your pay. Tax may also be with-Tax law changes for 2002.When you figure • Sick pay,
held from certain other income —  includ-how much income tax you want withheld from • Pensions and annuities,your pay and when you figure your estimated taxing pensions, bonuses, commissions, and
for 2002, consider tax law changes effective in • Gambling winnings,gambling winnings. In each case, the
2002. See Important Changes for 2002 in the amount withheld is paid to the Internal• Unemployment compensation, andfront of this publication, or get Publication 553,Revenue Service (IRS) in your name.
Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes. • Certain federal payments.
• Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax
This chapter explains in detail the rules for with-Certain withholding rates decreased.The through withholding, or do not pay enoughholding tax from each of these types of income.withholding rates on the following items havetax that way, you might have to pay esti-
been decreased. mated tax. People who are in business for This chapter also covers backup withholding
on interest, dividends, and other payments.themselves generally will have to pay their1) Gambling winnings. The rate has de- tax this way. You may have to pay esti-creased from 28% to 27%.
mated tax if you receive income such asSalaries and Wages2) Unemployment compensation. The rate dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and
has decreased from 15% to 10%. Income tax is withheld from the pay of mostroyalties. Estimated tax is used to pay not
employees. Your pay includes your regular pay,only income tax, but self-employment tax3) Federal payments. Withholding on certain
bonuses, commissions, and vacation al-and alternative minimum tax as well.federal payments is voluntary. The elective
lowances. It also includes reimbursements andrates have been decreased to 7%, 10%,
other expense allowances paid under a nonac-This chapter explains both of these methods.15%, and 27%.
countable plan. See Supplemental Wages,In addition, it explains:4) Backup withholding. The rate has de- later, for more information about reimburse-
creased from 31% to 30%. ments and allowances paid under a nonac-• Credit for withholding and estimated
countable plan.tax. When you file your 2001 income tax5) Supplemental wages. The rate has de-
creased from 28% to 27%. return, take credit for all the income taxMilitary retirees.Military retirement pay iswithheld from your salary, wages, pen-treated in the same manner as regular pay forWithholding on these items is discussed later in
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax youincome tax withholding purposes, even though itthis chapter.
paid for 2001, and is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax
purposes.• Underpayment penalty. If you did not
pay enough tax during the year eitherHousehold workers. If you are a household
through withholding or by making esti-Important Reminders worker, you can ask your employer to withhold
mated tax payments, you may have to payincome tax from your pay. Tax is withheld only if
a penalty. The IRS usually can figure thisUnemployment compensation. You can you want it withheld and your employer agrees
penalty for you. See Underpayment Pen-choose to have income tax withheld from your to withhold it. If you do not have enough income
alty at the end of this chapter.unemployment compensation. See Unemploy- tax withheld, you may have to make estimated
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax payments, as discussed later under Esti- If you and your spouse expect to file sepa-
1) Your divorce, if you have been claimingmated Tax. rate returns, figure your allowances separately
married status. based on your own individual income, adjust-
Farmworkers. Income tax is generally with- ments, deductions, exemptions, and credits.2) Any event that decreases the number ofheld from your cash wages for work on a farmwithholding allowances you can claim.unless your employer both: Personal allowances worksheet. Use theGenerally, you can submit a new Form W–4 Personal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of1) Pays you cash wages of less than $150whenever you wish to change the number ofForm W – 4 to figure your withholding al-during the year, and your withholding allowances for any other rea-lowances for exemptions and any special al-son.2) Has expenditures for agricultural labor to- lowances that apply.
taling less than $2,500 during the year.Changing your withholding for 2003.If
events in 2002 will decrease the number of yourDeductions and adjustments worksheet.If you receive either noncash wages or cash
withholding allowances for 2003, you must give Fill out this worksheet to adjust the number ofwages not subject to withholding, you can ask
your employer a new Form W–4 by December your withholding allowances for deductions, ad-your employer to withhold income tax. If your
1, 2002. If the event occurs in December 2002,justments to income, and tax credits. The De-employer does not agree to withhold tax, or if not
submit a new Form W–4 within 10 days. ductions and Adjustments Worksheet is on pageenough is withheld, you may have to make esti-
2 of Form W–4. Chapter 1 of Publication 505mated tax payments, as discussed later under
Cumulative wage method. If you change theEstimated Tax. explains this worksheet.
number of your withholding allowances during
the year, too much or too little tax may haveTwo-earner/two-job worksheet. You may
been withheld for the period before you madeDetermining Amount need to complete this worksheet if you have two
the change. You may be able to compensate forjobs or a working spouse. You can also add toof Tax Withheld this if your employer agrees to use the cumula-the amount, if any, on line 8 of this worksheet,tive wage withholding method for the rest of theThe amount of income tax your employer with- any additional withholding necessary to coveryear. You must ask in writing that your employerholds from your regular pay depends on two any amount you expect to owe other than in-use this method.things. come tax, such as self-employment tax.To be eligible, you must have been paid for
1) The amount you earn. the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.2) The information you give your employer on Getting the Right Amount
Form W –4. of Tax WithheldChecking your withholding.After you have
Form W –4 includes three types of informa-given your employer a Form W–4, you can In most situations, the tax withheld from yourtion that your employer will use to figure yourcheck to see whether the amount of tax withheldpay will be close to the tax you figure on yourwithholding. from your pay is too little or too much. Seereturn if you follow these two rules.
Getting the Right Amount of Tax Withheld, later.1) Whether to withhold at the single rate or atIf too much or too little tax is being withheld, you1) You accurately complete all the Formthe lower married rate. should give your employer a new Form W–4 to W –4 worksheets that apply to you.
2) How many withholding allowances you change your withholding.
2) You give your employer a new Form W–4claim. (Each allowance reduces the
when changes occur.amount withheld.) Note. You cannot give your employer either
a payment to cover withholding for past payBut because the worksheets and withholding3) Whether you want an additional amountperiods or a payment for estimated tax. methods do not account for all possible situa-withheld.
tions, you may not be getting the right amountIf your income is low enough that you will not withheld. This is most likely to happen in thehave to pay income tax for the year, you may beCompleting Form W –4 following situations.exempt from withholding. This is explained
• You are married and both you and yourForm W –4 has worksheets to help you figureunder Exemption From Withholding, later.
spouse work.how many withholding allowances you can
claim. The worksheets are for your own records.Note. You must specify a filing status and a • You have more than one job at a time.Do not give them to your employer.number of withholding allowances on Form
• You have nonwage income, such as inter-You do not have to use the worksheets if youW –4. You cannot specify only a dollar amount
est, dividends, alimony, unemploymentuse a more accurate method of figuring theof withholding.
compensation, or self-employment in-number of withholding allowances. See Alterna-
New job. When you start a new job, you must come.tive method of figuring withholding allowances
fill out Form W–4 and give it to your employer.under Completing Form W–4 and Worksheets • You will owe additional amounts with yourYour employer should have copies of the form. Ifin chapter 1 of Publication 505 for more informa-return, such as self-employment tax.you need to change the information, you must filltion.
out a new form. • Your withholding is based on obsoleteTwo jobs. If you have income from two jobsIf you work only part of the year (for example, Form W –4 information for a substantialat the same time, complete only one set of Formyou start working after the beginning of the part of the year.W –4 worksheets. Then split your allowancesyear), too much tax may be withheld. You may • Your earnings are more than $150,000 ifbetween the Forms W–4 for each job. You can-be able to avoid overwithholding if your em- you are single or $200,000 if you are mar-not claim the same allowances with more thanployer agrees to use the part-year method. See
one employer at the same time. You can claim ried.Part-year method in chapter 1 of Publication 505
all your allowances with one employer and nonefor more information. To make sure you are getting the right amountwith the other, or divide them any other way.
of tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will helpChanging your withholding. Events during
you compare the total tax to be withheld duringthe year may change your marital status or theMarried individuals.If both you and your
the year with the tax you can expect to figure onexemptions, adjustments, deductions, or credits spouse are employed and expect to file a joint
your return. It also will help you determine howyou expect to claim on your return. When this return, figure your withholding allowances using
much additional withholding, if any, is neededhappens, you may need to give your employer a your combined income, adjustments, deduc-
each payday to avoid owing tax when you filenew Form W –4 to change your withholding sta- tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set
your return. If you do not have enough tax with-tus or number of allowances. of worksheets. You can divide your total al-
held, you may have to make estimated tax pay-You must give your employer a new Form lowances any way, but you cannot claim an
ments, as explained under Estimated Tax, later.W –4 within 10 days after either of the following. allowance that your spouse also claims.
Page 42 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Claiming exemption from withholding.To rectly, but claims seven when the proper num-Rules Your Employer
claim exemption, you must give your employer a ber is six, will not be charged a W–4 penalty.Must Follow
Form W –4. Print “EXEMPT ” on line 7.
Your employer must send the IRS a copy ofIt may be helpful for you to know some of the Tipsyour Form W –4 if you claim exemption fromwithholding rules your employer must follow.
withholding and your pay is expected to usuallyThese rules can affect how to fill out your Form The tips you receive while working on your job
be more than $200 a week. If it turns out that youW-4 and how to handle problems that may arise. are considered part of your pay. You must in-
do not qualify for exemption, the IRS will sendclude your tips on your tax return on the same
New Form W –4. When you start a new job,both you and your employer a written notice.line as your regular pay. However, tax is not
your employer should give you a Form W–4 to If you claim exemption, but later your situa-withheld directly from tip income, as it is from
fill out. Your employer will use the informationtion changes so that you will have to pay incomeyour regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer
you give on the form to figure your withholdingtax after all, you must file a new Form W–4 will take into account the tips you report when
beginning with your first payday. within 10 days after the change. If you claimfiguring how much to withhold from your regular
exemption in 2002, but you expect to owe in-If you later fill out a new Form W–4, your pay.
come tax for 2003, you must file a new Formemployer can put it into effect as soon as possi- See chapter 7 for information on reporting
W –4 by December 1, 2002.ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is the your tips to your employer. For more information
start of the first payroll period ending 30 or more on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub-An exemption is good for only one year.days after you turn it in. lication 531, Reporting Tip Income.You must give your employer a new Form W–4
by February 15 each year to continue your ex-No Form W –4. If you do not give your em- How employer figures amount to withhold.emption.ployer a completed Form W–4, your employer The tips you report to your employer are counted
must withhold at the highest rate— as if you as part of your income for the month you report
were single and claimed no allowances. them. Your employer can figure your withholdingSupplemental Wages in either of two ways.
Repaying withheld tax.If you find you areSupplemental wages include bonuses, commis-1) By withholding at the regular rate on thehaving too much tax withheld because you didsions, overtime pay, and certain sick pay. Thesum of your pay plus your reported tips.not claim all the withholding allowances you arepayer can figure withholding on supplementalentitled to, you should give your employer a newwages using the same method used for your 2) By withholding at the regular rate on yourForm W –4. Your employer cannot repay any ofregular wages. If these payments are identifiedpay plus an amount equal to 27% of yourthe tax previously withheld. separately from your regular wages, your em-reported tips.
However, if your employer has withheldployer or other payer of supplemental wages
more than the correct amount of tax for the Formcan withhold income tax from these wages at aNot enough pay to cover taxes.If your regu-W –4 you have in effect, you do not have to fillflat rate of 27%. lar pay is too low for your employer to withholdout a new Form W–4 to have your withholding all the tax (including social security tax, Medi-lowered to the correct amount. Your employerExpense allowances. Reimbursements or care tax, or railroad retirement tax) due on yourcan repay the amount that was incorrectly with-other expense allowances paid by your em-pay plus your tips, you can give your employerheld. If you are not repaid, your Form W–2 will ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treatedmoney to cover the shortage.reflect the full amount actually withheld.as supplemental wages. If you do not give your employer money toReimbursements or other expense al- cover the shortage, your employer will first with-lowances paid under an accountable plan thathold as much social security tax, Medicare tax,Exemption From Withholding are more than your proven expenses are treatedor railroad retirement tax as possible, up to theas paid under a nonaccountable plan if you doproper amount, and then withhold income tax upIf you claim exemption from withholding, yournot return the excess payments within a reason-to the full amount of your pay. If not enough taxemployer will not withhold federal income taxable period of time. is withheld, you may have to make estimated taxfrom your wages. The exemption applies only toFor more information about accountable andpayments. When you file your return, you alsoincome tax, not to social security or Medicarenonaccountable expense allowance plans, seemay have to pay any social security tax, Medi-tax. Reimbursements in chapter 28. care tax, or railroad retirement tax your em-You can claim exemption from withholding ployer could not withhold.for 2002 only if both the following situations
apply. Penalties Allocated tips.Your employer should not
withhold income tax, social security tax, Medi-1) For 2001 you had a right to a refund of allYou may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both ofcare tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo-federal income tax withheld because youthe following apply. cated tips. Withholding is based only on yourhad no tax liability. pay plus your reported tips. Your employer1) You make statements or claim withholding
should refund to you any incorrectly withheld2) For 2002 you expect a refund of all federalallowances on your Form W–4 that reduce
tax. See Allocated Tips in chapter 7 for moreincome tax withheld because you expect the amount of tax withheld.
information.to have no tax liability.
2) You have no reasonable basis for those
statements or allowances at the time youStudent. If you are a student, you are not Taxable Fringe Benefitsprepare your Form W–4.automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to see
There is also a criminal penalty for willfullyThe value of certain fringe benefits you receivewhether you must file a return. If you work only
supplying false or fraudulent information on yourfrom your employer is considered part of yourpart time or only during the summer, you may
Form W –4 or for willfully failing to supply infor-pay. Your employer generally must withhold in-qualify for exemption from withholding.
mation that would increase the amount withheld.come tax on these benefits from your regular
The penalty upon conviction can be either a fineAge 65 or older or blind.If you are 65 or older pay for the period the benefits are paid or con-
of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to oneor blind, use one of the worksheets in chapter 1 sidered paid.
year, or both.of Publication 505, under Exemption From With- For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe
holding, to help you decide whether you can These penalties will apply if you deliberatelyBenefits under Employee Compensation in
claim exemption from withholding. Do not use and knowingly falsify your Form W–4 in an chapter 6.
either of those worksheets if you will itemize attempt to reduce or eliminate the proper with- Your employer can choose not to withhold
deductions or claim exemptions for dependents holding of taxes. A simple error —  an honest income tax on the value of your personal use of
or claim tax credits on your 2002 return. See mistake —  will not result in one of these penal- a car, truck, or other highway motor vehicle
Itemizing deductions or claiming exemptions orties. For example, a person who has tried to provided by your employer. Your employer must
tax credits in Publication 505. figure the number of withholding allowances cor- notify you if this choice is made.
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Page 46 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information on withholding on taxa- rollover distribution (ERD). You cannot chooseFederal Paymentsble fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publicationnot to have income tax withheld from an ERD.
505. You can choose to have income tax withheld
More information. For more information onfrom certain federal payments you receive.
taxation of annuities and distributions (includingThese payments are:Sick Pay
eligible rollover distributions) from qualified re-
1) Social security benefits,tirement plans, see chapter 11. For informationSick pay is a payment to you to replace your
regular wages while you are temporarily absent on IRAs, see chapter 18. For more information2) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,from work due to sickness or personal injury. Toon withholding on pensions and annuities, in-
3) Commodity credit loans you choose to in-qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plancluding a discussion of  Form W –4P, see Pen-
clude in your gross income, andto which your employer is a party. sions and Annuities in chapter 1 of Publication
If you receive sick pay from your employer or505. 4) Payments under the Agricultural Act ofan agent of your employer, income tax must be 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), or title II ofwithheld. An agent who does not pay regular the Disaster Assistance Act of 1988, asGambling Winningswages to you may choose to withhold income amended, that are treated as insurancetax at a flat 27% rate. proceeds and that you receive because:Income tax is withheld from certain kinds ofHowever, if you receive sick pay from a thirdgambling winnings. For 2002, the amount with-party who is not acting as an agent of your a) Your crops were destroyed or damagedheld is 27% of the proceeds paid (the amount ofemployer, income tax will be withheld only if you by drought, flood, or any other naturalyour winnings minus the amount of your bet).choose to have it withheld. See Form W –4S, disaster, orGambling winnings of more than $5,000 fromlater. b) You were unable to plant crops be-the following sources are subject to income taxIf you receive payments under a plan in cause of a natural disaster described inwithholding.which your employer does not participate (such (a).as an accident or health plan where you paid all• Any sweepstakes, wagering pool, or lot-the premiums), the payments are not sick paytery. To make this choice, you will have to fill outand usually are not taxable. Form W –4V, Voluntary Withholding Request,• Any other wager, if the proceeds are at(or a similar form provided by the payer) andUnion agreements. If you receive sick pay least 300 times the amount of the bet.give it to the payer. For 2002, you can choose tounder a collective bargaining agreement be-It does not matter whether your winnings arehave 7%, 10%, 15%, or 27% of each paymenttween your union and your employer, the agree- withheld.paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win-ment may determine the amount of income tax
nings not paid in cash are taken into account atIf you do not choose to have income taxwithholding. See your union representative or
their fair market value. withheld, you may have to make estimated taxyour employer for more information.
payments. See Estimated Tax, later.Gambling winnings from bingo, keno, and slotForm W –4S. If you choose to have income If you do not pay enough tax either throughmachines generally are not subject to incometax withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, withholding or estimated tax, you may have totax withholding. However, you may need to pro-such as an insurance company, you must fill out pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,vide the payer with a social security number toForm W –4S, Request for Federal Income Tax later, for information.avoid withholding. See Backup withholding onWithholding From Sick Pay. Its instructions con-gambling winnings in Publication 505. If youtain a worksheet you can use to figure the More information. For more informationreceive gambling winnings not subject to with-amount you want withheld. They also explain about the tax treatment of social security andholding, you may need to make estimated taxrestrictions that may apply. railroad retirement benefits, see chapter 12. Getpayments. See Estimated Tax, later.Give the completed form to the payer of your Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, for infor-
If you do not pay enough tax through with-sick pay. The payer must withhold according to mation about the tax treatment of commodity
holding or estimated tax payments, you may beyour directions on the form. credit loans or crop disaster payments.
subject to a penalty. See Underpayment Pen-If you do not request withholding on Form
alty, later.W –4S, or if you do not have enough tax with- Backup Withholdingheld, you may have to make estimated tax pay-
ments. If you do not pay enough estimated tax orForm W –2G. If a payer withholds income taxBanks and other businesses that pay you cer-have enough income tax withheld, you may from your gambling winnings, you should re-tain kinds of income must file an informationhave to pay a penalty. ceive a Form W–2G, Certain Gambling Win- return (Form 1099) with the IRS. The informa-
nings, showing the amount you won and the tion return shows how much you were paid dur-
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on lineing the year. It also includes your name andPensions and Annuities
59 of Form 1040. taxpayer identification number (TIN). TINs are
explained in chapter 1.Income tax usually will be withheld from your
pension or annuity distributions, unless you These payments generally are not subject toUnemploymentchoose not to have it withheld. This rule applies withholding. However, “backup” withholding is
Compensationto distributions from: required in certain situations. And, backup with-
holding can apply to most kinds of payments that• A traditional individual retirement arrange-You can choose to have income tax withheldare reported on Form 1099.ment (IRA), from unemployment compensation. To make For 2002, the payer must withhold at a flatthis choice, you will have to fill out Form W –4V,• A life insurance company under an en- 30% rate in the following situations.Voluntary Withholding Request (or a similardowment, annuity, or life insurance con-
form provided by the payer) and give it to the• You do not give the payer your TIN in thetract,
payer. The amount withheld will be 10% of eachrequired manner.• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,payment. • The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN• A stock bonus plan, and Unemployment compensation is taxable. So, you gave is incorrect.if you do not have income tax withheld, you may• Any other plan that defers the time you • You are required, but fail, to certify thathave to make estimated tax payments. See Esti-receive compensation. you are not subject to backup withholding.mated Tax, later.
If you do not pay enough tax either throughThe amount withheld depends on whether • The IRS notifies the payer to start with-
withholding or estimated tax, you may have toyou receive payments spread out over more holding on interest or dividends because
pay a penalty. See Underpayment Penalty,than one year (periodic payments), within one you have underreported interest or divi-
later, for information.year (nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible dends on your income tax return. The IRS
Page 44 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 47 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 5–A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2002 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
credits from your total tax?
(Do not subtract any
estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 100%* of the tax shown
on your 2001 tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and credits be at
least 90% (66-2/3% for farmers
and fishermen) of the tax
shown on your 2002 tax
return? Note: Your 2001 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
/H17075
/H17075
No
Yes
/H17074
* 112% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2001 and 2002 is from farming or fishing and your 2001 adjusted gross in come was more than
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2002 is married filing a separate return).
will do this only after it has mailed you four Estimated payments not required.You doWho Must Makenotices over at least a 120-day period. not have to pay estimated tax for 2002 if you
Estimated Tax Payments? meet all three of the following conditions:
See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-
If you had a tax liability for 2001, you may have1) You had no tax liability for 2001.cation 505 for more information.
to pay estimated tax for 2002. 2) You were a U.S. citizen or resident for thePenalties.There are civil and criminal penal-
whole year.ties for giving false information to avoid backupGeneral rule.You must make estimated taxwithholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi- 3) Your 2001 tax year covered a 12-monthpayments for 2002 if both of the following apply.nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to period.$1,000, or imprisonment of up to one year, or1) You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxYou had no tax liability for 2001 if your totalboth. for 2002 after subtracting your withholdingtax was zero or you did not have to file anand credits. income tax return.
2) You expect your withholding and credits to
Married taxpayers. To figure whether yoube less than the smaller of:Estimated Tax must make estimated tax payments, apply the
rules discussed here to your separate estimated• 90% of the tax to be shown on your 2002Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on income. If you can make joint estimated taxtax return, orincome that is not subject to withholding. This payments, you can apply these rules on a joint• 100% of the tax shown on your 2001 taxincludes income from self-employment, interest, basis.return. Your 2001 tax return must cover alldividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of You and your spouse can make joint esti-12 months.assets, prizes, and awards. You also may have mated tax payments even if you are not livingto pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax together.Special rules for farmers, fishermen, andbeing withheld from your salary, pension, or
You and your spouse cannot make joint esti-higher income taxpayers.There are excep-other income is not enough.
mated tax payments if:tions to the general rule for farmers, fishermen,Estimated tax is used to pay both income tax
and certain higher income taxpayers. See Fig-and self-employment tax, as well as other taxes 1) You are legally separated under a decreeure 5–A and chapter 2 of Publication 505 forand amounts reported on your tax return. If you of divorce or separate maintenance,more information.do not pay enough through withholding or by
making estimated tax payments, you may be 2) Either spouse is a nonresident alien, orAliens. Resident and nonresident alienscharged a penalty. If you do not pay enough bymay also have to make estimated tax payments.3) You and your spouse have different taxthe due date of each payment period (see When Resident aliens should follow the rules in thisyears.To Pay Estimated Tax, later), you may be chapter unless noted otherwise. Nonresidentcharged a penalty even if you are due a refund Whether you and your spouse make jointaliens should get  Form 1040 –ES(NR), U.S.when you file your tax return. For information on estimated tax payments or separate paymentsEstimated Tax for Nonresident Alien Individuals.when the penalty applies, see Underpayment will not affect your choice of filing a joint tax
Penalty, later. return or separate returns for 2002.Avoiding estimated tax.If you receive sala-
ries or wages, you can avoid having to make2001 separate returns and 2002 joint re-
estimated tax payments by asking your em-turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your
ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. To spouse for 2002, but you filed separate returns
do this, file a new Form W–4 with your em- for 2001, your 2001 tax is the total of the tax
ployer. shown on your separate returns. You filed a
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 45

Page 48 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
separate return if you filed as single, head of income tax return. The following chart gives the
household, or married filing separately. payment periods and due dates for estimated
After May 31 and Sep. 15 Jan. 15tax payments.2001 joint return and 2002 separate re- before Sep. 1 next year*
turns. If you plan to file a separate return forFor the period: Due date:2002, but you filed a joint return for 2001, your
Jan. 1* through Mar. 31 April 152001 tax is your share of the tax on the joint After Aug. 31 Jan. 15 (None)April 1 through May 31 June 15return. You file a separate return if you file as nextJune 1 through Aug. 31 September 15single, head of household, or married filing sep- year*
Sept. 1 through Dec. January 15 nextarately. To figure your share of the tax on the
31 year** *See January payment, and Saturday, Sunday,jooint return, first figure the tax both you and holiday rule under When To Pay Estimated Tax,your spouse would have paid had you filed sep- earlier.*If your tax year does not begin on Januaryarate returns for 2001 using the same filing sta-1, see Fiscal year taxpayers, later.tus as for 2002. Then multiply the tax on the joint**See January payment, later.return by the following fraction: Change in estimated tax.After making your
first estimated tax payment, changes in your
Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule.If the due income, adjustments, deductions, credits, or ex-
date for making an estimated tax payment fallsemptions may make it necessary for you to
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, therefigure your estimated tax. Pay the unpaid bal-
The tax you would have paid
had you filed a separate return
The total tax you and your spouse would
have paid had you filed separate returns
payment will be on time if you make it on the nextance of your amended estimated tax by the nextday that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legalExample. Joe and Heather filed a joint re- payment due date after the change or in install-holiday. For example, a payment due Saturday,turn for 2001 showing taxable income of ments by that date and the due dates for theJune 15, 2002, will be on time if you make it by$48,000 and a tax of $7,557. Of the $48,000 remaining payment periods.Monday, June 17, 2002.taxable income, $40,000 was Joe’s and the rest
was Heather’s. For 2002, they plan to file mar- How much to pay to avoid a penalty. ToJanuary payment. If you file your 2002 Formried filing separately. Joe figures his share of the determine how much you should pay by each1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2003, andtax on the 2001 joint return as follows: payment due date, see How To Figure Eachpay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need
Payment, next. If the earlier discussions of Noto make your estimated tax payment that wouldTax on $40,000 based on a separate income subject to estimated tax during first pe-be due on January 15, 2003.return..................... $  8,172
riod or Change in estimated tax apply to you,Tax on $8,000 based on a separate
Fiscal year taxpayers.If your tax year doesyou may need to read Annualized Income In-return.....................  1,204
not start on January 1, see the Form 1040–ES stallment Method in Publication 505, for informa-Total...................... $  9,376
instructions for your payment due dates. tion on how to avoid a penalty.Joe’s percentage of total ($8,172 ÷
$9,376) 87%
Joe’s share of tax on joint return How To FigureWhen To Start($7,557 × 87%) .............. $  6,574
Each Payment
You do not have to make estimated tax pay-
ments until you have income on which you willYou should pay enough estimated tax by theHow To Figure owe the tax. If you have income subject to esti-due date of each payment period to avoid a
Estimated Tax mated tax during the first payment period, youpenalty for that period. You can figure your re-
must make your first payment by the due datequired payment for each period by using eitherTo figure your estimated tax, you must figurefor the first payment period. You can pay all yourthe regular installment method or the annualizedyour expected adjusted gross income, taxableestimated tax at that time, or you can pay it inincome installment method. These methods areincome, taxes, deductions, and credits for theinstallments. If you choose to pay in install-described in Publication 505. If you do not payyear. ments, make your first payment by the due dateenough each payment period, you may beWhen figuring your 2002 estimated tax, itfor the first payment period. Make your remain-charged a penalty even if you are due a refundmay be helpful to use your income, deductions,ing installment payments by the due dates forwhen you file your tax return.and credits for 2001 as a starting point. Use yourthe later periods.
2001 federal tax return as a guide. You can use File Form 2210 to avoid a penalty.If your
Form 1040–ES to figure your estimated tax.No income subject to estimated tax duringestimated tax payment for a previous period is
first period.If you first have income subject toYou must make adjustments both for less than one-fourth of your amended estimated
estimated tax during a later payment period, youchanges in your own situation and for recent tax, you may be charged a penalty for underpay-
must make your first payment by the due datechanges in the tax law. For 2002, there are ment of estimated tax for that period when you
for that period. You can pay your entire esti-several changes in the law. These changes are file your tax return. To avoid the penalty, you
mated tax by the due date for that period, or youdiscussed in Publication 553, Highlights of 2001 must file Form 2210 with your 2002 tax return.can pay it in installments by the due date for thatTax Changes, or visit the IRS Web Site at You must also show that the total of your with-period and the due dates for the remaining peri-www.irs.gov. holding and estimated tax payment for the pe-ods. The following chart shows when to makeForm 1040–ES includes a worksheet to help riod was at least as much as your annualizedinstallment payments.you figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- income installment. See chapter 4 of Publicationsheet for your records. 505 for more information.If you first have Make a Make laterFor more complete information and exam-
income payment installmentsples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2002,
on which you must by: by:see chapter 2 of Publication 505. Estimated Tax Paymentspay estimated tax:
Not RequiredWhen To Pay
Before Apr. 1 Apr. 15 June 15 You do not have to make estimated tax pay-Estimated Tax Sep. 15 ments if your withholding in each payment pe-Jan. 15 riod is at least one-fourth of your required annualFor estimated tax purposes, the year is divided next year* payment or at least your required annualizedinto four payment periods. Each period has a
income installment for that period. You also dospecific payment due date. If you do not pay
not have to make estimated tax payments if youenough tax by the due date of each of the pay-After Mar. 31 and June 15 Sep. 15
will pay enough through withholding to keep thement periods, you may be charged a penalty before June 1 Jan. 15
next year* amount you owe with your return under $1,000.even if you are due a refund when you file your
Page 46 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 49 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you file a joint return and you are makingForms W –2 and W–2G. You file Form W–2How To Pay Estimated Tax joint estimated tax payments, please enter the with your income tax return. File Form W–2G
names and social security numbers on the pay- with your return if it shows any federal incomeThere are five ways to pay estimated tax.
ment voucher in the same order as they will tax withheld from your winnings.
appear on the joint return.1) By crediting an overpayment on your 2001 You should get at least two copies of each
return to your 2002 estimated tax. form you receive. Attach one copy to the front of
Change of address. You must notify the IRSyour federal income tax return. Keep one copy2) By sending in your payment with a if you are making estimated tax payments andfor your records. You should also receive copiespayment-voucher from Form 1040–ES. you changed your address during the year. Youto file with your state and local returns.
must send a clear and concise written statement3) By paying electronically using the Elec-
tronic Federal Tax Payment System to the IRS Service Center where you filed your
(EFTPS). last return and provide all of the following:Form W –2
4) By direct debit if you are filing Form 1040• Your full name (and your spouse’s full Your employer should give you a Form W–2 foror Form 1040A electronically. name), 2001 by January 31, 2002. You should receive a
5) By credit card using a pay-by-phone sys- separate Form W–2 from each employer you• Your signature (and spouse’s signature),
tem. worked for.• Your old address (and spouse’s old ad-
If you stop working before the end of thedress if different),
year, your employer can give you your Form
• Your new address, and W –2 at any time after you leave your job. How-Crediting an Overpayment
ever, your employer must give it to you by Janu-• Your social security number (and spouse’sWhen you file your Form 1040 or Form 1040A ary 31 of the following year (or the next day thatsocial security number).for 2001 and you have an overpayment of tax, is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday if January
You can use  Form 8822, Change of Address,you can apply part or all of it to your estimated 31 is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday).
for this purpose.tax for 2002. On line 69 of Form 1040, or line 44 If you ask for the form, your employer mustof Form 1040A, write the amount you want You can continue to use your old preprintedgive it to you within 30 days after receiving yourcredited to your estimated tax rather than re-payment-vouchers until the IRS sends you newwritten request or within 30 days after your finalfunded. The amount you have credited shouldones. However, do not correct the address onwage payment, whichever is later.be taken into account when figuring your esti-the old voucher. If you have not received your Form W–2 bymated tax payments.
February 1, 2002, you should ask your employerYou can use all the credited amount toward
for it. If you do not receive it by February 15, callyour first payment, or you can spread it out inPayment by Direct Debit the IRS.any way you choose among any or all of youror Credit Cardpayments. Form W –2 shows your total pay and other
compensation and the income tax, social secur-If you ask that an overpayment be credited toIf you want to make estimated payments by
ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-your estimated tax for the next year, the pay-direct debit or by credit card, see the Form
ing the year. Include the federal income taxment is considered to have been made on the1040–ES instructions or How To Pay Estimated
withheld (as shown on Form W-2) on:due date of the first estimated tax installmentTax in Publication 505.
(April 15 for calendar year taxpayers). You can-
• Line 59 if you file Form 1040,not have any of that amount refunded to you
after that due date until the close of that tax year. • Line 37 if you file Form 1040A, or
You also cannot use that overpayment in anyCredit for Withholding • Line 8 if you file Form 1040EZ.other way after that date.
Form W –2 is also used to report any taxableand Estimated Tax sick pay you received and any income tax with-
Using the Payment-Vouchers held from your sick pay.When you file your 2001 income tax return, take
credit for all the income tax and excess socialEach payment of estimated tax must be accom- Form W –2Gsecurity or railroad retirement tax withheld frompanied by a payment-voucher from Form
your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also, take1040–ES. If you made estimated tax payments If you had gambling winnings in 2001, the payercredit for the estimated tax you paid for 2001.last year, you should receive a copy of the 2002 may have withheld 271/2% or 28% as income tax.These credits are subtracted from your tax. YouForm 1040 – ES in the mail. It will have If tax was withheld, the payer will give you ashould file a return and claim these credits, evenpayment-vouchers preprinted with your name, Form W –2G showing the amount you won andif you do not owe tax.address, and social security number. Using the the amount of tax withheld.preprinted vouchers will speed processing, re-If you had two or more employers and were
Report the amounts you won on line 21 ofduce the chance of error, and help save paid wages of more than $80,400 during 2001,
Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld onprocessing costs. too much social security or railroad retirement
line 59 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win-tax may have been withheld from your wages.If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot useSee Credit for Excess Social Security Tax orwill have to get a copy of Form 1040–ES from
Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld in chapter 38.the IRS. After you make your first payment, a
Form 1040 –ES package with the preprinted
vouchers will be mailed to you. Follow the in-Withholding The 1099 Seriesstructions in the package to make sure you use
the vouchers correctly. If you had income tax withheld during 2001, youMost forms in the 1099 series are not filed with
Use the window envelopes that came withshould receive a statement by January 31,your return. You should receive these forms byyour Form 1040–ES package. If you use your2002, showing your income and the tax with-February 1, 2002. Keep these forms for yourown envelope, make sure you mail your held. Depending on the source of your income,records. There are several different forms in thispayment-vouchers to the address shown in theyou will receive: series, including:Form 1040–ES instructions for the place where
• Form W –2, Wage and Tax Statement,you live. • Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and
• Form W –2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, Barter Exchange Transactions,Do not use the address shown in the
orForm 1040 or Form 1040A instruc- • Form 1099–DIV, Dividends and Distribu-
tions. • A form in the 1099 series.
CAUTION
!
tions,
Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 47

Page 50 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Form 1099–G, Certain Government and Community property states are listed ineither you or your former spouse can claim all of
Qualified State Tuition Program Pay- chapter 2. For more information on these rules, the joint payments, or you each can claim part of
ments, and some exceptions, see Publication 555, them. If you cannot agree on how to divide the
Community Property. payments, you must divide them in proportion to• Form 1099–INT, Interest Income, each spouse’s individual tax as shown on your
• Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income, separate returns for 2001.
If you claim any of the joint payments on yourFiscal Years• Form 1099–OID, Original Issue Discount, tax return, enter your former spouse’s social
If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal• Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen- security number (SSN) in the space provided on
year (a 12-month period ending on the last daysions, Annuities, Retirement or the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you
of any month except December), you must fol-Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance divorced and remarried in 2001, enter your pre-
low special rules to determine your credit forContracts, etc., sent spouse’s SSN in that space and write your
federal income tax withholding. For a discussionformer spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV,” to the• Form SSA –1099, Social Security Benefitof how to take credit for withholding on a fiscalleft of line 60, Form 1040, or line 38, FormStatement, and year return, see Fiscal Years in chapter 3 of1040A.
Publication 505.• Form RRB –1099, Payments by the Rail-
road Retirement Board.
Estimated TaxIf you received the types of income reported Underpayment Penaltyon some forms in the 1099 series, you may notTake credit for all your estimated tax payments
be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.for 2001 on line 60 of Form 1040 or line 38 ofIf you did not pay enough tax either throughSee the instructions to these forms for details.Form 1040A. Include any overpayment from withholding or by making estimated tax pay-
2000 that you had credited to your 2001 esti-ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-Form 1099 –R. Attach Form 1099–R to your
mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Formmated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.return if box 4 shows federal income tax with-
1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot useGenerally, you will not have to pay a penalty forheld. Include the amount withheld in the total on
Form 1040EZ. 2001 if any of the following situations applies.line 59 of Form 1040 or line 37 of Form 1040A.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receivedName changed. If you changed your name, • The total of your withholding and esti-payments reported on Form 1099–R. and you made estimated tax payments using mated tax payments was at least as much
your old name, attach a brief statement to theas your 2000 tax (or 110% of your 2000Backup withholding. If you were subject to
front of your tax return indicating: tax if your adjusted gross income wasbackup withholding on income you received dur-
more than $150,000 —  $75,000 if youring 2001, include the amount withheld, as • When you made the payments,
2001 filing status is married filing sepa-shown on your Form 1099, in the total on line 59
• The amount of each payment, rately) and you paid all required estimatedof Form 1040, or line 37 of Form 1040A.
tax payments on time.• Which IRS address you sent the payments
to, • The tax balance due on your return is noForm Not Correct more than 10% of your total 2001 tax, and• Your name when you made the payments,
you paid all required estimated tax pay-andIf you receive a form with incorrect information ments on time.on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected• Your social security number.form. Call the telephone number or write to the • Your total 2001 tax minus your withholding
The statement should cover payments youaddress given for the payer on the form. The is less than $1,000.
made jointly with your spouse as well as any youcorrected Form W–2G or Form 1099 you re- • You did not have a tax liability for 2000.made separately.ceive will be marked “Corrected.” A special form,
Form W –2c, Corrected Wage and Tax State- • You did not have any withholding taxes
ment, is used to correct a Form W–2. Separate Returns and your current year tax less any house-
hold employment taxes is less than
If you and your spouse made separate esti- $1,000.
mated tax payments for 2001 and you file sepa-Form Received After Filing Special rules apply if you are a farmer or fisher-rate returns, you can take credit only for your
man. See Farmers and Fishermen in chapter 4own payments.If you file your return and you later receive a
of Publication 505 for more information.If you made joint estimated tax payments,form for income that you did not include on your
you must decide how to divide the paymentsreturn, you should report the income and take
IRS can figure the penalty for you.If youbetween your returns. One of you can claim allcredit for any income tax withheld by filing Form
think you owe the penalty but you do not want toof the estimated tax paid and the other none, or1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
figure it yourself when you file your tax return,you can divide it in any other way you agree on.Return. See Amended Returns and Claims for
you may not have to. Generally, the IRS willIf you cannot agree, you must divide the pay-Refund in chapter 1.
figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.ments in proportion to each spouse’s individual
However, you must complete Form 2210 and filetax as shown on your separate returns for 2000.
it with your return if you are able to lower orSeparate Returns eliminate your penalty. See chapter 4 of Publica-
tion 505.If you are married but file a separate return, youDivorced Taxpayers
can take credit only for the tax withheld from
If you made joint estimated tax payments foryour own income. Do not include any amount
2001, and you were divorced during the year,withheld from your spouse’s income. However,
different rules may apply if you live in a commu-
nity property state.
Page 48 Chapter 5 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 51 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income reimbursed for moving expenses, get Publica-
tion 521, Moving Expenses.
Back pay awards. Include in income amounts6.
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
back pay. These include payments made to youEmployee for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,
Wages, Salaries, and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyCompensation should be reported to you by your employer on
Form W –2.This section discusses many types of employeeand Other
compensation followed by a detailed explana-Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
tion of fringe benefits. you receive for outstanding work are included inEarnings If you are an employee, you should receiveyour income and should be shown on your Form
Form W –2 from your employer showing the payW –2. These include prizes such as vacation
you received for your services. Include your paytrips for meeting sales goals. If the prize or
on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on lineaward you receive is goods or services, youImportant Reminder 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not receive amust include the fair market value of the goods
Form W –2. or services in your income. However, if yourForeign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or employer merely promises to pay you a bonus orresident alien, you must report income fromChild-care providers.If you provide childaward at some future time, it is not taxable untilsources outside the United States (foreign in-care, either in the child’s home or in your homeyou receive it or it is made available to you.come) on your tax return unless it is exempt byor other place of business, the pay you receive
Employee achievement award. If you re-U.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidemust be included in your income. If you are not
ceive tangible personal property (other thanor outside the United States and whether or notan employee, you are probably self-employed
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asyou receive a Form W–2, Wage and Tax State- and must include payments for your services on
an award for length of service or safety achieve-ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. ThisSchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From
ment, you can generally exclude its value fromapplies to earned income (such as wages andBusiness, or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040), Net
your income. However, the amount you can ex-tips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-Profit From Business. You are generally not an
clude is limited to your employer’s cost andest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents,employee unless you are subject to the will and
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsand royalties). control of the person who employs you as to
that are not qualified plan awards) for all suchIf you reside outside the United States, youwhat you are to do and how you are to do it.
awards you receive during the year. Your em-may be able to exclude part or all of your foreignBaby sitting.If you baby sit for relatives orployer can tell you whether your award is asource earned income. For details, see Publica-neighborhood children, whether on a regularqualified plan award. Your employer must maketion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi-basis or only periodically, the rules for child-carethe award as part of a meaningful presentation,dent Aliens Abroad. providers apply to you. under conditions and circumstances that do not
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
guised pay.Miscellaneous
However, the exclusion does not apply to theIntroduction Compensation following awards.
This chapter discusses wages, salaries, fringe • A length-of-service award if you received itThis section discusses many types of employeebenefits, and other compensation received for for less than 5 years of service or if youcompensation. The subjects are arranged in al-services as an employee. The topics include: received another length-of-service awardphabetical order.
during the year or the previous 4 years.• Bonuses and awards,
Advance commissions and other earnings. • A safety achievement award if you are a• Sickness and injury benefits, and If you receive advance commissions or other manager, administrator, clerical employee,amounts for services to be performed in the• Special rules for certain employees. or other professional employee or if morefuture and you are a cash method taxpayer, youthan 10% of eligible employees previouslymust include these amounts in your income inThe chapter explains what income is included received safety achievement awards dur-the year you receive them.in the employee’s gross income and what is not ing the year.If you repay unearned commissions or otherincluded.
amounts in the same year you receive them,
Example. Ben Green received three em-reduce the amount included in your income byUseful Items ployee achievement awards during the year: athe repayment. If you repay them in a later taxYou may want to see: nonqualified plan award of a watch valued atyear, you can deduct the repayment as an item-
$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),Publication valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued ator you may be able to take a credit for that year.
$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarSee  Repayments in chapter 13.
fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachExpenses
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re- award by itself would be excluded from income.❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care ceive travel, transportation, or other business However, since the $1,750 total value of theExpenses expense allowances or reimbursements from awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax your employer, get Publication 463. If you are $150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in his income.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 49

Page 52 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Government cost-of-living allowances. a substantial risk of forfeiture (meaning you the corporation’s stock on the date of use minus
Cost-of-living allowances are generally included have a good chance of losing it) at the time of the fair market value on the date the right was
in your income. However, they are not included contribution, do not include the value of your granted. You include the cash payment in your
in your income if you are a federal civilian em- interest in your income until it is no longer sub- income in the year you use the right.
ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- ject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.Stock options. If you receive a nonstatutorytioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United option to buy or sell stock or other property asSeverance pay. Amounts you receive as sev-States. payment for your services, you will usually haveerance pay are taxable. A lump-sum paymentAllowances and differentials that increase income either when you receive the option orfor cancellation of your employment contractyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less when you exercise the option (use it to buy ormust be included in your income in the tax yeardesirable post of duty are part of your compen- sell the stock or other property). However, if youryou receive it.sation and must be included in income. For option is a statutory stock option, you usually willexample, your compensation includes ForeignAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed-not have any income until you sell or exchangePost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropicaleral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentyour stock. Your employer can tell you whichdifferentials. For more information, get Publica-for accrued annual leave when you retire orkind of option you hold. For details, get Publica-tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesresign, this amount will be included as wages ontion 525.Stationed Abroad. your Form W–2.
Restricted property.Generally, if you receiveIf you resign from one agency and are reem-
Note received for services.If your employer property for your services, you must include itsployed by another agency, you may have to
gives you a secured note as payment for your fair market value in your income in the year yourepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay-
services, you must include the fair market value receive the property. However, if you receivement to the second agency. You can reduce
(usually the discount value) of the note in your stock or other property that has certain restric-gross wages by the amount you repaid in the
income for the year you receive it. When you tions that affect its value, you may not have tosame tax year in which you received it. Attach to
later receive payments on the note, a propor- include the value of the property in your incomeyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of in the year you receive it. For details, see Re-given to you by the agency you repaid to explain
the fair market value that you previously in- stricted Property in Publication 525.the difference between the wages on the return
cluded in your income. Do not include that part Dividends you receive on restricted stock areand the wages on your Forms W–2.
again in your income. Include the rest of the extra compensation to you. Your employerOutplacement services. If you choose topayment in your income in the year of payment. should include these payments on your Formaccept a reduced amount of severance pay soIf your employer gives you an unsecured W –2.that you can receive outplacement servicesnote as payment for your services, payments on
Stock you chose to include in income.(such as training in resum´e writing and interviewthe note that are credited toward the principal
Dividends you receive on restricted stock youtechniques), you must include the unreducedamount of the note are compensation income
chose to include in your income in the yearamount of the severance pay in income.when you receive them.
transferred are treated the same as any otherHowever, you can deduct the value of these
dividends. Report them on your return as divi-Retirement plan contributions.Generally, outplacement services (up to the difference be-
dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-you must include in income amounts you paytween the severance pay included in income
ter 9.into a retirement plan through payroll deduc-and the amount actually received) as a miscella-
For information on how to treat dividendstions. You recover your contributions tax freeneous deduction (subject to the 2% limit) on
reported on both your Form W–2 and Formwhen you retire and receive benefits from theSchedule A (Form 1040).
1099–DIV, see Dividends received on restrictedplan. See chapter 11 for more information aboutSick pay. Pay you receive from your employerstock in Publication 525.the tax treatment of retirement plan benefits.while you are sick or injured is part of your salary
Employer’s contributions to qualified plan.or wages. In addition, you must include in your
Fringe BenefitsYour employer’s contributions to a qualified re-income sick pay benefits received from any of
tirement plan for you are not included in incomethe following payers. Fringe benefits you receive in connection withat the time contributed. (Your employer can tell
the performance of your services are included in1) A welfare fund.you whether your retirement plan is qualified.)
your income as compensation unless you payHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage2) A state sickness or disability fund. fair market value for them or they are specificallyincluded in the plan may have to be included.
excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-3) An association of employers or employ-See Group-Term Life Insurance Premiums,
ance of services (for example, under a covenantees.later, under Fringe Benefits.
not to compete) is treated as the performance of4) An insurance company, if your employerElective deferrals.If you chose to set aside services for purposes of these rules.paid for the plan.part of your pay for retirement under a qualified
Accounting period. You must use the samedeferred compensation arrangement (for exam-However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-accounting period your employer uses to reportple, a section 401(k) plan), the amount you setdent or health insurance policy, the benefits youyour taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-aside (called an elective deferral) is treated asreceive under the policy are not taxable.ployer has the option to report taxable noncashan employer contribution to a qualified plan,
fringe benefits by using either of the followingSocial security and Medicare taxes paid bysubject to a limit. For 2001, this limit is $10,500
rules.employer. If you and your employer have anfor all elective deferrals. If you set aside more
agreement that your employer pays your socialthan $10,500, the excess must be included in 1) The general rule: benefits are reported forsecurity and Medicare taxes without deductingyour income for that year. See Publication 525 a full calendar year (January 1– Decem-them from your gross wages, you must reportfor a discussion of the tax treatment of corrective ber 31).the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wagesdistributions of excess deferrals.
on your tax return. The payment is also treatedElective deferrals are not excluded from 2) The special accounting period rule:
as wages for figuring your social security andwages for social security and Medicare taxes benefits provided during the last 2 months
Medicare taxes and your social security andand benefits. of the calendar year (or any shorter period)
Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsIf you are a federal employee, this treatment are treated as paid during the following
are not treated as social security and Medicareapplies to your contributions to the Thrift Sav- calendar year. For example, each year
wages if you are a household worker or a farmings Plan. your employer reports the value of benefits
worker. provided during the last 2 months of theEmployer’s contributions to nonqualified prior year and the first 10 months of theplan. If your employer pays into a nonqualifiedStock appreciation rights.Do not include a current year.plan for you, you generally must include the stock appreciation right granted by your em-
contributions in your income as wages for the ployer in income until you exercise (use) the
tax year in which the contributions are made. right. When you use the right, you are entitled to Your employer does not have to use the same
However, if your interest in the plan is subject to a cash payment equal to the fair market value of accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
Page 50 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 53 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must use the same period for all employees who it, the value is not included in your income.Commuter highway vehicle. This is a
receive a particular benefit. Generally, the value of these benefits, such as highway vehicle that seats at least six adults (not
You must use the same accounting perioddiscounts at company cafeterias, cab fares including the driver). At least 80% of the
that you use to report the benefit to claim an home when working overtime, and company pic- vehicle’s mileage must reasonably be expected
employee business deduction (for use of a car, nics, is not included in your income. to be:
for example). Holiday gifts.If your employer gives you a1) For transporting employees between their
Form W –2. Your employer reports your taxa-turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value athomes and work place, and
ble fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherChristmas or other holidays, you do not have to2) On trips during which employees occupycompensation) of Form W–2. The total value ofinclude the value of the gift in your income.at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingyour fringe benefits may also be noted in box 12.However, if your employer gives you cash, a giftcapacity (not including the driver).The value of your fringe benefits may be addedcertificate, or a similar item that you can easily
to your other compensation on one Form W–2, exchange for cash, you include the value of thatTransit pass.This is any pass, token, fare-or you may receive a separate Form W–2 show- gift as extra salary or wages regardless of thecard, voucher, or similar item entitling a personing just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1amount involved. to ride mass transit (whether public or private)with a notation in box 12.
free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter
highway vehicle operated by a person in the
Educational Assistance business of transporting persons for compensa-Accident or Health Plan tion.You can exclude from your income up to $5,250
Generally, the value of accident or health planof qualified employer-provided educational as-Qualified parking.This is parking providedcoverage provided to you by your employer issistance. The exclusion does not apply toto an employee at or near the employer’s placenot included in your income. Benefits you re-graduate-level courses beginning before Janu-of business. It also includes parking provided onceive from the plan are generally taxable, asary 1, 2002. For more information, see Publica-or near a location from which the employeeexplained later under Sickness and Injury Bene-tion 508, Tax Benefits for Work-Related commutes to work in a commuter highway vehi-fits. Education. cle or carpool. It does not include parking at or
near the employee’s home.Long-term care coverage. Contributions by
your employer to provide coverage for long-term
Employer-Provided Vehiclescare services are generally not included in in-
Group-Term Life Insurancecome. However, contributions made through aIf your employer provides a car (or other high-flexible spending or similar arrangement (such Premiumsway motor vehicle) to you, your personal use ofas a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourthe car is usually a taxable noncash fringe bene-Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofincome. This amount will be reported as wagesfit. group-term life insurance coverage provided toin box 1 of your Form W–2. Your employer must determine the actualyou by your employer (or former employer) is notContributions you make to the plan are dis-value of this fringe benefit to include in yourincluded in your income. However, you mustcussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental income. include in income the cost of employer-providedExpenses.
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000Certain employer-provided transporta-Archer MSA contributions.Contributions by of coverage. If you pay any part of the cost of thetion can be excluded from gross in-your employer to your Archer MSA (previously insurance, your entire payment reduces, dollarcome. See the discussion on
TIP
called a medical savings account) are not in- for dollar, the amount you would otherwise in-Transportation, next.cluded in your income. Their total will be re- clude in your income. However, you cannot re-
ported in box 12 of Form W–2 with code R. You duce the amount to include in your income by:
must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer
TransportationMSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- 1) Payments for coverage in a different tax
tracts, and attach the form to your return. year,
If your employer provides you with a qualifiedIf your employer does not make contributions 2) Payments for coverage through a cafeteriatransportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedto your MSA, you can make your own contribu- plan, unless the payments are after-taxfrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedtions to your MSA. These contributions are dis- contributions, ortransportation fringe benefit is:cussed in Publication 969, Medical Savings
Accounts (MSAs). Also, see Form 8853. 3) Payments for coverage not taxed to you1) Transportation in a commuter highway ve-because of the exceptions discussed laterhicle (such as a van) between your home in Entire cost excluded.and work place,Adoption Assistance The amount included in your income is re-2) A transit pass, or ported as part of your wages in box 1 of yourYou may be able to exclude from income 3) Qualified parking. Form W –2. It is also shown separately in box 12amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
with code C.ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-Cash reimbursement by your employer for these
nection with your adoption of an eligible child.expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-Group-term life insurance.This insurance isSee Publication 968, Tax Benefits for Adoption,rangement is also excludable. However, cashterm life insurance protection (insurance for afor more information. reimbursement for a transit pass is excludablefixed period of time) that:Adoption benefits are reported by your em-only if a voucher or similar item that can be
ployer in box 12 of Form W–2 with code T. Theyexchanged only for a transit pass is not readily1) Provides a general death benefit,are also included as social security and Medi-available for direct distribution to you.
2) Is provided to a group of employees,care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are
Exclusion limit.The exclusion for commuternot included as wages in box 1. To determine 3) Is provided under a policy carried by thehighway vehicle transportation and transit passthe taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must employer, andfringe benefits cannot be more than a total ofcomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-
$65 a month, regardless of the total value of4) Provides an amount of insurance for eachtion Expenses. Attach the form to your return.
both benefits. employee based on a formula that pre-
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringevents individual selection.
benefit cannot be more than $180 a month,De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
regardless of its value. Permanent benefits.If your group-term life
If your employer provides you with a product or If the benefits have a value that is more than insurance policy includes permanent benefits,
service and the cost of it is so small that it would these limits, the excess must be included in your such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
be unreasonable for the employer to account for income. must include in your income, as wages, the cost
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 51

Page 54 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
COST PER $1,000 OF PROTECTIONof the permanent benefits minus the amount you your duties as an ordained, licensed, or commis-
FOR ONE MONTH sioned minister. However, you must include thepay for them. Your employer should be able to
rental value of the home or the housing allow-tell you the amount to include in your income.
Age Cost ance as earnings from self-employment onAccidental or other death benefits.Insur- Under 25 .................. $. 0 5 Schedule SE (Form 1040) if you are subject toance that provides accidental or other death25 through 29............... . 0 6 the self-employment tax. For more information,benefits but does not provide general death ben-30 through 34............... . 0 8 see Publication 517, Social Security and Otherefits (travel insurance, for example) is not35 through 39............... . 0 9 Information for Members of the Clergy and Re-group-term life insurance. 40 through 44............... . 1 0 ligious Workers.45 through 49............... . 1 5
Designation requirement.The church or50 through 54............... . 2 3Entire cost excluded.You are not taxed on
55 through 59............... . 4 3 organization that employs you must officiallythe cost of group-term life insurance if any of the
60 through 64............... . 6 6 designate the payment as a housing allowancefollowing circumstances apply. 65 through 69............... 1.27 before the payment is made. A definite amount
70 and older................ 2.06 must be designated; the amount of the housing1) You are permanently and totally disabled
allowance cannot be determined at a later date.and have ended your employment.
If you are employed and paid by a localExample. You are 51 years old and work for2) Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- congregation, a resolution by a national churchemployers A and B. Both employers provideicy for the entire period the insurance is in agency of your denomination does not effec-group-term life insurance coverage for you forforce during the tax year. tively designate a housing allowance for you.the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with
The local congregation must officially designate3) A charitable organization (defined in chap-employer A and $45,000 with employer B. You
the part of your salary that is to be a housingter 26) is the only beneficiary of the policypay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
allowance. However, a resolution of a nationalfor the entire period the insurance is inployer B group plan. You figure the amount to
church agency can designate your housing al-force during the tax year. (You are notinclude in your income as follows:
lowance if you are directly employed by theentitled to a deduction for a charitable con-
agency. If no part has been officially designated,tribution for naming a charitable organiza-Employer A coverage (in thousands) $35
you must include your total salary in your in-Employer B coverage (in thousands) + 45tion as the beneficiary of your policy.)
come.Total coverage (in thousands)..... $ 8 0
Minus: Exclusion (in thousands).... − 50 Homeowner. If you own your home or areEntire cost taxed.You are taxed on the entireExcess amount (in thousands)..... $ 3 0 buying it, you can exclude your housing allow-cost of group-term life insurance if either of theMultiply by cost per $1,000 per month, ance from your income if you spend it for thefollowing circumstances apply. age 51 (from table)............ × .23 down payment on the home, for mortgage pay-Cost of excess insurance for 1 month $6.90ments, or for interest, taxes, utilities, repairs, etc.1) The insurance is provided by your em-Multiply by number of full months However, you cannot exclude more than the fairployer through a qualified employees’ coverage at this cost........... × 12 rental value of the home plus the cost of utilities,trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedCost of excess insurance for tax year $82.80
even if a larger amount is designated as a hous-Minus: Premiums you paid ($4.15 × 12annuity plan.
ing allowance. The fair rental value of a homemonths) .................... −49.802) You are a key employee and your includes the fair rental value of the furnishings inCost to include in incomeemployer’s plan discriminates in favor of it.as wages $33.00
key employees. You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
the qualified mortgage interest and real estate
taxes you pay on your home even if you useLife insurance agents.Full-time life insur- nontaxable housing allowance funds to makeance agents who are considered employees forSpecial Rules for the payments. See chapters 24 and 25.social security and Medicare tax withholding
purposes are treated as employees in applying Teachers or administrators.If you are a min-Certain Employeesthe provisions relating to group-term life insur- ister employed as a teacher or administrator by
ance under a policy carried by their employer. a church school, college, or university, you areThis section deals with special rules for peopleperforming ministerial services for purposes ofin certain types of employment: members of thethe housing exclusion. However, if you performMore than $50,000 from one employer. If clergy, members of religious orders, peopleservices as a teacher or administrator on theyou have only one employer and you were in-working for foreign employers, military person-faculty of a nonchurch college, you cannot ex-sured at any time during the tax year for morenel, veterans, and certain volunteers. clude from your income a housing allowance orthan $50,000 under a group-term life insurance
the value of a home that is provided to you.policy, your taxable income from this source is
Clergyincluded as other compensation on the Form If you live in faculty lodging as an em-W –2 you receive. ployee of an educational institution orIf you are a member of the clergy, you must
an academic health center, all or partinclude in your income offerings and fees you
TIP
More than $50,000 from two or more employ- of the value of that lodging may be nontaxablereceive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,ers. If two or more employers provide you under a different rule. See Faculty lodging in themasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If thegroup-term life insurance coverage totaling discussion on meals and lodging in Publicationoffering is made to the religious institution, it ismore than $50,000, you must figure how much 525.not taxable to you.to include in your income. You must include theIf you are a member of a religious organiza-If you serve as a minister of music or ministercost of life insurance provided to you during thetion and you give your outside earnings to theof education or serve in an administrative ortax year, regardless of when your employersorganization, you still must include the earningsother function of your religious organization, butpaid the premiums. in your income. However, you may be entitled toare not authorized to perform substantially all of
a charitable contribution deduction for thethe religious duties of an ordained minister inFiguring the taxable cost.You figure the tax-amount paid to the organization. See chapteryour church (even if you are commissioned as aable cost for each month of coverage by multi-26. minister of the gospel), the housing exclusionplying the number of thousands of dollars of does not apply to you.insurance coverage for the month (figured to theHousing.  Special rules apply to members of
nearest tenth), less 50, by the cost from thethe clergy. Under these rules, you do not includeTheological students.The housing exclusion
following table. Use your age on the last day ofin your income the rental value of a home (in- does not apply if you are a theological student
the tax year. You must prorate the cost from thecluding utilities) or a housing allowance provided serving a required internship as an assistant
table if less than a full month of coverage isto you as part of your pay. The home or allow- pastor, unless you are ordained, commissioned,
involved. ance must be provided as compensation for or licensed as a minister.
Page 52 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 55 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Traveling evangelists.If you are an ordainedServices performed outside the order.If rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-
you are directed to work outside the order, your cation 525.minister and are providing evangelistic services,
services are not an exercise of duties requiredyou can exclude amounts received from Employment abroad. For information on in-by the order unless they meet both of the follow-out-of-town churches that are designated as a come earned abroad, get Publication 54.ing requirements. housing allowance, provided you actually use
them to maintain your permanent home.
1) They are the kind of services that are ordi-Militarynarily the duties of members of the order.Retired members of the clergy.The rental
value of a home provided rent free by your Payments you receive as a member of a military2) They are part of the duties that you must
church for your past services is not income if you service generally are taxed as wages except forexercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
are a retired minister. In addition, the amount of retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.order as its agent.
your housing allowance that you spend for utili- Allowances generally are not taxed. For more
If you are an employee of a third party, theinformation on the tax treatment of military al-ties, maintenance, repairs, and similar ex-
services you perform for the third party will notlowances and benefits, get Publication 3, Armedpenses that are directly related to providing a
be considered directed or required of you by theForces’ Tax Guide.home is not income to you. These amounts are
order. Amounts you receive for these servicesalso not included in net earnings from self-em- Military retirement pay.If your retirementare included in your income, even if you haveployment. pay is based on age or length of service, it istaken a vow of poverty.The general convention of a national relig- taxable and must be included in your income asious denomination can designate a housing al- a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, orExample. Mark Brown is a member of alowance for retired ministers that can be on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do notreligious order and has taken a vow of poverty.excluded from income. This applies if the local include in your income the amount of any reduc-He renounces all claims to his earnings andcongregations authorize the general convention tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aturns over his earnings to the order.to establish and maintain a unified pension sys- survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenMark is a school teacher. He was instructedtem for all retired clergy members of the denomi- under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-by the superiors of the order to get a job with anation for their past services to the local tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-churches. For more information on survivor annuities,ployee of the school, and, at his request, theA surviving spouse of a retired minister can- see chapter 11.school made the salary payments directly to thenot exclude a housing allowance from income. Iforder. Disability.If you are retired on disability,these payments were reported to you on FormBecause Mark is an employee of the school,see  Military and Government Disability Pen-1099–R, include them on lines 16a and 16b ofhe is performing services for the school rathersions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.Form 1040, or on lines 12a and 12b of Formthan as an agent of the order. The wages Mark1040A. Otherwise, include them on line 21 of Veterans’ benefits.Do not include in your in-earns working for the school are included in hisForm 1040. come any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,income.
regulation, or administrative practice adminis-Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a
tered by the Department of Veterans Affairsmember of the clergy is usually treated the sameForeign Employer (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans oras any other pension or annuity. It must be
their families are not taxable. reported on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreign
on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. employer. 1) Education, training, and subsistence al-
lowances.U.S. citizen.If you are a U.S. citizen whoMembers of Religious 2) Disability compensation and pension pay-works in the United States for a foreign govern-
Orders ments for disabilities paid either to veter-ment, an international organization, a foreign
ans or their families.  embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustIf you are a member of a religious order who hasinclude your salary in your income. 3) Grants for homes designed for wheelchairtaken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings
living.Social security and Medicare taxes.Youthat you renounce and turn over to the order
are exempt from social security and Medicaredepends on whether your services are per- 4) Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whotaxes if you are employed in the United Statesformed for the order. lost their sight or the use of their limbs.by an international organization or a foreign gov-
5) Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-ernment. However, you must pay self-employ-Services performed for the order.If you are
dends paid either to veterans or their ben-ment tax on your earnings from servicesperforming the services as an agent of the order
eficiaries, including the proceeds of aperformed in the United States, even though youin the exercise of duties required by the order,
veteran’s endowment policy paid beforeare not self-employed. This rule also applies ifdo not include in your income the amounts
death. you are an employee of a qualifyingturned over to the order.
wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-If your order directs you to perform services 6) Interest on insurance dividends you leaveernment.for another agency of the supervising church or on deposit with the VA.
an associated institution, you are considered toNon-U.S. citizen.If you are not a U.S. citizen,be performing the services as an agent of the Rehabilitative program payments. VAor if you are a U.S. citizen but also a citizen oforder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an payments to hospital patients and resident vet-the Philippines, and you work for an interna-order that you turn over to the order are not erans for their services under the VA’s therapeu-tional organization in the United States, yourincluded in your gross income. tic or rehabilitative programs are not treated assalary from that source is exempt from tax. If younontaxable veterans’ benefits. Report thesework for a foreign government in the UnitedExample. You are a member of a church payments as income on line 21 of Form 1040.States, your salary from that source is exemptorder and have taken a vow of poverty. Youfrom tax if your work is like the work done byrenounce any claims to your earnings and turn Volunteersemployees of the United States in that foreignover to the order any salaries or wages youcountry and the foreign government gives anearn. You are a registered nurse, so your order The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aequal exemption to employees of the Unitedassigns you to work in a hospital that is an volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similarStates in that country.associated institution of the church. However, agency is covered in the following discussions.you remain under the general direction and con-Waiver of alien status.If you are an alien
trol of the order. You are considered to be anwho works for a foreign government or interna-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive
agent of the order and any wages you earn attional organization and you file a waiver under as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader
the hospital that you turn over to your order aresection 247(b) of the Immigration and National- for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,
not included in your income. ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different and clothing are exempt from tax.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 53

Page 56 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Taxable allowances. The following al- Military and GovernmentDisability Incomelowances must be included in your income and Disability Pensions
reported as wages. Generally, if you retire on disability, you must
Certain military and government disability pen-report your pension or annuity as income. There1) Allowances paid to your spouse and minor sions are not taxable.is a tax credit for people who are permanentlychildren while you are a volunteer leader You may be able to exclude from incomeand totally disabled. For information on this
training in the United States. amounts you receive as a pension, annuity, orcredit and the definition of permanent and total
similar allowance for personal injury or sicknessdisability, see chapter 34.2) Living allowances designated by the Direc-
resulting from active service in one of the follow-tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen-
ing government services.Disability pensions.Generally, you must re-sation. These are allowances for personal
port as income any amount you receive for per-items such as domestic help, laundry and • The armed forces of any country.sonal injury or sickness through an accident orclothing maintenance, entertainment and
health plan that is paid for by your employer. If• The National Oceanic and Atmosphericrecreation, transportation, and other mis-
both you and your employer pay for the plan,Administration.cellaneous expenses.
only the amount you receive that is due to your• The Public Health Service.3) Leave allowances. employer’s payments is reported as income.
However, certain payments may not be taxable• The Foreign Service.4) Readjustment allowances or termination
to you. Your employer should be able to give youpayments. These are considered received
specific details about your pension plan and tellConditions for exclusion.Do not includeby you when credited to your account.
you the amount you paid for your disability pen-the disability payments in your income if any of
sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui-the following conditions apply.
Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpsties, you may be receiving other payments for
volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment 1) You were entitled to receive a disabilitysickness and injury.
allowance during his period of service, to be paid payment before September 25, 1975.
to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofCost paid by you.If you pay the entire cost of2) You were a member of a listed govern-duty. Although the allowance is not available toa health or accident insurance plan, do not in-ment service or its reserve component, orhim until the end of his service, Gary must in-clude any amounts you receive from the plan forwere under a binding written commitmentclude it in his income on a monthly basis as it ispersonal injury or sickness as income on yourto become a member, on September 24,credited to his account. tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi-1975.cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year,
3) You receive the disability payments for ayou may have to include some, or all, of theVolunteers in Service to America (VISTA).If
combat-related injury. This is a personalreimbursement in your income. See  Reim-you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include
injury or sickness that:bursement in a later year in chapter 23.meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your
income as wages. Cafeteria plans.Generally, if you are cov- a) Results directly from armed conflict,
ered by an accident or health insurance plan
b) Takes place while you are engaged inNational Senior Services Corps programs. through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the
extra-hazardous service,Do not include in your income amounts youinsurance premiums was not included in your
receive for supportive services or reimburse-income, you are not considered to have paid thec) Takes place under conditions simulat-ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-premiums and you must include any benefits ing war, including training exerciseslowing programs. you receive in your income. If the amount of thesuch as maneuvers, or
premiums was included in your income, you are• Retired Senior Volunteer Program d) Is caused by an instrumentality of war.considered to have paid the premiums, and any(RSVP). benefits you receive are not taxable. 4) You would be entitled to receive disability• Foster Grandparent Program. compensation from the Department of Vet-Accrued leave payment.If you retire on disa-• Senior Companion Program. erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-bility, any lump-sum payment you receive fortion for it. Your exclusion under thisaccrued annual leave is a salary payment. Thecondition is equal to the amount you wouldService Corps of Retired Executives payment is not a disability payment. Include it inbe entitled to receive from the VA.(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- your income in the tax year you receive it.
ive services or reimbursements for Pension based on years of service.If youRetirement and profit-sharing plans.If youout-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not receive a disability pension based on years ofreceive payments from a retirement orinclude these amounts in income. service, you generally must include it in yourprofit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-income. But if it is a result of active service in onebility retirement, do not treat the payments as aVolunteer tax counseling.Do not include in of the listed government services and one of thedisability pension. The payments must be re-your income any reimbursements you receive listed conditions applies, do not include in in-ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-for transportation, meals, and other expenses come the part of your pension that you wouldmation on pensions, see chapter 11.you have in training for, or actually providing, have received if the pension had been based onvolunteer federal income tax counseling for the a percentage of disability. You must include theHow to report.If you retired on disability, youelderly (TCE). rest of your pension in your income.must include in income any disability pensionYou can deduct as a charitable contributionyou receive under a plan that is paid for by yourTerrorist attack.Do not include in your in-your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inemployer. You must report your taxable disabil-come disability payments you receive for injuriestaking part in the volunteer income tax assis-ity payments as wages on line 7 of Form 1040 orresulting directly from a terrorist attack that oc-tance (VITA) program. Form 1040A, until you reach minimum retire-curs while you are a U.S. government employee
ment age. Minimum retirement age generally isperforming official duties outside the United
the age at which you can first receive a pensionStates. For your disability payments to be tax
or annuity if you are not disabled. exempt, the Secretary of State must determine
Sickness and Injury the attack was a terrorist attack.Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are
Benefits taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theVA disability benefits.Disability benefits you
payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or receive from the VA are not included in your
This section discusses many types of sicknesson lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules income. If you are a military retiree and you
and injury benefits including disability benefitsfor reporting pensions are explained in How To receive disability benefits from other than the
and military and government disability pensions.Report in chapter 11. VA, do not include in your income the amount of
Page 54 Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 57 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
disability benefits equal to the VA benefits to 2) Maintenance or personal care services re-Railroad sick pay.Payments you receive
which you are entitled. quired by a chronically ill individual as as sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment
prescribed by a licensed health care prac-Insurance Act are taxable and you must includeRetroactive VA determination.If you retire titioner. them in your income. However, do not includefrom the armed services based on years of ser-
them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobvice and are later given a retroactive
injury.service-connected disability rating by the VA,Chronically ill individual.A chronically ill in-
your retirement pay for the retroactive period is If you received income because of a disabil-dividual is one who has been certified as one of
excluded from income up to the amount of VAthe following. ity, see Disability Income, earlier.disability benefits you would have been entitled
to receive. You can claim a refund of any tax1) An individual who, for at least 90 days, is
Federal Employees ’ Compensation Actpaid on the excludable amount (subject to theunable to perform at least two activities of
(FECA). Payments received under this Act forstatute of limitations) by filing an amended re-daily living without substantial assistance
turn on Form 1040X for each previous year personal injury or sickness, including paymentsdue to loss of functional capacity. Activities
during the retroactive period. to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.of daily living are eating, toileting, transfer-
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever- However, you are taxed on amounts you receivering, bathing, dressing, and continence.ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- under this Act as continuation of pay for up to2) An individual who requires substantial su-ity benefits, do not include in your income the 45 days while a claim is being decided. Reportpervision to be protected from threats toportion of the severance payment equal to the this income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Formhealth and safety due to severe cognitiveVA benefit you would have been entitled to re- 1040A, or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, payimpairment.ceive in that same year. However, you must for sick leave while a claim is being processed isinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust-The certification must have been made by ataxable and must be included in your income asment or other nondisability severance paymentlicensed health care practitioner within the previ-wages.you received on release from active duty, even ifous 12 months.you are later given a retroactive disability rating You can deduct the amount you spend to buy
by the VA. back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligibleLimit on exclusion.You can generally ex- for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It isclude from gross income up to $200 a day fora miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2%Long-Term Care 2001. The $200 is indexed for inflation. Seelimit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buy backLimit on exclusion, under Long-Term Care In-Insurance Contracts sick leave in the same year you use it, thesurance Contracts, under Sickness and Injury
amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. DoBenefits in Publication 525 for more information.Long-term care insurance contracts are gener-
not deduct it separately.ally treated as accident and health insurance
contracts. Amounts you receive from them Workers’ Compensation(other than policyholder dividends or premium Other compensation. Many other amounts
refunds) generally are excludable from incomeAmounts you receive as workers’ compensation you receive as compensation for sickness oras amounts received for personal injury or sick-for an occupational sickness or injury are fullyinjury are not taxable. These include the follow-ness. To claim an exclusion for payments madeexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’ ing amounts.on a per diem or other periodic basis under acompensation act or a statute in the nature of along-term care insurance contract, you must file • Compensatory damages you receive forworkers’ compensation act. The exemption alsoForm 8853 with your return. physical injury or physical sickness,applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-A long-term care insurance contract is any whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsinsurance contract that only provides coverageyou receive based on your age, length of ser- payments.for qualified long-term care services. The vice, or prior contributions to the plan, even ifcontract: • Benefits you receive under an accident oryou retired because of occupational sickness orhealth insurance policy on which eitherinjury.1) Must be guaranteed renewable, you paid the premiums or your employer
If part of your workers’ compensation2) Must not provide for a cash surrender paid the premiums but you had to include
reduces your social security orvalue or other money that can be paid, them in your income.  
equivalent railroad retirement benefitsassigned, pledged, or borrowed, CAUTION
!
• Disability benefits you receive for loss ofreceived, that part is considered social security3) Must provide that refunds, other than re- income or earning capacity as a result of(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andfunds on the death of the insured or com- injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-may be taxable. For more information, see Pub-plete surrender or cancellation of the icy.lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-contract, and dividends under the contractroad Retirement Benefits. • Compensation you receive for permanentmay be used only to reduce future premi-
loss or loss of use of a part or function ofums or increase future benefits, and
your body, or for your permanent disfig-Return to work. If you return to work after4) Generally must not pay or reimburse ex- urement. This compensation must bequalifying for workers’ compensation, paymentspenses incurred for services or items that based only on the injury and not on theyou continue to receive while assigned to lightwould be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
period of your absence from work. Theseduties are taxable. Report these payments ascept where Medicare is a secondary payer
benefits are not taxable even if your em-wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, oror the contract makes per diem or other
on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. ployer pays for the accident and healthperiodic payments without regard to ex-
plan that provides these benefits.penses.
Other Sickness and Injury
Qualified long-term care services.Qualified Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-Benefitslong-term care services are: bursement for medical care is generally not tax-
able. However, this reimbursement may reduceIn addition to disability pensions and annuities,1) Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
your medical expense deduction. For more in-you may receive other payments for sickness orpeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
formation, see chapter 23.habilitative services, and injury.
Chapter 6 Wages, Salaries, and Other EarningsPage 55

Page 58 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your total tips for any one month from any
1) Write information about your tips in a tipone job are less than $20, do not report them to
diary, or your employer.
7. Do not report the value of any noncash tips,2) Keep copies of documents that show your
such as tickets or passes, to your employer. Youtips, such as restaurant bills and credit
do not pay social security and Medicare taxes orcard charge slips.
railroad retirement tax on these tips.Tip Income You should keep your daily tip record with your
personal records. You must keep your recordsHow to report.If your employer does not give
for as long as they are important for administra-you any other way to report tips, you can use
tion of the federal tax law. Form 4070.  To get a year’s supply of the form,Introduction If you keep a tip diary, you can use Formask the IRS or your employer for Publication
4070A,  Employee’s Daily Record of Tips. To getThis chapter is for employees who receive tips 1244. Fill in the information asked for on the
Form 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Servicefrom customers. form, sign and date the form, and give it to your
(IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244.All tips you receive are income and are sub- employer.
Publication 1244 includes a year’s supply ofject to federal income tax. You must include in If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-Form 4070A. Each day, write in the informationgross income all tips you receive directly from ployer a statement with the following informa-asked for on the form.customers, tips from charge customers that are tion.If you do not use Form 4070A, start yourpaid to you by your employer, and your share of
• Your name, address, and social securityrecords by writing your name, your employer’sany tips you receive under a tip-splitting or
number.name, and the name of the business if it istip-pooling arrangement.
different from your employer’s name. Then,The value of noncash tips, such as tickets, • Your employer’s name, address, and busi-each workday, write the date and the followingpasses, or other items of value are also income ness name (if it is different from theinformation.and subject to tax. employer’s name).
Reporting your tip income correctly is not• Cash tips you get directly from customers• The month (or the dates of any shorterdifficult. You must do three things. or from other employees. period) in which you received tips.
• Tips from credit card charge customers1) Keep a daily tip record. • The total tips required to be reported forthat your employer pays you. that period.2) Report tips to your employer.
• The value of any noncash tips you get,You must sign and date the statement. You3) Report all your tips on your income tax such as tickets, passes, or other items ofshould keep a copy with your personal records.return. value.
Your employer may require you to report your• The amount of tips you paid out to othertips more than once a month. However, theThis chapter will show you how to do these threeemployees through tip pools or tip split-statement cannot cover a period of more thanthings and what to do on your tax return if youting, or other arrangements, and the one calendar month.have not done the first two. This chapter will alsonames of the employees to whom youshow you how to treat allocated tips. Electronic tip statement.Your employerpaid the tips.
can have you furnish your tip statements elec-
Useful Items tronically.Do not write in your tip diary theYou may want to see: amount of any service charge that yourWhen to report. Give your report for eachemployer adds to a customer’s bill andCAUTION
!
month to your employer by the 10th of the nextPublication then pays to you and treats as wages. This ismonth. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday,❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income part of your wages, not a tip. or legal holiday, give your employer the report by
the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or❏ 1244 Employee’s Daily Record of Tips Electronic tip record.You may use an legal holiday.and Report to Employer electronic system provided by your employer to
record your daily tips. You must receive andExample 1. You must report your tips re-Form (and Instructions) keep a paper copy of this record. ceived in June 2002 by July 10, 2002.❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Tax
on Unreported Tip Income Example 2. You must report your tips re-
ceived in January 2002 by February 11, 2002.❏ 4070 Employee’s Report of Tips to
February 10 is on a Sunday, and the 11th is theReporting Tips to YourEmployer
next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday.Employer
Final report.If your employment ends dur-
ing the month, you can report your tips whenWhy report tips to your employer? YouKeeping a Daily Tip your employment ends.must report tips to your employer so that:
Record • Your employer can withhold federal in-Penalty for not reporting tips.If you do notcome tax and social security and Medicarereport tips to your employer as required, youtaxes or railroad retirement tax, may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of theWhy keep a daily tip record?You must keep
social security and Medicare taxes or railroada daily tip record so you can: • Your employer can report the correct
retirement tax you owe on the unreported tips.amount of your earnings to the Social Se-• Report your tips accurately to your em- (For information about these taxes, see Report-curity Administration or Railroad Retire-ployer, ing social security and Medicare taxes on tipsment Board (which affects your benefits
not reported to your employer under Reporting• Report your tips accurately on your tax when you retire or if you become disabled,
Tips on Your Tax Return, later.) The penaltyreturn, and or your family ’s benefits if you die), and
amount is in addition to the taxes you owe.• Prove your tip income if your return is ever• You can avoid the penalty for not reportingYou can avoid this penalty if you can showquestioned. tips to your employer (explained later). reasonable cause for not reporting the tips to
your employer. To do so, attach a statement to
How to keep a daily tip record.There are two What tips to report.Report to your employer your return explaining why you did not report
ways to keep a daily tip record. You can either: only cash, check, or credit card tips you receive. them.
Page 56 Chapter 7 Tip Income

Page 59 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Giving your employer money for taxes. you reported to your employer for 2001 are in-“UT ” and the total of the uncollected taxes on the
Your regular pay may not be enough for yourcluded in the wages shown in box 1 of your Formdotted line next to line 58.
employer to withhold all the taxes you owe onW –2. Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips
your regular pay plus your reported tips. If thisyou did not report to your employer.
happens, you can give your employer money If you received $20 or more in cash anduntil the close of the calendar year to pay the charge tips in a month and did notAllocated Tipsrest of the taxes. report all of those tips to your em-CAUTION
!
If you do not give your employer enough If your employer allocated tips to you, they areployer, see Reporting social security and Medi-money, your employer will apply your regularcare taxes on tips not reported to your employer, shown separately in box 8 of your Form W–2.pay and any money you give to the taxes in thelater. They are not included in box 1 with your wagesfollowing order. and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-
If you did not keep a daily tip record assion does not apply to you.1) All taxes on your regular pay. required and an amount is shown in
2) Social security and Medicare taxes or rail- box 8 of your Form W–2, see Allocated What are allocated tips?These are tips that
CAUTION
!
road retirement tax on your reported tips.Tips, later. your employer assigned to you in addition to the
tips you reported to your employer for the year.3) Federal, state, and local income taxes onIf you kept a daily tip record and reported tips
Your employer will have done this only if:your reported tips. to your employer as required under the rules
explained earlier, add the following tips to the• You worked in a restaurant, cocktailAny taxes that remain unpaid can be col-amount in box 1 of your Form W–2.lected by your employer from your next lounge, or similar business that must allo-
paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol- cate tips to employees, and• Cash and charge tips you received that
lected at the end of the year, you may be subjecttotaled less than $20 for any month. • The tips you reported to your employerto a penalty for underpayment of estimated were less than your share of 8% of food• The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding and drink sales.passes, or other items of value.and Estimated Tax, for more information.
You must report on your tax return any How were your allocated tips figured?TheExample. John Allen began working at thesocial security and Medicare taxes or tips allocated to you are your share of an amountDiamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2001)railroad retirement tax that remainedCAUTION
!
figured by subtracting the reported tips of allon June 30 and received $10,000 in wagesuncollected at the end of 2001. See Reporting
employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)during the year. John kept a daily tip recorduncollected social security and Medicare taxes
of food and drink sales (other than carryoutshowing that his tips for June were $18 and hison tips under Reporting Tips on Your Tax Re-
sales and sales with a service charge of 10% ortips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. Heturn, later. These uncollected taxes will be
more). Your share of that amount was figuredwas not required to report his June tips to hisshown in box 12 of your 2001 Form W–2 (codes
using either a method provided by anemployer, but he reported all of the rest of hisA and B).
employer-employee agreement or a methodtips to his employer as required.
provided by IRS regulations based on employ-John’s Form W–2 from Diamond Restaurant
ees’ sales or hours worked. For informationTip Rate Determination shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re-
about the exact allocation method used, askported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre-and Education Program your employer.ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018
as wages on his tax return.Your employer may participate in the Tip Rate
Must you report your allocated tips on yourDetermination and Education Program. The pro-
return? You must report allocated tips on yourReporting social security and Medicaregram was developed to help employees and
tax return unless either of the following excep-taxes on tips not reported to your employer.employers understand and meet their tip report-
tions applies.If you received $20 or more in cash and chargeing responsibilities.
tips in a month from any one job and did notThere are two agreements under the pro- 1) You kept a daily tip record, or other evi-report all of those tips to your employer, yougram —  the Tip Rate Determination Agreement dence that is as credible and as reliable asmust report the social security and Medicare(TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com-
a daily tip record, as required under rulestaxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onmitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in the
explained earlier.your return. To report these taxes, you must filefood and beverage industry may be able to get
a return even if you would not otherwise have toapproval of an employer-designed EmTRAC 2) Your tip record is incomplete, but it showsfile. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileprogram. For information on the EmTRAC pro- that your actual tips were more than theForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)gram, see Notice 2001–1 in Internal Revenue tips you reported to your employer plus the
Bulletin No. 2001–2. Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. Enterallocated tips.
the tax on line 54, Form 1040, and attach FormYour employer can provide you with a copy If either exception applies, report your actual tips4137 to your return.of the agreement. If you want to learn more
on your return. Do not report the allocated tips.about these agreements, contact the local tip
See What tips to report under Reporting Tips oncoordinator. A list of tip coordinators is availableReporting uncollected social security and
Your Tax Return, earlier.at www.irs.gov. Medicare taxes on tips. If your employer
could not collect all the social security and Medi-
How to report allocated tips.If you mustcare taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe on
report allocated tips on your return, add thetips reported for 2001, the uncollected taxes will
amount in box 8 of your Form W–2 to thebe shown in box 12 of your Form W–2 (codes AReporting Tips on Your amount in box 1. Report the total as wages onand B). You must report these amounts as addi-
line 7 of Form 1040. (You cannot file Formtional tax on your return. You may have uncol-Tax Return 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)lected taxes if your regular pay was not enough
for your employer to withhold all the taxes youBecause social security and Medicare taxes
owe and you did not give your employer enoughwere not withheld from the allocated tips, youHow to report tips.Report your tips with your
money to pay the rest of the taxes. must report those taxes as additional tax on yourwages on line 1, Form 1040EZ, or line 7, Form
return. Complete Form 4137,  and include theTo report these uncollected taxes, you must1040A or Form 1040.
allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-file a return even if you would not otherwise have
ing social security and Medicare taxes on tipsto file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileWhat tips to report.You must report all tips
not reported to your employer under ReportingForm 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxesyou received in 2001, including both cash tips
Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier.in your total tax amount on line 58, and writeand noncash tips, on your tax return. Any tips
Chapter 7 Tip Income Page 57

Page 60 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
Issued After 1989 dividends on stock owned by your child, even
8. though the dividends are paid to you as custo-❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record dian.Redemption of Series EE and I
U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After Penalty for failure to supply SSN.If you
1989 do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,
Interest Income you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to
supply social security number under Penalties in
chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.
Backup withholding. Your interest income isImportant Reminder General Information
generally not subject to regular withholding.
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-A few items of general interest are covered here.Foreign-source income.If you are a U.S. citi-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on thezen with interest income from sources outsideTax on investment income of a child underincome. Under backup withholding, the payer ofthe United States (foreign income), you mustage 14. Part of a child’s 2001 investment in-interest must withhold, as income tax, a percent-report that income on your tax return unless it iscome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. Thisage of the amount you are paid. For 2002, theexempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youmay happen if all the following are true.percentage is 30%.reside inside or outside the United States and Backup withholding may also be required ifwhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the1) The child was under age 14 on January 1,the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-foreign payer. 2002. mined that you underreported your interest or
2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-dividend income. For more information, see
ment income (such as taxable interest andBackup Withholding in chapter 5.
dividends) and has to file a tax return.Reporting backup withholding.If backupIntroduction 3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2001.withholding is deducted from your interest in-
come, the payer must give you a FormThis chapter discusses: If all these statements are true, Form 8615, Tax 1099–INT for the year that indicates the amountfor Children Under Age 14 Who Have Invest-• Different types of interest income, withheld. The Form 1099–INT will show anyment Income of More Than $1,500, must be backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-• What interest is taxable and what interestcompleted and attached to the child’s tax return.held.”is nontaxable, If any of these statements is not true, Form 8615
is not required and the child’s income is taxed atJoint accounts.If two or more persons hold• When to report interest income, and his or her own tax rate. property (such as a savings account or bond) as• How to report interest income on your taxHowever, the parent can choose to includejoint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenantsreturn. the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s in common, each person’s share of any interestreturn if certain requirements are met. Usefrom the property is determined by local law.In general, any interest that you receive or thatForm 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s
is credited to your account and can be with-Interest and Dividends, for this purpose.
drawn is taxable income. (It does not have to beFor more information about the tax on invest-Income from property given to a child.
entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to thisment income of children and the parents’ elec- Property you give as a parent to your child under
rule are discussed later in this chapter.tion, see chapter 32. the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law,You may be able to deduct expenses youBeneficiary of an estate or trust.Interest,becomes the child’s property.have in earning this income on Schedule Adividends, and other investment income you re-Income from the property is taxable to the(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Seeceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust ischild, except that any part used to satisfy a legalchapter 30. generally taxable income. You should receive aobligation to support the child is taxable to theSchedule K –1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’sRecordkeeping. You should keep a parent or legal guardian having that legal obliga-Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., fromlist showing sources and amounts of tion.the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K–1 and itsinterest received during the year. Also,RECORDS
instructions will tell you where to report the in-Savings account with parent as trustee.keep the forms you receive that show your inter-
come on your Form 1040. Interest income from a savings account openedest income (Forms 1099–INT, for example) as
for a child who is a minor, but placed in the namean important part of your records. Social security number (SSN). You must and subject to the order of the parents as trust-give your name and SSN to any person requiredees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of theby federal tax law to make a return, statement,state in which the child resides, both of theUseful Items or other document that relates to you. This in-following are true.You may want to see: cludes payers of interest.
1) The savings account legally belongs to theSSN for joint account.If the funds in a jointPublication child.account belong to one person, list that person’s
❏ 537 Installment Sales name first on the account and give that person’s 2) The parents are not legally permitted to
SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsuse any of the funds to support the child.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,
❏ 1212 List of Original Issue Discount later.) If the joint account contains combinedForm 1099 –INT. Interest income is generallyInstruments funds, give the SSN of the person whose namereported to you on Form 1099–INT, Interestis listed first on the account. Income, or a similar statement, by banks, sav-Form (and Instructions) These rules apply both to joint ownership byings and loans, and other payers of interest. Thisa married couple and to joint ownership by other❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and form shows you the interest you received duringindividuals. For example, if you open a jointOrdinary Dividends the year. Keep this form for your records. You dosavings account with your child using funds be-not have to attach it to your tax return.❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and longing to the child, list the child’s name first on Report on your tax return the total amount ofOrdinary Dividends for Form 1040Athe account and give the child’s SSN. interest income that you receive for the tax year.Filers Custodian account for your child.If your This includes amounts reported to you on Form
❏ 3115 Application for Change in child is the actual owner of an account that is 1099–INT and amounts for which you did not
Accounting Method recorded in your name as custodian for the child, receive a Form 1099–INT.
Page 58 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 61 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives• Domestic savings and loan associations, earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-
interest as a nominee for you, that person will culator. If no other interest is credited to your• Federal savings and loan associations,give you a Form 1099–INT showing the interest account during the year, the Form 1099 –INTandreceived on your behalf. you receive will show $35 interest for the year.
• Mutual savings banks.If you receive a Form 1099–INT that in- You must report $35 interest income on your tax
cludes amounts belonging to another person, return.
see the discussion on nominee distributionsMoney market funds. Generally, amounts Interest on insurance dividends.Interest onunder How To Report Interest Income in chapter you receive from money market funds should beinsurance dividends left on deposit with an in-1 of Publication 550, or see the Schedule 1reported as dividends, not as interest. surance company that can be withdrawn annu-(Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040) in- ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited tostructions. Money market certificates, savings certifi-your account. However, if you can withdraw itcates, and other deferred interest accounts.Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form only on the anniversary date of the policy (orIf you open any of these accounts, interest may1099–INT that shows an incorrect amount (or other specified date), the interest is taxable inbe paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or less duringother incorrect information), you should ask the the year that date occurs.the term of the account. You generally mustissuer for a corrected form. The new Form
include this interest in your income when youPrepaid insurance premiums.Any increase1099–INT you receive will be marked “Cor-
actually receive it or are entitled to receive it in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,rected.”
without paying a substantial penalty. The same advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is
Form 1099 –OID. Reportable interest incomeis true for accounts that mature in 1 year or less interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
may also be shown on Form 1099–OID, Origi- and pay interest in a single payment at maturity. ums due on insurance policies or made avail-
nal Issue Discount. For more information aboutIf interest is deferred for more than 1 year, see able for you to withdraw.
amounts shown on this form, see Original IssueOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later. U.S. obligations.Interest on U.S. obligations,Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
Interest subject to penalty for early with-such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,
Exempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredissued by any agency or instrumentality of the
dividends you receive from a regulated invest-interest account before maturity, you may haveUnited States is taxable for federal income tax
ment company (mutual fund) are not included into pay a penalty. You must report the totalpurposes.
your taxable income. (However, see amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Treasury bills generally have a 13-week,
Information-reporting requirement, next.) You count during the year, without subtracting the26-week, or 52-week maturity period. They are
will receive a notice from the mutual fund tellingpenalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-issued at a discount in the amount of $1,000 and
you the amount of the exempt-interest dividendsings in chapter 1 of Publication 550, for moremultiples of $1,000. The difference between the
that you received. Exempt-interest dividendsinformation on how to report the interest anddiscounted price you pay for the bills and the
are not shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form deduct the penalty. face value you receive at maturity is interest
1099–INT. income. Generally, you report this interest in-Money borrowed to invest in money mar- come when the bill is paid at maturity.Information-reporting requirement.Al- ket certificate.The interest you pay on money Treasury notes have maturity periods ofthough exempt-interest dividends are not taxa-borrowed from a bank or savings institution tomore than 1 year, ranging up to 10 years. Matur-ble, you must show them on your tax return ifmeet the minimum deposit required for a moneyity periods for Treasury bonds are longer thanyou have to file. This is an information-reportingmarket certificate from the institution and the10 years. Both notes and bonds generally payrequirement and does not change the interest you earn on the certificate are two sepa-interest every 6 months. Generally, you reportexempt-interest dividends to taxable income.rate items. You must report the total interest youthis interest for the year paid. For more informa-earn on the certificate in your income. If yoution, see U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and BondsNote. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromitemize deductions, you can deduct the interestin chapter 1 of Publication 550.specified private activity bonds may be subjectyou pay as investment interest, up to the amount
to the alternative minimum tax. See Alternativeof your net investment income. See Interest Ex- For other information on TreasuryMinimum Tax in chapter 31 for more informa-penses in chapter 3 of Publication 550. notes or bonds, write to:tion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains a
discussion on private activity bonds, under StateExample. You deposited $5,000 with a Bureau of the Public Debtor Local Government Obligations. bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to Attn: Customer Information
make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredParkersburg, WV 26106–2186Interest on VA dividends.Interest on insur-to buy a 6–month money market certificate. Theance dividends that you leave on deposit withcertificate earned $575 at maturity in 2001, butOr, on the Internet, visit:the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notyou received only $265, which represented the www. publicdebt.treas.govtaxable. This includes interest paid on dividends$575 you earned minus $310 interest chargedon converted United States Government Lifeon your $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormInsurance and on National Service Life Insur- For information on series EE, series I, and1099–INT for 2001 showing the $575 interestance policies. series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savingsyou earned. The bank also gives you a state-
Bonds, later.ment showing that you paid $310 interest for
2001. You must include the $575 in your in-Interest on tax refunds.Interest you receivecome. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-on tax refunds is taxable income.Taxable Interest ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
to the net investment income limit. Interest on condemnation award.If the con-Taxable interest includes interest you receive demning authority pays you interest to compen-from bank accounts, loans you make to others,Gift for opening account.If you receive non-sate you for a delay in paying an award, theand other sources. The following are some othercash gifts or services for making deposits or forinterest is taxable.sources of taxable interest. opening an account in a savings institution, you
Installment sale payments.If a contract formay have to report the value as interest.Dividends that are actually interest.Certain the sale or exchange of property provides forFor deposits of less than $5,000, gifts ordistributions commonly called dividends are ac- deferred payments, it also usually provides forservices valued at more than $10 must be re-tually interest. You must report as interest interest payable with the deferred payments.ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 orso-called “dividends” on deposits or on share That interest is taxable when you receive it. Ifmore, gifts or services valued at more than $20accounts in: little or no interest is provided for in a deferredmust be reported as interest. The value is deter-
payment contract, part of each payment may be• Cooperative banks, mined by the cost to the financial institution.
treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and• Credit unions, Example. You open a savings account atOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, In-
• Domestic building and loan associations, your local bank and deposit $800. The accountstallment Sales.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Interest on annuity contract.Accumulated 1961 and 1971 matured in 2001. If youU.S. Savings Bondsinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its have used method 1, you generally must
maturity date is taxable. report the interest on these bonds on yourThis section provides tax information on U.S.
2001 return.savings bonds. It explains how to report theUsurious interest.Usurious interest is inter-interest income on these bonds and how to treat2) Method 2. Choose to report the increaseest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable astransfers of these bonds. in redemption value as interest each year.interest unless state law automatically changes
For other information on U.S. savingsit to a payment on the principal. You must use the same method for all series EE,
bonds, write to: series E, and series I bonds you own. If you do
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). not choose method 2 by reporting the increase
Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable. in redemption value as interest each year, you
Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You Bureau of the Public Debt must use method 1.generally do not include it in your income until Attn: Savings Bond Operations Office
If you plan to cash your bonds in theyou make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap- Parkersburg, WV 26106–1328
same year that you will pay for higherter 18.
education expenses, you may want toOr, on the Internet, visit:
TIP
use method 1 because you may be able toInterest income on frozen deposits.Ex- www.savingsbonds.gov
exclude the interest from your income. To learnclude from your gross income interest on frozen
how, see Education Savings Bond Program,deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the
later.year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashposit because: method of accounting, as most individual tax-Change from method 1. If you want topayers do, you generally report the interest on1) The financial institution is bankrupt or in- change your method of reporting the interestU.S. savings bonds when you receive it. Thesolvent, or from method 1 to method 2, you can do socash method of accounting is explained in chap-without permission from the IRS. In the year of2) The state where the institution is locatedter 1 under Accounting Methods. change you must report all interest accrued tohas placed limits on withdrawals because
date and not previously reported for all yourAccrual method taxpayers.If you use an ac-other financial institutions in the state are
bonds.crual method of accounting, you must reportbankrupt or insolvent.
interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itOnce you choose to report the interest eachThe amount of interest you must exclude isaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestyear, you must continue to do so for all seriesthe interest that was credited on the frozen de-until you receive it or the bonds mature. AccrualEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and forposits minus the sum of: methods of accounting are explained in chapterany you get later, unless you request permission
1 under Accounting Methods. to change, as explained next.1) The net amount you withdrew from these
deposits during the year, and Change from method 2. To change fromSeries HH Bonds. These bonds are issued at
method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-face value. Interest is paid twice a year by direct2) The amount you could have withdrawn as
sion from the IRS. Permission for the change isdeposit to your bank account. If you are a cashof the end of the year (not reduced by any
automatically granted if you send the IRS amethod taxpayer, you must report interest onpenalty for premature withdrawals of a
statement that meets all the following require-these bonds as income in the year you receive it.time deposit).
ments.Series HH Bonds were first offered in 1980.If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interestBefore 1980, series H bonds were issued. Se-income on deposits that were frozen at the end 1) You have typed or printed at the top,ries H bonds are treated the same as series HHof 2001, see Frozen deposits under How To “Change in Method of Accounting Underbonds. If you are a cash method taxpayer, youReport Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publica- Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc.must report the interest when you receive it.tion 550, for information about reporting this 99–49 (or later update).”Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30interest income exclusion on your 2001 tax re-years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.2) It includes your name and social securityturn.
number under the label in (1).The interest you exclude is treated asSeries EE and series I bonds.Interest on
credited to your account in the following year.these bonds is payable when you redeem the3) It identifies the savings bonds for which
You must include it in income when you canbonds. The difference between the purchase you are requesting this change.
withdraw it. price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
4) It includes your agreement to:est.
Example. $100 of interest was credited onSeries EE bonds were first offered in Julya) Report all interest on any bonds ac-your frozen deposit during the year. You with-1980. They have a maturity period of 30 years. quired during or after the year ofdrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofBefore July 1980, series E bonds were issued. change when the interest is realizedthe end of the year. You must include $80 inThe original 10-year maturity period of series Eupon disposition, redemption, or finalyour income for the year. You must exclude $20.bonds has been extended to 40 years for bonds maturity, whichever is earliest, andissued before December 1965 and 30 years for
Bonds traded flat.If you buy a bond when b) Report all interest on the bonds ac-bonds issued after November 1965. Series EE
interest has been defaulted or when the interest quired before the year of change whenand series E bonds are issued at a discount. The
has accrued but has not been paid, that interest the interest is realized upon disposition,face value is payable to you at maturity.
is not income and is not taxable as interest if redemption, or final maturity, whicheverSeries I bonds were first offered in 1998.
paid later. When you receive a payment of thatThese are inflation-indexed bonds issued at is earliest, with the exception of the in-
interest, it is a return of capital that reduces thetheir face amount with a maturity period of 30 terest reported in prior tax years.
remaining cost basis. Interest that accrues afteryears. The face value plus accrued interest is
the date of purchase, however, is taxable inter-payable to you at maturity. 5) It includes your signature.
est income for the year it is received or accrued.If you use the cash method of reporting in-You must attach this statement to your tax re-See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later, come, you can report the interest on series EE,turn for the year of change, which you must filefor more information. series E, and series I bonds in either of theby the due date (including extensions).following ways.
You can have an automatic extension of 6Below-market loans. A below-market loan is
months from the due date of your return (includ-a loan on which no interest is charged or on 1)Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest
ing extensions) to file the statement with anwhich interest is charged at a rate below the until the earlier of the year you cash or
amended return. To get this extension, you mustapplicable federal rate. See Below-Market dispose of the bonds or the year they ma-
have filed your original return by the due dateLoans in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,
information. later.) Note. Series E bonds issued in (including extensions). At the top of the state-
Page 60 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 63 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The
bond was issued to you and your spouse as
co-owners. You both postpone reporting interest
on the bond. You later have the bond reissued
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one in
your spouse’s name. You must report half the
interest earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust.If you own series E, series
EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must
include in your income for that year the interest
earned to the date of transfer if you have not
already reported it. However, if you are consid-
ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
value both before and after the transfer contin-
Table 8–1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF ...
You buy a bond in your name and the name of
another person as co-owners, using only your
own funds
You.
THEN the tax on the bond interest
must be paid by ...You buy a bond in the name of another person,
who is the sole owner of the bond
You and another person buy a bond as
co-owners, each contributing part of the
purchase price
The person for whom you bought the
bond.
Both you and the other co-owner,
in proportion to the amount each
paid for the bond.
You and your spouse, who live in a community
property state, buy a bond that is community
property
You and your spouse. If you file
separate returns, both you and your
spouse generally pay tax on one-half
of the interest.
ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
ment, write “Filed pursuant to section generally must report one-half of the bond inter-defer reporting the interest earned each year.
301.9100–2.” est. For more information about communityYou must include the total interest in your in-
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop- come in the year you cash or dispose of theBy the date you file the original state-erty. bonds or the year the bonds finally mature,ment, you must also send a copy to the whichever is earlier.address below. Table 8–1. These rules are also shown in The same rules apply to previously unre-Internal Revenue Service Table 8–1. ported interest on series EE or series E bonds ifAttention: CC:PA:T the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH orP.O. Box 7604 Ownership transferred.If you bought seriesseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for theBenjamin Franklin Station E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bondsWashington, DC 20044 your own funds and had them reissued in yourtraded, later.co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,If you use a private delivery service, send the
you must include in your gross income for theDecedents. The manner of reporting interestcopy to the address below.
income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,year of reissue all interest that you earned onInternal Revenue Service
after the death of the owner, depends on thethese bonds and have not previously reported.Attention: CC:PA:T
accounting and income-reporting method previ-But, if the bonds were reissued in your name1111 Constitution Avenue, NW
ously used by the decedent. This is explained inalone, you do not have to report the interestRoom 6561
chapter 1 of Publication 550.accrued at that time.Washington, DC 20044
This same rule applies when bonds (otherSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re-than bonds held as community property) areInstead of filing this statement, you can re- porting the interest on your series EE or series Etransferred between spouses incident to di-quest permission to change from method 2 to bonds, you did not recognize taxable income
vorce.method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, when you traded the bonds for series HH or
follow the form instructions for an automatic series H bonds, unless you received cash in thePurchased jointly.If you and a co-ownerchange. No user fee is required. trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-each contributed funds to buy series E, series
ries HH bonds.) Any cash you received is in-EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have theCo-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in come up to the amount of the interest earned onbonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,the names of co-owners, such as you and your the bonds traded. When your series HH or se-you must include in your gross income for thechild or you and your spouse, interest on the ries H bonds mature, or if you dispose of themyear of reissue your share of all the interestbond is generally taxable to the co-owner who before maturity, you report as interest the differ-earned on the bonds that you have not previ-bought the bond. ence between their redemption value and yourously reported. At the time of reissue, the formercost. Your cost is the sum of the amount youOne co-owner’s funds used.  If you used co-owner does not have to include in gross in-paid for the traded series EE or series E bondsyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxcome his or her share of the interest earned thatplus any amount you had to pay at the time ofon the interest. This is true even if you let thewas not reported before the transfer. This inter-the trade.other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allest, however, as well as all interest earned after
the proceeds. Under these circumstances, sincethe reissue, is income to the former co-owner.Example. You own series E bonds with ac-the other co-owner will receive a Form This income-reporting rule also applies whencrued interest of $523 and a redemption value of1099–INT at the time of redemption, the otherthe bonds are reissued in the name of your$2,723 and have postponed reporting the inter-co-owner must provide you with another Formformer co-owner and a new co-owner. But theest. You trade the bonds for $2,500 in series HH1099–INT showing the amount of interest fromnew co-owner will report only his or her share ofbonds and $223 in cash. You must report thethe bond that is taxable to you. The co-ownerthe interest earned after the transfer. $223 as taxable income in the year of the trade.who redeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See
If bonds that you and a co-owner boughtNominee distributions under How To Report In- Choice to report interest in year of trade.jointly are reissued to each of you separately interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for You can choose to treat all of the previouslythe same proportion as your contribution to themore information about how a person who is a unreported accrued interest on the series EE orpurchase price, neither you nor your co-ownernominee reports interest income belonging to series E bonds traded for series HH bonds ashas to report at that time the interest earnedanother person. income in the year of the trade. If you make thisbefore the bonds were reissued. choice, it is treated as a change from method 1.Both co-owners’ funds used. If you and
See Change from method 1 under Series EEthe other co-owner each contribute part of theExample 1. You and your spouse each and series I bonds, earlier.bond’s purchase price, the interest is generallyspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriestaxable to each of you, in proportion to theEE savings bond. The bond was issued to youForm 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-amount each of you paid. and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other
pone reporting interest on the bond. You laterCommunity property. If you and your payer that redeems it must give you a Form
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, onespouse live in a community property state and 1099 –INT if the interest part of the payment you
in your name and one in your spouse’s name. Athold bonds as community property, one-half of receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form
that time neither you nor your spouse has tothe interest is considered received by each of 1099 –INT should show the interest as the differ-
report the interest earned to the date of reissue.you. If you file separate returns, each of you ence between the amount you received and the
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 61

Page 64 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount paid for the bond. However, your FormForm 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your Amount excludable. If the total proceeds
1099–INT may show more interest than you exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.
have to include on your income tax return. For Form 1040A. savings bonds you redeem during the year are
example, this may happen if any of the following not more than your qualified higher educationalQualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualifiedare true. expenses for the year, you can exclude all of theU.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued
interest. If the proceeds are more than the ex-after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
penses, you can exclude only part of the inter-1) You chose to report the increase in theissued either in your name (sole owner) or in
redemption value of the bond each year. est.your and your spouse’s names (co-owners).
The interest shown on your Form You must be at least 24 years old before theTo determine the excludable amount, multi-1099–INT will not be reduced by amountsbond’s issue date. ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.previously included in income. The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theThe date a bond is issued may be ear-
qualified higher educational expenses you paid2) You received the bond from a decedent. lier than the date the bond is pur-
The interest shown on your Form during the year. The denominator (bottom part)chased because bonds are issued asCAUTION
!
1099–INT will not be reduced by any inter-of the first day of the month in which they areof the fraction is the total proceeds you received
est reported by the decedent before death,purchased. during the year.
or on the decedent’s final return, or by the
estate on the estate’s income tax return. Example. In February 2001, Mark and
Beneficiary.You can designate any individualJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-3) Ownership of the bond was transferred.(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in AprilThe interest shown on your Form
1993. They received proceeds of $7,256, repre-1099–INT will not be reduced by interestVerification by IRS.If you claim the exclu-
senting principal of $5,000 and interest ofthat accrued before the transfer. sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-
$2,256. In 2001, they paid $4,000 of theirtion information from the Department of the4) You were named as a co-owner and the daughter’s college tuition. They are not claimingTreasury.other co-owner contributed funds to buy an education credit for that amount, and they dothe bond. The interest shown on your Qualified expenses.Qualified higher edu-not have an education IRA. They can excludeForm 1099–INT will not be reduced by thecational expenses are tuition and fees required$1,244 ($2,256 × ($4,000 ÷ $7,256)) of interestamount you received as nominee for thefor you, your spouse, or your dependent (forin 2001. They must pay tax on the remainingother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inwhom you can claim an exemption) to attend an$1,012 ($2,256 − $1,244) interest.this chapter, for more information abouteligible educational institution.
the reporting requirements.) Modified adjusted gross income limit.Qualified expenses include any contribution
The interest exclusion is limited if your modifiedyou make to a qualified state tuition program or5) You received the bond in a taxable distri-
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:to a Coverdell education savings account.bution from a retirement or profit-sharing
plan. The interest shown on your Form Qualified expenses do not include expenses• $55,750 to $70,750 for taxpayers filing sin-1099–INT will not be reduced by the inter-for room and board or for courses involving gle or head of household, andest portion of the amount taxable as a dis-sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a
tribution from the plan and not taxable as • $83,650 to $113,650 for married taxpayersdegree program.
interest. (This amount is generally shown filing jointly or for a qualifying widow(er)Eligible educational institutions.Theseon Form 1099–R, Distributions From Pen- with dependent child.institutions include most public, private, andsions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
nonprofit universities, colleges and vocational You do not qualify for the interest exclusion ifing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.,
schools that are accredited and are eligible toyour modified AGI is equal to or more than thefor the year of distribution.)
participate in student aid programs run by theupper limit for your filing status.For more information on including the correctDepartment of Education. Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion,amount of interest on your return for (1), (2), (3),
Reduction for certain benefits.You must is adjusted gross income (line 20 of Form 1040Aand (4) above, see How To Report Interest In-
reduce your qualified higher educational ex-come, later. Publication 550 includes examples or line 34 of Form 1040) figured before the
penses by certain benefits the student may haveshowing how to report these amounts. interest exclusion, and modified by adding back
received. These benefits include: any:If you received a taxable distribution of
bonds from a retirement or profit-sharing plan1) Qualified scholarships that are exempt1) Foreign earned income exclusion,((5) above), see How To Report Interest Income from tax (see chapter 13 for information on
2) Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,in Publication 550 for information on how toqualified scholarships), and
report the interest. 3) Exclusion of income for bona fide re-2) Any other nontaxable payments (other
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- sidents of American Samoa,than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-
empt from state and local taxes. The ceived for educational expenses, such as:4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,Form 1099–INT you receive will indi-
TIP
a) Veterans’ educational assistance bene-cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond 5) Exclusion for adoption benefits received
fits,interest in box 3. Do not include this amount on under an employer’s adoption assistance
your state or local income tax return. program, andb) Benefits under a qualified state tuition
program, or 6) Deduction for student loan interest.
c) Certain employer-provided educationalEducation Savings Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
assistance benefits. 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If youBond Program
claim any of the exclusion or deduction items
listed above (except item 6), add the amount ofYou may be able to exclude from income all orEffect of other tax benefits.Do not include
part of the interest you receive on the redemp- the exclusion or deduction (except any deduc-in your qualified expenses any expenses used
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the tion for student loan interest) to the amount onto:
year if you pay qualified higher educational ex- line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the total on
penses during the same year. This exclusion is1) Figure an education credit on Form 8863,Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.
known as the Education Savings Bond Program. or If you have investment interest expense in-
curred to earn royalty income, see Education2) Figure how much of a distribution from anIf you are married, you can qualify for this
Savings Bond Program in chapter 1 of Publica-education IRA you can exclude from yourexclusion only if you file a joint return with your
income.spouse. tion 550.
Page 62 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 65 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-De minimis OID. You can treat the discount In most cases, you must report the entire
est exclusion, you must keep a writtenas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID as
record of the qualified U.S. savingsof the stated redemption price at maturity multi- interest income. But see Refiguring OID shownRECORDS
bonds you redeem. Your record must includeplied by the number of full years from the date ofon Form 1099–OID, later in this discussion, for
the serial number, issue date, face value, andoriginal issue to maturity. This small discount is more information.
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-known as “de minimis” OID. Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofest) of each bond. You can use Form 8818, record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-Optional Form To Record Redemption of SeriesExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond withment that belongs to you and receives a FormEE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,1099–OID on your behalf, that person must giveto record this information. You should also keepissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofyou a Form 1099–OID.bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher(the number of full years from the date of originalRefiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID.educational expenses during the year. issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 ofdiscount is less than $25, the OID is treated asForm 1099–OID if either of the following apply. zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will
Bonds Sold Between recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)1) You bought the debt instrument after its
Interest Dates original issue and paid a premium or anExample 2. The facts are the same as in acquisition premium.Example 1, except that the bond was issued atIf you sell a bond between interest payment
2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond or$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discountdates, part of the sales price represents interest
a stripped coupon (including certain zeroaccrued to the date of sale. You must report thatis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you
coupon instruments).part of the sales price as interest income for themust include the OID in income as it accrues
year of sale. over the term of the bond. For information about figuring the correct
If you buy a bond between interest payment amount of OID to include in your income, seeDebt instrument bought after original is-dates, part of the purchase price represents Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments insue. If you buy a debt instrument with deinterest accrued before the date of purchase. Publication 1212.minimis OID at a premium, the discount is notWhen that interest is paid to you, treat it as aincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrumentreturn of your capital investment, rather thanwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discountForm 1099 –OID not received. If you hadinterest income, by reducing your basis in theis reported under the market discount rules. See OID for the year but did not receive a Formbond. See Accrued interest on bonds under Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica- 1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which listsHow To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 oftion 550. total OID on certain debt instruments and hasPublication 550 for information on reporting the information that will help you figure OID. If yourpayment. debt instrument is not listed in Publication 1212,Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules
consult the issuer for further information aboutdiscussed in this chapter do not apply to the
Insurance the accrued OID for the year.following debt instruments. 
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, seeRefiguring periodic interest shown on Formciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-Stripped tax-exempt obligations under 1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt instru-ble. But if you receive the proceeds in Stripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1 ment or acquired it from another holder duringinstallments, you must usually report a part ofof Publication 550). the year, see Bonds Sold Between Interesteach installment payment as interest income. Dates, earlier, for information about the treat-2) U.S. savings bonds.For more information about insurance pro- ment of periodic interest that may be shown in
ceeds received in installments, see Publication3) Short-term debt instruments (those with abox 2 of Form 1099–OID for that instrument.
525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income. fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year
from the date of issue). Certificates of deposit (CDs).If you buy aAnnuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- CD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must4) Obligations issued by an individual beforeance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- include in income each year a part of the totalMarch 2, 1984.ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income, interest due and report it in the same manner asnot as interest income. See chapter 11 for infor-5) Loans between individuals, if all the follow-other OID.mation on pension and annuity income. ing are true. This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
ments with banks, building and loan associa-a) The lender is not in the business ofOriginal Issue tions, etc., including:lending money.
Discount (OID) • Time deposits,b) The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior loans• Bonus plans,Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-between the same individuals, isest. You generally include OID in your income as • Savings certificates,$10,000 or less.it accrues over the term of the debt instrument,
• Deferred income certificates,whether or not you receive any payments fromc) Avoiding any federal tax is not one of
the issuer. the principal purposes of the loan. • Bonus savings certificates, and
A debt instrument generally has OID when
• Growth savings certificates.the instrument is issued for a price that is less
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDForm 1099 –OID. The issuer of the debt in-
Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-is the difference between the stated redemptionstrument (or your broker, if you held the instru-
ally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs areprice at maturity and the issue price. ment through a broker) should give you Form
CDs that are not in registered form. They are notAll instruments that pay no interest before1099–OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar
issued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-maturity are presumed to be issued at a dis-statement, if the total OID for the calendar year
able from one individual to another.count. Zero coupon bonds are one example ofis $10 or more. Form 1099–OID will show, in
Banks must provide the IRS and the personthese instruments. box 1, the amount of OID for the part of the year
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099–INT.that you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2,The OID accrual rules generally do not apply
other interest that you must include in your in-to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
More information.See chapter 1 of Publica-come. A copy of Form 1099–OID will be sent toturity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).
tion 550 for more information about OID andthe IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.See Discount on Short-Term Obligations in
related topics, such as market discount bonds.Keep it for your records.chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 63

Page 66 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Give a notice to withdraw before makingState or Local 1) You forfeited interest income because ofthe withdrawal,
the early withdrawal of a time deposit,Government Obligations 3) Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
2) You received or paid accrued interest ondraw the earnings, orGenerally, interest on obligations used to fi- securities transferred between interestnance government operations is not taxable if4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlesspayment dates,the obligations are issued by a state, the Districtthe interest you are to receive on an early
3) You had a financial account in a foreignof Columbia, a possession of the United States,withdrawal or redemption is substantially
country, unless the combined value of allor any of their political subdivisions. This in-less than the interest payable at maturity.
foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-cludes interest on certain obligations issued af-
ing all of 2001 or the accounts were withter 1982 by an Indian tribal government treatedAccrual method. If you use an accrual certain U.S. military banking facilities,as a state. method, you report your interest income whenInterest on arbitrage bonds issued by state 4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987you earn it, whether or not you have received it.or local governments after October 9, 1969, and and choose to reduce interest income fromInterest is earned over the term of the debtinterest on private activity bonds generally is the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-instrument.taxable. mium (see Bond Premium Amortization in
For more information on whether such inter- chapter 3 of Publication 550), orExample. If, in the previous example, you
est is taxable or tax exempt, see State or Localuse an accrual method, you must include the5) You are reporting OID in an amount moreGovernment Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldor less than the amount shown on Formtion 550. report the interest as follows: 1999, $80; 2000,1099–OID.
$249.60; and 2001, $179.20.Information reporting requirement.If you Schedule B. You must complete Part I ofmust file a tax return, you are required to showCoupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds isSchedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form 1040any tax-exempt interest you received on yourtaxable in the year the coupon becomes due andand any of the following apply.return. This is an information-reporting require-payable. It does not matter when you mail the
ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-coupon for payment. 1) Your taxable interest income is more thanest to taxable interest. $400.
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
How To Report gram (discussed earlier).When To Report
3) You had a foreign account.Interest IncomeInterest Income 4) You received interest from a seller-fi-
Generally, you report all of your taxable interestnanced mortgage, and the buyer used theWhen to report your interest income depends onincome on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a, Form property as a home.whether you use the cash method or an accrual1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ. 5) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-ex-method to report income. You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interestempt interest.income is more than $400. Instead, you mustCash method. Most individual taxpayers useuse Form 1040A or Form 1040. 6) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.the cash method. If you use this method, you savings bond interest that includesgenerally report your interest income in the yearForm 1040A. You must complete Part I of amounts you reported before 2001.in which you actually or constructively receive it.Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form 1040A7) You received, as a nominee, interest thatHowever, there are special rules for reportingand any of the following are true. actually belongs to someone else.the discount on certain debt instruments. See
U.S. Savings Bonds and Original Issue Dis- 1) Your taxable interest income is more than8) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-count, earlier. $400. est on frozen deposits.
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion9) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-Example. On September 1, 1999, you under the Education Savings Bond Pro- est on a bond that you bought betweenloaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-gram (discussed earlier). interest payment dates.pounded annually. You are not in the business
of lending money. The note stated that principal3) You received interest from a seller-fi-10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list isand interest would be due on August 31, 2001.nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the true.In 2001, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-property as a home.
On line 1, Part I, list each payer’s name and thepal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash4) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax- amount received from each. If you received amethod, you must include in income on your exempt interest. Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID from a bro-2001 return the $508.80 interest you received in
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.that year. 5) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.
savings bond interest that includesConstructive receipt.You constructively Form 1099 –INT. Your taxable interest in-amounts you reported before 2001.receive income when it is credited to your ac- come, except for interest from U.S. savings
count or made available to you. You do not need bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in box6) You received, as a nominee, interest that
to have physical possession of it. For example, 1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount to anyactually belongs to someone else.
you are considered to receive interest, divi- other taxable interest income you received. You7) You received a Form 1099–INT for inter-dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac- must report all of your taxable interest incomeest or frozen deposits.count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar even if you do not receive a Form 1099–INT.
financial institution, or interest on life insuranceList each payer’s name and the amount of inter- If you forfeited interest income because of
policy dividends left to accumulate, when theyest income received from each payer on line 1. If the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
are credited to your account and subject to youryou received a Form 1099 – INT or Form ductible amount will be shown on Form
withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet1099–OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- 1099–INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
entered in your passbook. age firm as the payer. drawal of savings in chapter 1 of Publication
550.You cannot use Form 1040A if you must useYou constructively receive income on the
Box 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the amountForm 1040, as described next.deposit or account even if you must: 
of interest income you received from U.S. sav-
1) Make withdrawals in multiples of evenForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
amounts, of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3
Page 64 Chapter 8 Interest Income

Page 67 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to any other taxable interest income you re-U.S. savings bond interest previously 2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savings
ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wasreported. If you received a Form 1099–INT Bond Interest Previously Reported” and
previously included in interest income. If part of for U.S. savings bond interest, the form may enter amounts previously reported or inter-
the amount shown in box 3 was previously in- show interest you do not have to report. See est accrued before you received the bond.
cluded in your interest income, see U.S. savings Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bonds interest,3) Subtract these amounts from the subtotalbond interest previously reported, later. earlier, under U.S. Savings Bonds. and enter the result on line 2.Box 4 of Form 1099–INT (federal income tax On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040),
withheld) will contain an amount if you were or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),More information. For more informationsubject to backup withholding. Report thereport all the interest shown on your Formabout how to report interest income, see chapteramount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 8, on 1099–INT. Then follow these steps. 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for theForm 1040A, line 37, or on Form 1040, line 59 form you must file.1) Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal(federal income tax withheld).
of all interest listed on line 1.Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows investment
expenses you may be able to deduct as an
itemized deduction. See chapter 3 of Publication
550 for more information about investment ex-
penses.
Chapter 8 Interest Income Page 65

Page 68 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you the distributions you received from them
during the year. Keep this form with your rec-General Information ords. You do not have to attach it to your tax
return. Even if you do not receive Form9. This section discusses general rules on dividend1099–DIV, you must still report all of your taxa-income. ble dividend income.
Tax on investment income of a child under Reporting tax withheld.If tax is withheldage 14. Part of a child’s 2001 investment in-Dividends and from your dividend income, the payer must givecome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. Thisyou a Form 1099–DIV that indicates the amountmay happen if all of the following are true.withheld.1) The child was under age 14 on January 1,Other Corporate
2002. Nominees. If someone receives distribu-
tions as a nominee for you, that person will give2) The child had more than $1,500 of invest-Distributions you a Form 1099–DIV, which will show distribu-ment income (such as taxable interest and
tions received on your behalf.dividends) and has to file a tax return.
3) Either parent was alive at the end of 2001.Form 1099 –MISC. Certain substitute pay-
Important Reminder ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestIf all of these statements are true, Form 8615, that are received by a broker on your behalfTax for Children Under Age 14 Who Have In-must be reported to you on Form 1099–MISC,Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen withvestment Income of More Than $1,500, must be Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.dividend income from sources outside the completed and attached to the child’s tax return.See Reporting Substitute Payments under ShortUnited States (foreign income), you must reportIf any of these statements is not true, Form 8615Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for morethat income on your tax return unless it is ex-is not required and the child’s income is taxed atinformation about reporting these payments.empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-his or her own tax rate. side inside or outside the United States andHowever, the parent can choose to includeIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099.Ifwhether or not you receive a Form 1099 from thethe child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectforeign payer. return if certain requirements are met. Useamount (or other incorrect information), youForm 8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s should ask the issuer for a corrected form. TheInterest and Dividends, for this purpose. new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor-For more information about the tax on invest-rected.”ment income of children and the parents’ elec-Introduction tion, see chapter 32. Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of: exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after aBeneficiary of an estate or trust.Dividends dividend is declared, but before it is paid, theand other distributions you receive as a benefi-• Ordinary dividends, owner of record (usually the payee shown on theciary of an estate or trust are generally taxabledividend check) must include the dividend in• Capital gain distributions, income. You should receive a Schedule K –1 income.(Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share of Income,• Nontaxable distributions, and
Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.Dividends received in January.If a regu-• Other distributions you may receive from aYour copy of Schedule K–1 and its instructionslated investment company (mutual fund) or realcorporation or a mutual fund. will tell you where to report the income on yourestate investment trust (REIT) declares a divi-
Form 1040. dend (including any exempt-interest dividend orThis chapter also explains how to report divi- capital gain distribution) in October, November,dend income on your tax return. Social security number (SSN). You must or December payable to shareholders of recordgive your name and SSN (or individual taxpayerDividends are distributions of money, stock, on a date in one of those months but actuallyidentification number (ITIN)) to any person re-or other property paid to you by a corporation. pays the dividend during January of the nextquired by federal tax law to make a return, state-You also may receive dividends through a part- calendar year, you are considered to have re-ment, or other document that relates to you. Thisnership, an estate, a trust, or an association that ceived the dividend on December 31. You reportincludes payers of dividends. If you do not giveis taxed as a corporation. However, some the dividend in the year it was declared.your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, youamounts you receive that are called dividends
may have to pay a penalty.are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
For more information on SSNs and ITINs,are actually interest under Taxable Interest in
see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 8.chapter 8.)
Ordinary DividendsBackup withholding. Your dividend incomeMost distributions are paid in cash (or
is generally not subject to regular withholding.check). However, distributions can consist of Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-However, it may be subject to backup withhold-more stock, stock rights, other property, or ser- mon type of distribution from a corporation. Theying to ensure that income tax is collected on thevices. are paid out of the earnings and profits of aincome. Under backup withholding, the payer ofcorporation and are ordinary income to you. Thisdividends must withhold, as income tax, a per-Useful Items means they are not capital gains. You can as-centage of the amount you are paid. For 2002,sume that any dividend you receive on commonYou may want to see: this percentage is 30%. or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlessBackup withholding may also be required ifthe paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-Publication the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-nary dividends will be shown in box 1 of themined that you underreported your interest or❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals Form 1099–DIV you receive.dividend income. For more information, see
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Backup Withholding in chapter 5. Dividends used to buy more stock.The cor-
poration in which you own stock may have a❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions Stock certificate in two or more names.If dividend reinvestment plan. This plan lets youtwo or more persons hold stock as   joint tenants,choose to use your dividends to buy (through anForm (and Instructions) tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common,agent) more shares of stock in the corporationeach person may receive a share of any divi-❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and instead of receiving the dividends in cash. If youdends from the stock. Each person’s share isOrdinary Dividends are a member of this type of plan and you usedetermined by local law.❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and your dividends to buy more stock at a price
Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040AForm 1099–DIV. Most corporations use Form equal to its fair market value, you still must
Filers 1099 –DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show report the dividends as income.
Page 66 Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 69 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest- Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.
Distributions of stock dividends and stock rightsment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceNontaxable are taxable to you if any of the following apply.less than its fair market value, you must report
as dividend income the fair market value of theDistributions 1) You or any other shareholder has theadditional stock on the dividend payment date.
choice to receive cash or other propertyYou also must report as dividend income anyYou may receive a return of capital or a tax-freeinstead of stock or stock rights.service charge subtracted from your cash divi-distribution of more shares of stock or stock
2) The distribution gives cash or other prop-dends before the dividends are used to buy therights. These distributions are not treated the
erty to some shareholders and an increaseadditional stock. But you may be able to deductsame as ordinary dividends or capital gain distri-
in the percentage interest in thethe service charge. See chapter 30 for morebutions.
corporation’s assets or earnings and prof-information about deducting expenses of pro-
its to other shareholders.ducing income. Return of Capital
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you 3) The distribution is in convertible preferred
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aA return of capital is a distribution that is not paidstock and has the same result as in (2).
price less than fair market value. If you chooseout of the earnings and profits of a corporation. It4) The distribution gives preferred stock toto do this, you must report as dividend income is a return of your investment in the stock of thesome common stock shareholders andcompany. You should receive a Formthe difference between the cash you invest and common stock to other common stock1099–DIV or other statement from the corpora-the fair market value of the stock you buy. When shareholders.tion showing you what part of the distribution is afiguring this amount, use the fair market value of
return of capital. On Form 1099–DIV, a nontax- 5) The distribution is on preferred stock. (Thethe stock on the dividend payment date.
able return of capital will be shown in box 3. Ifdistribution, however, is not taxable if it is
you do not receive such a statement, you reportan increase in the conversion ratio of con-Money market funds. Report amounts you
the distribution as an ordinary dividend. vertible preferred stock made solely toreceive from money market funds as dividend take into account a stock dividend, stockincome. Money market funds are a type of mu- split, or similar event that would otherwiseBasis adjustment.A return of capital reducestual fund and should not be confused with bank result in reducing the conversion right.)the basis of your stock. It is not taxed until yourmoney market accounts that pay interest. basis in the stock is fully recovered. If you buyThe term “stock” includes rights to acquirestock in a corporation in different lots at differentstock, and the term “shareholder” includes atimes, and you cannot definitely identify theholder of rights or of convertible securities.shares subject to the return of capital, reduceIf you receive taxable stock dividends orCapital Gain the basis of your earliest purchases first.stock rights, include their fair market value at theWhen the basis of your stock has been re-time of the distribution in your income.Distributions duced to zero, report any additional return of
Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.capital that you receive as a capital gain.
Capital gain distributions (also called capital If you hold preferred stock having a redemptionWhether you report it as a long-term or
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to price higher than its issue price, the differenceshort-term capital gain depends on how long
your account by regulated investment compa- (the redemption premium) generally is taxableyou have held the stock. See Holding Period in
nies (commonly called mutual funds)  and real as a constructive distribution of additional stockchapter 15.
on the preferred stock. For more information,estate investment trusts (REITs). They will be
see chapter 1 of Publication 550.Example. You bought stock in 1989 forshown in box 2a of the Form 1099–DIV you
$100. In 1992, you received a return of capital ofreceive from the mutual fund or REIT.
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-$80. You did not include this amount in yourReport capital gain distributions as long-term
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketincome, but you reduced the basis of your stockcapital gains regardless of how long you owned
value when distributed. If you receive stock orto $20. You received a return of capital of $30 inyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. stock rights that are not taxable to you, see2001. The first $20 of this amount reduced your
Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentbasis to zero. You report the other $10 as aUndistributed capital gains of mutual funds Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-long-term capital gain for 2001. You must reportand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs mation on how to figure their basis.as a long-term capital gain any return of capitalkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax onyou receive on this stock in later years.them. You must treat your share of these gains Fractional shares.You may not own enoughas distributions, even though you did not actu- stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofLiquidating distributions.Liquidating distri-ally receive them. However, they are not in- stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-butions, sometimes called liquidating dividends,cluded on Form 1099–DIV. Instead, they are dend. However, with the approval of the share-are distributions you receive during a partial orreported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- holders, the corporation may set up a plan incomplete liquidation of a corporation. These dis-
holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital which fractional shares are not issued, but in-tributions are, at least in part, one form of a
Gains. stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givenreturn of capital. They may be paid in one or
Report undistributed capital gains as to the shareholders. Any cash you receive formore installments. You will receive a Form
long-term capital gains in column (f) on line 11 of fractional shares under such a plan is treated as1099–DIV from the corporation showing you the
Schedule D (Form 1040). The tax paid on these an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalamount of the liquidating distribution in box 8 or
gains by the mutual fund or REIT is shown in box shares. You must determine your gain or loss9.
and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-2 of Form 2439. You take credit for this tax byFor more information on liquidating distribu-
ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is theincluding it on line 65, Form 1040, and checkingtions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
difference between the cash you receive and thebox a on that line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439
basis of the fractional shares sold.to your return, and keep Copy C for your rec-Distributions of Stockords.
Example. You own one share of commonand Stock RightsBasis adjustment. Increase your basis in stock that you bought on January 3, 1993, for
your mutual fund or your interest in a REIT byDistributions by a corporation of its own stock $100. The corporation declared a common stock
the difference between the gain you report andare commonly known as stock dividends. Stock dividend of 5% on June 30, 2001. The fair mar-
the credit you claim for the tax paid. rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri- ket value of the stock at the time the stock
butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the dividend was declared was $200. You were paid
Additional information.For more informationcorporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividends $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under
on the treatment of distributions from mutualand stock rights are not taxable to you, and you a plan described in the above paragraph. You
funds, see Publication 564. do not report them on your return. figure your gain or loss as follows:
Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate DistributionsPage 67

Page 70 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value of old stock..... $200.00 to pay your premiums are not taxable. However, cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive any
Fair market value of stock dividend dividend income.you must report as taxable interest income the
(cash received)..............  +10.00 interest that is paid or credited on dividends left
Fair market value of old stock and Form 1099–DIV. If you owned stock on whichwith the insurance company.
stock dividend............... $210.00 you received $10 or more in dividends and otherIf dividends on an insurance contract (other
distributions, you should receive a Formthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-Basis (cost) of old stock after the
1099–DIV. Even if you do not receive Formstock dividend (($200 ÷ $210) × uted to you, they are a partial return of the
1099–DIV, you must report all of your taxable$100)...................... $95.24 premiums you paid. Do not include them in your
dividend income.Basis (cost) of stock dividend gross income until they are more than the total of
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100).......... +  4.76 See Form 1099 –DIV for more informationall net premiums you paid for the contract. (For
Total...................... $100.00 on how to report dividend income.information on the treatment of a distribution
from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-Cash received................ $10.00 Form 1040A. You must complete Part II ofbution Before Annuity Starting Date From aBasis (cost) of stock dividend...... − 4.76 Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to yourNonqualified Plan under Taxation of Nonperi-Gain $5.24 Form 1040A, if:odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension andBecause you had held the share of stock forAnnuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Formmore than 1 year at the time the stock dividendtions on insurance policies on line 16b (Form1099–DIV) are more than $400, orwas declared, your gain on the stock dividend is1040) or line 12b (Form 1040A).a long-term capital gain. 2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- that actually belong to someone else.Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-
dends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli-clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip List on line 5 each payer’s name and thecies are not taxable. In addition, interest oncertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. amount of ordinary dividends you received. Ifdividends left with the Department of VeteransThe certificate is generally nontaxable when you you received a Form 1099–DIV from a broker-Affairs is not taxable.receive it. If you choose to have the corporation age firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.sell the certificate for you and give you the pro- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedPatronage dividends. Generally, patronageceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9, Formdividends you receive in money from a coopera-tween the proceeds and the portion of your basis 1040A.tive organization are included in your income.in the corporation’s stock that is allocated to the
Do not include in your income patronagecertificate. Form 1040. You must fill in Part II of Scheduledividends you receive on:However, if you receive a scrip certificate B and attach it to your Form 1040, if:that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
1) Property bought for your personal use, orof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- 1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Formceive it. You must include its fair market value in2) Capital assets or depreciable property 1099–DIV) are more than $400, orincome on the date you receive it. bought for use in your business. But you2) You received, as a nominee, dividendsmust reduce the basis (cost) of the itemsthat actually belong to someone else.bought. If the dividend is more than the
adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-If your ordinary dividends are more than $400,
port the excess as income. you must also complete Part III of Schedule B.Other Distributions
List on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, eachThese rules are the same whether the coop-You may receive any of the following distribu- payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-erative paying the dividend is a taxable ortions during the year. dends you received. If your securities are heldtax-exempt cooperative. by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list theExempt-interest dividends.Exempt-interest name of the brokerage firm that is shown onAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notdividends you receive from a regulated invest- Form 1099–DIV as the payer. If your stock isreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-ment company (mutual fund) are not included in held by a nominee who is the owner of record,port these amounts on line 21 of Form 1040, lineyour taxable income. You will receive a notice and the nominee credited or paid you dividends13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.from the mutual fund telling you the amount of on the stock, show the name of the nominee andthe exempt-interest dividends you received. the dividends you received or for which you wereExempt-interest dividends are not shown on credited.Form 1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT. Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed
How To ReportInformation reporting requirement.Al- on line 5. Also enter this total on line 9, Form
though exempt-interest dividends are not taxa- 1040.
Dividend Incomeble, you must show them on your tax return if
you have to file a return. This is an information Expenses related to dividend income.You
Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orreporting requirement and does not change the may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-
Form 1040A to report your dividend income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. dend income if you itemize your deductions on
Report the total of your ordinary dividends onSchedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30 forAlternative minimum tax treatment. line 9 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. general information about deducting expensesExempt-interest dividends paid from specifiedIf you receive capital gain distributions, youof producing income.private activity bonds may be subject to themay be able to use Form 1040A or you mayalternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini-have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-More information. For more informationmum Tax in chapter 31 for more information.butions only in chapter 17. If you receive nontax-about how to report dividend income, see chap-
able distributions required to be reported asDividends on insurance policies.Insurance ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for the
capital gains, you must use Form 1040. Youpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses form you must file.
Page 68 Chapter 9 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 71 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive as normal rent payments, there are
other amounts that may be rental income. Rental Expenses
10. When to report.Report rental income on yourThis part discusses repairs and certain otherreturn for the year you actually or constructivelyexpenses of renting property that you ordinarilyreceive it, if you are a cash basis taxpayer. Youcan deduct from your rental income. It includesare a cash basis taxpayer if you report income ininformation on the expenses you can deduct ifRental Income the year you receive it, regardless of when it wasyou rent part of your property, or if you changeearned. You constructively receive incomeyour property to rental use. Depreciation, whichwhen it is made available to you, for example, byyou can also deduct from your rental income, isand Expenses being credited to your bank account. discussed later.For more information about when you con-
structively receive income, see  Accounting When to deduct. You generally deduct your
Methods in chapter 1. rental expenses in the year you pay them.Introduction
Vacant rental property.If you hold propertyThis chapter discusses rental income and ex-Advance rent. Advance rent is any amount
for rental purposes, you may be able to deductpenses. It covers the following topics. you receive before the period that it covers.
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-Include advance rent in your rental income in the• Rental income. ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, oryear you receive it regardless of the period cov-
maintaining the property while the property isered or the method of accounting you use.• Rental expenses.
vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss of
• Personal use of dwelling unit (including rental income for the period the property is va-Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rentvacation home). cant.your property. In the first year, you receive
$5,000 for the first year’s rent and $5,000 as rent• Depreciation. Pre-rental expenses.You can deduct yourfor the last year of the lease. You must includeordinary and necessary expenses for managing,• Limits on rental losses. $10,000 in your income in the first year.conserving, or maintaining rental property from
• How to report your rental income and ex- the time you make it available for rent.Security deposits.Do not include a securitypenses.
deposit in your income when you receive it if youDepreciation.You can begin to depreciate
plan to return it to your tenant at the end of therental property when it is ready and available forIf you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental
lease. But if you keep part or all of the securityrent. See Placed-in Service Date under Depreci-property, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
deposit during any year because your tenantation, later.Dispositions of Assets.
does not live up to the terms of the lease, includeIf you have a loss from damage to, or theft of, Expenses for rental property sold.If you sellthe amount you keep in your income for thatrental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, property you held for rental purposes, you canyear.Disasters, and Thefts. deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses forIf an amount called a security deposit is to beIf you rent a condominium or a cooperative managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-used as a final payment of rent, it is advanceapartment, some special rules apply to you even erty until it is sold.rent. Include it in your income when you receivethough you receive the same tax treatment asit. Personal use of rental property. If youother owners of rental property. See Publication
sometimes use your rental property for personal527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor-Payment for canceling a lease.If your tenantpurposes, you must divide your expenses be-mation. pays you to cancel a lease, the amount youtween rental and personal use. Also, your rentalreceive is rent. Include the payment in yourexpense deductions may be limited. See Per-Useful Items income in the year you receive it regardless ofsonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacationyour method of accounting.You may want to see: Home), later.
Expenses paid by tenant.If your tenant paysPart interest.If you own a part interest inPublication
any of your expenses, the payments are rentalrental property, you can deduct your part of the❏ 527 Residential Rental Property income. You must include them in your income.expenses that you paid.
You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct-❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in
ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses,Service Before 1987 Repairs and Improvementslater, for more information.❏ 535 Business Expenses
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rentalProperty or services.If you receive property❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-or services, instead of money, as rent, includeprovements. You recover the cost of improve-❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property the fair market value of the property or servicesments by taking depreciation (explained later).in your rental income.
Form (and Instructions) If the services are provided at an agreed Separate the costs of repairs and im-
upon or specified price, that price is the fair provements, and keep accurate rec-❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
market value unless there is evidence to the ords. You will need to know the cost ofRECORDS
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax— contrary. improvements when you sell or depreciate your
Individuals property.
Rental of property also used as a home.If❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsyou rent property that you also use as yourRepairs. A repair keeps your property in good❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental home and you rent it fewer than 15 days duringoperating condition. It does not materially add toIncome and Loss the tax year, do not include the rent you receivethe value of your property or substantially pro-
in your income and do not deduct rental ex-long its life. Repainting your property inside or
penses. However, you can deduct on Scheduleout, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-
A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualtying, and replacing broken windows are exam-
and theft losses that are allowed for nonrentalples of repairs.Rental Income property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit If you make repairs as part of an extensive
(Including Vacation Home), later. remodeling or restoration of your property, theYou generally must include in your gross income whole job is an improvement.all amounts you receive as rent. Rental incomePart interest.If you own a part interest in
is any payment you receive for the use or occu- rental property, you must report your part of theImprovements. An improvement adds to the
pation of property. In addition to amounts you rental income from the property. value of your property, prolongs its useful life, or
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
adapts it to new uses. Improvements include theLocal transportation expenses. You can the property was used or held for rental pur-
following items. deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-poses.
portation expenses if you incur them to collectYou cannot deduct depreciation or insurance• Putting a recreation room in an unfinishedrental income or to manage, conserve, or main-for the part of the year the property was held forbasement. tain your rental property. personal use. However, you can include the
• Paneling a den. Generally, if you use your personal car,home mortgage interest and real estate tax ex-
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, youpenses for the part of the year the property was• Adding a bathroom or bedroom.
can deduct the expenses using one of two meth-held for personal use as an itemized deduction• Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony.ods: actual expenses or the standard mileageon Schedule A (Form 1040).
rate. For 2001, the standard mileage rate for all• Putting up a fence.
business miles is 34.5 cents a mile. For moreExample. Your tax year is the calendar• Putting in new plumbing or wiring. information, see chapter 28. year. You moved from your home in May and
started renting it on June 1. You can deduct as• Putting in new cabinets. To deduct car expenses under either
rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlymethod, you must keep records that• Putting on a new roof. expenses, such as taxes and insurance.follow the rules in chapter 28. In addi-RECORDS
• Paving a driveway. Starting with June, you can deduct as rentaltion, you must complete Part V of Form 4562
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-and attach it to your tax return.If you make an improvement to property, the ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
cost of the improvement must be capitalized.
Tax return preparation.You can deduct, as aThe capitalized cost can generally be depreci-
rental expense, the part of the tax return prepa-ated as if the improvement were separate prop-
ration fees you paid to prepare Part I of Sched-erty.
Renting Part ofule E (Form 1040). You can also deduct, as a
rental expense, any portion of the total expenseOther Expenses Propertyyou paid to resolve a tax underpayment related
to your rental activities. On your 2001 ScheduleOther expenses you can deduct from your rental If you rent part of your property, you must divideE, you can deduct fees paid in 2001 to prepareincome include advertising, cleaning and main- certain expenses between the part of the prop-Part I of your 2000 Schedule E.tenance services, utilities, fire and liability insur- erty used for rental purposes and the part of theance, taxes, interest, commissions for the property used for personal purposes as thoughcollection of rent, ordinary and necessary travel
you actually had two separate pieces of prop-and transportation, and other expenses, dis- erty.cussed next. Not Rented for Profit You can deduct the expenses related to the
Rental payments for property.You can de- part of the property used for rental purposes,If you do not rent your property to make a profit,duct the rent you pay for property that you use such as home mortgage interest and real estateyou can deduct your rental expenses only up tofor rental purposes. If you buy a leasehold for taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formthe amount of your rental income. Any rentalrental purposes, you can deduct an equal part of 1040). You can deduct the expenses for the partexpenses in excess of rental income cannot bethe cost each year over the term of the lease. of the property used for personal purposes, sub-carried forward to the next year. For more infor-
ject to certain limitations, only if you itemize yourmation about the rules for an activity not en-Rental of equipment. You can deduct the deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Yougaged in for profit, see chapter 1 of Publicationrent you pay for equipment that you use for can also deduct as a rental expense a part of535.rental purposes. However, in some cases, lease other expenses that normally are nondeductiblecontracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,
personal expenses, such as expenses for elec-Where to report. Report your not-for-profityou cannot deduct these payments. You can
tricity or painting the outside of your house. Yourental income on line 21, Form 1040. You canrecover the cost of purchased equipment
cannot deduct any part of the cost of the firstinclude your mortgage interest (if you use thethrough depreciation.
phone line even if your tenants have unlimitedproperty as your main home or second home),
Insurance premiums paid in advance.If you use of it.real estate taxes, and casualty losses on the
pay an insurance premium for more than oneappropriate lines of Schedule A (Form 1040),You do not have to divide the expenses that
year in advance, each year you can deduct theItemized Deductions, if you itemize your deduc-belong only to the rental part of your property.
part of the premium payment that will apply totions. For example, if you paint a room that you rent, orthat year. You cannot deduct the total premium if you pay premiums for liability insurance inClaim your other rental expenses, subject toin the year you pay it. the rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication connection with renting a room in your home,
535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions onyour entire cost is a rental expense. If you installLocal benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You cana second phone line strictly for your tenants’deduct charges for local benefits that increase
deduct these expenses only if they, togetheruse, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-the value of your property, such as charges for
with certain other miscellaneous itemized de-ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer
ductions, total more than 2% of your adjustedciation, discussed later, on the part of thesystems. These charges are nondepreciable
gross income. property used for rental purposes as well as oncapital expenditures. You must add them to the
the furniture and equipment you use for rentalbasis of your property. You can deduct local
purposes.benefit taxes if they are for maintaining, repair-
ing, or paying interest charges for the benefits.
How to divide expenses.If an expense is forProperty ChangedTravel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- both rental use and personal use, such as mort-nary and necessary expenses of traveling away gage interest or heat for the entire house, youto Rental Usefrom home if the primary purpose of the trip was must divide the expense between the rental useto collect rental income or to manage, conserve, and the personal use. You can use any reasona-If you change your home or other property, (or aor maintain your rental property. You must prop-part of it), to rental use at any time other than atble method for dividing the expense. It may beerly allocate your expenses between rental andthe beginning of your tax year, you must dividereasonable to divide the cost of some items (fornonrental activities. For information on travelyearly expenses, such as depreciation, taxes,example, water) based on the number of peopleexpenses, see chapter 28. and insurance, between rental use and personalusing them. However, the two most common
To deduct travel expenses, you mustuse. methods for dividing an expense are one based
keep records that follow the rules inYou can deduct as rental expenses only theon the number of rooms in your home and one
chapter 28. part of the expense that is for the part of the year
RECORDS
based on the square footage of your home.
Page 70 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 73 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
applying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of 2) You rented or tried to rent the property for
personal use in applying both (1) and (2) above. a period of less than 12 consecutivePersonal Use of This rule does not apply when dividing expenses months and the period ended because you
between rental and personal use. sold or exchanged the property.
Dwelling Unit
This special rule does not apply when dividingFair rental price.A fair rental price for your(Including Vacation expenses between rental and personal use.property generally is an amount that a person
who is not related to you would be willing to pay.Home) The rent you charge is not a fair rental price if it isFiguring Days
substantially less than the rents charged forIf you have any personal use of a dwelling unit of Personal Useother properties that are similar to your property.(including vacation home) that you rent, you
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anymust  divide your expenses between rental use
day that it is used by any of the following per-and personal use. See Figuring Days of Per-Examples sons.sonal Use and  How To Divide Expenses, later.
 If you used your dwelling unit for personalThe following examples show how to determine1) You or any other person who has an inter-purposes long enough during 2001, it will bewhether you used your rental property as a est in it, unless you rent it to anotherconsidered a “dwelling unit used as a home.” If home. owner as his or her main home under aso, you cannot deduct rental expenses that ex-
shared equity financing agreement (de-ceed rental income for that property. See Dwell-
fined later).Example 1. You converted the basement ofing Unit Used as Home and How To Figure
your home into an apartment with a bedroom, aRental Income and Deductions, later. If your 2) A member of your family or a member ofbathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented thedwelling unit is not considered a dwelling unit the family of any other person who has abasement apartment at a fair rental price toused as a home, you can deduct rental ex- financial interest in it, unless the familycollege students during the regular school year.penses that exceed rental income for that prop- member uses the dwelling unit as his orYou rented to them on a 9-month lease (273erty subject to certain limits. See Limits on her main home and pays a fair rental price.days).Rental Losses, later. Family includes only brothers and sisters,During June (30 days), your brothers stayedhalf-brothers and half-sisters, spouses, an-Exception for minimal rental use.If you use with you and lived in the basement apartmentcestors (parents, grandparents, etc.) andthe dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerrent free. lineal descendants (children, grandchild-than 15 days during the year, do not include anyYour basement apartment was used as a ren, etc.).of the rent in your income and do not deduct anyhome because you used it for personal pur-of the rental expenses. See Dwelling Unit Used 3) Anyone under an arrangement that letsposes for 30 days. Rent-free use by your brotheras Home, later. you use some other dwelling unit.is considered personal use. Your personal use
(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days orDwelling unit. A dwelling unit includes a 4) Anyone at less than a fair rental price.10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).house, apartment, condominium, mobile home,
boat, vacation home, or similar property. A Main home. If the other person or member ofExample 2. You rented the guest bedroomdwelling unit has basic living accommodations, the family in (1) or (2) above has more than onein your home at a fair rental price during the localsuch as sleeping space, a toilet, and cooking home, his or her main home is the one lived incollege’s homecoming, commencement, andfacilities. A dwelling unit does not include prop- most of the time.football weekends (a total of 27 days). Yourerty used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar
sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for theestablishment. Shared equity financing agreement.This islast 3 weeks (21 days) in July.Property is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, an agreement under which two or more personsThe room was used as a home because youor similar establishment if it is regularly available acquire undivided interests for more than 50used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That isfor occupancy by paying customers and is not years in an entire dwelling unit, including themore than the greater of 14 days or 10% of theused by an owner as a home during the year. land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-27 days it was rented (3 days).
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main homeExample. You rent a room in your home upon payment of rent to the other co-owner orExample 3. You own a cottage in a resortthat is always available for short-term occu- owners.area. You rented it at a fair rental price for a totalpancy by paying customers. You do not use the
of 170 days during the year. For 12 of thoseroom yourself, and you allow only paying cus- Donation of use of property. You use adays, the tenant was not able to use the cottagetomers to use the room. The room is used solely dwelling unit for personal purposes if:and allowed you to use it even though you didas a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment
not refund any of the rent. Your family actuallyand is not a dwelling unit. • You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
used the cottage for 10 of those days. Therefore,ble organization,
the cottage is treated as having been rented for
Dwelling Unit • The organization sells the use of the unit160 (170 − 10) days. Your family also used the
at a fund-raising event, andcottage for 7 other days during the year.Used as Home
You used the cottage as a home because • The “purchaser” uses the unit.
you used it for personal purposes for 17 days.The tax treatment of rental income and ex-
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%penses for a dwelling unit that you also use for
Examplesof the 160 days it was rented (16 days).personal purposes depends on whether you use
it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income The following examples show how to determineand Deductions, later.) days of personal use.You use a dwelling unit as a home during theUse As Main Home Before or After
tax year if you use it for personal purposes moreRenting Example 1. You and your neighbor arethan the greater of: co-owners of a condominium at the beach. You For purposes of determining whether a dwellingrent the unit to vacationers whenever possible.1) 14 days, or unit was used as a home, do not count as daysThe unit is not used as a main home by anyone.of personal use the days you used the property2) 10% of the total days it is rented to others Your neighbor uses the unit for two weeks everyas your main home before or after renting it orat a fair rental price. year.offering it for rent in either of the following cir-
See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later. Because your neighbor has an interest in thecumstances.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur- unit, both of you are considered to have used the
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price, 1) You rented or tried to rent the property forunit for personal purposes during those 2
do not count that day as a day of rental in 12 or more consecutive months. weeks.
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Page 74 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. You and your neighbors are ever, if you had a net loss, you may not be able
1) The cottage was used for rental a total ofco-owners of a house under a shared equity to deduct all of your rental expenses.
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was availablefinancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the Use Table 10–1 to figure your deductiblefor rent but not rented (7 days) are nothouse and pay you a fair rental price. expenses.days of rental use. The July weekend (2Even though your neighbors have an interestdays) you used it is rental use becausein the house, the days your neighbors live thereyou received a fair rental price for theare not counted as days of personal use by you.weekend.This is because your neighbors rent the house Depreciationas their main home under a shared equity fi-2) You used the cottage for personal pur-
nancing agreement. poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks inYou recover your cost in income producingMay). property through yearly tax deductions. You doExample 3. You own a rental property that this by depreciating the property; that is, by3) The total use of the cottage was 99 daysyou rent to your son. Your son has no interest in deducting some of your cost on your tax return(14 days personal use + 85 days rentalthis dwelling unit. He uses it as his main home. each year.use).He pays you a fair rental price for the property.
Three basic factors determine how much de-4) Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) ofYour son’s use of the property is not personal preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) yourthe cottage expenses.use by you because your son is using it as his basis in the property, (2) the recovery period formain home, he has no interest in the property,When determining whether you used the cot-the property, and (3) the depreciation methodand he is paying you a fair rental price.tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) youused. You cannot simply deduct your mortgage
used it is personal use even though you re-or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,Example 4. You rent your beach house toceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There-fixtures and equipment, as an expense.Joshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun-fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83You can deduct depreciation only on the parttains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.days of rental use for this purpose. Because youof your property used for rental purposes. De-You are using your house for personal pur-used the cottage for personal purposes morepreciation reduces your basis for figuring gain orposes on the days that Joshua uses it becausethan 14 days and more than 10% of the days ofloss on a later sale or exchange.your house is used by Joshua under an arrange-rental use, you used it as a home. If you have a You may have to use Form 4562 to figurement that allows you to use his house. net loss, you may not be able to deduct all of theand report your depreciation. See How To Re-rental expenses. See Property Used as a Homeport Rental Income and Expenses, later.in the following discussion.
Days Used for Repairs and Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.Maintenance You should claim the correct amount of depreci-How To Figure Rental
ation each tax year. If, in an earlier year, you didAny day that you spend working substantially fullIncome and Deductions not claim depreciation that you were entitled totime repairing and maintaining your property is deduct, you must still reduce your basis in thenot counted as a day of personal use. Do notHow you figure your rental income and deduc-property by the amount of depreciation that youcount such a day as a day of personal use eventions depends on whether the dwelling unit wasshould have deducted. You generally cannotif family members use the property for recrea-used as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used as deduct the unclaimed depreciation in the currenttional purposes on the same day. Home,  earlier) and, if used as a home, howyear or any later tax year. However, you may bemany days the property was rented. able to claim the correct amount of depreciation
How To Divide Expenses on an amended return (Form 1040X) for the
earlier year. See Claiming the correct amount ofProperty Not Used As a HomeIf you use a dwelling unit for both rental and depreciation in Publication 527 for more infor-
personal purposes, divide your expenses be- mation.If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,tween the rental use and the personal use basedreport all the rental income and deduct all theChanging your accounting method to de-on the number of days used for each purpose.rental expenses. See How To Report Rental duct unclaimed depreciation.If you claimedExpenses for the rental use of the unit are de-Income and Expenses, later. less depreciation than allowable in an earlierductible under the rules explained in How To Your deductible rental expenses can beyear, you can change your accounting methodFigure Rental Income and Deductions, next. more than your gross rental income. However,to take a deduction in the current year for the When dividing your expenses follow thesesee Limits on Rental Losses, later. unclaimed depreciation. To change your ac-rules. counting method, you must have the consent of
the IRS. In some instances, you can receive1)  Any day that the unit is rented at a fairProperty Used As a Home automatic consent. For more information, seerental price is a day of rental use even if
chapter 1 of Publication 946.you used the unit for personal purposesIf you use a dwelling unit as a home during the
that day. This rule does not apply whenyear (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier),Land. You can never depreciate land. Thedetermining whether you used the unit ashow you figure your rental income and deduc-costs of clearing, grading, planting, and land-a home. tions depends on how many days the unit wasscaping are usually all part of the cost of landrented.2) Any day that the unit is available for rent and are not depreciable.
but not actually rented is not a day of
Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use arental use. Depreciation Systemsdwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer
than 15 days during the year, do not include in
Example. Your beach cottage was avail- There are three ways to figure depreciation. Theincome any of the rental income. Also, you can-
able for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 depreciation system you use depends on thenot deduct any expenses as rental expenses.
days). Your family uses the cottage during the type of property and when the property was
last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unable placed in service. For property used in rentalRented 15 days or more.If you use a dwell-
to find a renter for the first week in August (7 activities you use:ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or more
days). The person who rented the cottage forduring the year, you include all your rental in-• MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost Re-July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2come in your income. See How To Report covery System) for property placed in ser-days) without any reduction in or refund of rent.Rental Income and Expenses, later. If you had a vice after 1986.The cottage was not used at all before May 17 ornet profit from the rental property for the year
after August 31. (that is, if your rental income is more than the• ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
You figure the part of the cottage expenses total of your rental expenses, including depreci- tem) for property placed in service after
to treat as rental expenses as follows. ation), deduct all of your rental expenses. How- 1980 but before 1987, or
Page 72 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 75 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 10–1. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
● Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home. )
1. Enter rents received
2.a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)
● Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
● Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero
4.a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such as
repairs, insurance, and utilities)
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)
c. Add lines 4a and 4b
d. Allowable operating expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c
5. Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter zero
6.a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit
c. Add lines 6a and 6b
d. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6c
7.a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 6d
from line 6c
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet
above. If you were unable to deduct all your
expenses last year because of the rental
income limit, add these unused amounts to
your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
dwelling unit that you could deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not
rented the unit. Do not include interest on
a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit.
For example, do not include interest on a
home equity loan used to pay off credit
cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or
pay college tuition. Include interest on a loan
used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling
unit, or to refinance such a loan. Enter the
rental portion of this interest on line 2a of
the worksheet.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses
related to the dwelling unit that you could
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
had not rented the dwelling unit. To do this,
complete Section A of Form 4684,
Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as
personal losses. On line 17 of Form 4684,
enter 10% of your adjusted gross income
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental
expenses that are directly related only to the
rental activity. These include interest on
loans used for rental activities other than to
buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also
include rental agency fees, advertising,
office supplies, and depreciation on office
equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
portion of the mortgage interest you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented
the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of the
mortgage interest you could not deduct on
Schedule A because it is more than the limit
on home mortgage interest. Do not include
interest on a loan that did not benefit the
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
casualty and theft losses, use the Form
4684 you prepared for line 2c of this
worksheet.
Allocating the limited deduction. If you
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c
or 6c this year, you can allocate the
allowable deduction in any way you wish
among the expenses included on line 4c or
6c. Enter the amount you allocate to each
expense on the appropriate line of Schedule
E, Part I.
A. Enter the amount from line 10
of Form 4684
B. Enter the rental portion of A
C. Enter the amount from line 2c
of this worksheet
D. Subtract C from B. Enter the
result here and on line 6a of
this worksheet
figured without your rental income and
expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the
rental portion of the result from line 18 of
Form 4684 on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it
to figure your personal losses on Schedule
A. Instead, figure the personal portion on a
separate Form 4684.
dwelling unit (as explained in the line 2a
instructions).
• Useful lives and either straight line or anSection 179 election.You cannot claim the your share of the cooperative housing
accelerated method of depreciation, such section 179 deduction for property held to pro-corporation’s depreciation. See Cooperative
as the declining balance method, if placed duce rental income (unless renting property isapartments in Publication 527 for information on
in service before 1981. your trade or business). See chapter 2 of Publi- how to figure your depreciation deduction.
cation 946.
This chapter discusses MACRS only. IfNo deduction greater than basis.The total MACRS
you need more information about de-of all your yearly depreciation deductions cannot
preciating property placed in service In general, tangible property placed in servicebe more than the cost or other basis of theCAUTION
!
before 1987, see Publication 534, Depreciating property. For this purpose, your yearly deprecia-during 2001 is depreciated using MACRS.
Property Placed in Service Before 1987. tion deductions include any depreciation thatMACRS consists of two systems that deter-
you were allowed to claim, even if you did notmine how you depreciate your property. TheIf you placed property in service before 2001,claim it.continue to use the same method of figuring main system is called the General Deprecia-
depreciation that you used in the past. tion System (GDS). The second system isCooperative apartments.If you rent your co-
operative apartment to others, you can deduct called the Alternative Depreciation System
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

Page 76 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 10–2. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property • Residential rental property.
Used in Rental Activities
Recovery periods for property used in rental
activities are shown in Table 10–2.MACRS Recovery Period to Use
The class to which property is assigned isGeneral Depreciation Alternative determined by its class life. Class lives and re-Type of Property System Depreciation System covery periods for most assets are listed in Ap-
Computers and their peripheral pendix B in Publication 946.
equipment ........................ 5  years 5 years
Additions or improvements to property.Office machinery, such as:
Treat depreciable additions or improvementsTypewriters you make to any property as separate property
Calculators items for depreciation purposes. The recovery
period for an addition or improvement to prop-Copiers.................... 5  years 6 years
erty begins on the later of: Automobiles....................... 5  years 5 years
Light trucks........................ 5  years 5 years 1) The date the addition or improvement is
placed in service, orAppliances, such as:
2) The date the property to which the additionStoves
or improvement was made is placed inRefrigerators................ 5  years 9 years service.
Carpets .......................... 5  years 9 years The class and recovery period of the addition
Furniture used in rental property.......... 5  years 9 years or improvement is the one that would apply to
the underlying property if it were placed in ser-Office furniture and equipment, such as: vice at the same time as the addition or improve-
Desks ment.
Files...................... 7  years 10 years
Example. You own a residential rentalAny property that does not have a class house that you have been renting since 1986
life and that has not been and are depreciating under ACRS. You put an
addition onto the house and you placed it indesignated by law as being in
service in 2001. You must use MACRS for theany other class............... 7  years 12 years addition. Under MACRS, the addition would be
depreciated as residential rental property overFences ........................... 1 5  years 20 years 27.5 years.
Roads ........................... 1 5  years 20 years
Shrubbery ........................ 1 5  years 20 years
Placed-in-Service Date
Residential rental property (buildings or You can begin to depreciate property when you
structures) and structural place it in service in your trade or business or for
the production of income. Property is consideredcomponents such as furnaces,
placed in service in a rental activity when it iswater pipes, venting, etc.,........ 27.5 years 40 years ready and available for a specific use in that
activity.Additions and improvements, such as a The recovery period of the property to which
new roof..................... the addition or improvement is made,
determined as if the property were placed inCost Basisservice at the same time as the addition or
improvement. To deduct the proper amount of depreciation
each year, you must first determine your basis in
the property you intend to depreciate. The basis(ADS). GDS is used to figure your depreciation  In addition, you may elect to exclude certainused for figuring depreciation is your originaldeduction for property used in most rental activi-property from the application of MACRS. Seebasis in the property increased by any additionsties, unless you elect ADS. Publication 946 for more information. or improvements made to the property. YourTo figure your MACRS deduction, you need original basis is usually your cost. However, ifto know the following information about your you acquire the property in some other way,property:
Recovery Periods Under GDS such as by inheriting it, getting it as a gift, or
building it yourself, you may have to figure your1) Its recovery period, Each item of property that can be depreciated isoriginal basis in another way. Other adjustmentsassigned to a property class. The recovery pe-2) Its placed-in-service date, and could also affect your basis. See chapter 14.
riod of the property depends on the class the3) Its depreciable basis. property is in. The property classes are:
ConventionsPersonal home changed to rental use.You • 3-year property,must use MACRS to figure the depreciation on To figure your depreciation deduction for bothproperty you used as your home and changed to• 5-year property, the year in which you place property in servicerental property in 2001. • 7-year property, and the year in which you dispose of property,
Excluded property.You cannot use MACRS you use one of the following conventions.• 10-year property,for certain personal property placed in service in
1) Mid-month convention.your rental property in 2001 if it had been previ-• 15-year property,
ously placed in service before MACRS became 2) Half-year convention.• 20-year property,effective in 1987 (before August 1, 1986, if elec-
3) Mid-quarter convention.tion made). • Nonresidential real property, and
Page 74 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 77 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mid-month convention.  A mid-month con-
vention is used for residential rental property in
all situations. Under a mid-month convention,
residential rental property placed in service, or
disposed of, during any month is treated as
placed in service, or disposed of, in the middle of
that month.
Half-year convention.The half-year conven-
tion is used in rental activities other than resi-
dential rental property. The half-year convention
treats all property placed in service, or disposed
of, during a tax year as placed in service, or
disposed of, in the middle of that tax year.
A half year of depreciation is allowable for
the first year property is placed in service, re-
gardless of when the property is placed in ser-
vice during the tax year. For each of the
remaining years of the recovery period, you will
take a full year of depreciation. If you hold the
property for the entire recovery period, a half
year of depreciation is allowable for the year in
which the recovery period ends. If you dispose
of the property before the end of the recovery
period, a half year of depreciation is allowable
for the year of disposition.
Mid-quarter convention.A mid-quarter con-
vention must be used in certain circumstances
for property other than residential rental prop-
erty. This convention applies if the total basis of
such property that is placed in service in the last
3 months of a tax year is more than 40% of the
total basis of all such property you place in
service during the tax year.
Under a mid-quarter convention, all property
placed in service, or disposed of, during any
quarter of a tax year is treated as placed in
service, or disposed of, in the middle of the
quarter.
Exception. If the third quarter of your 2001
tax year includes September 11, 2001, you may
elect to apply the half-year convention, as dis-
cussed above, to all property (other than non-
residential real property and residential rental
property) placed in service during your 2001 tax
year. The third quarter begins on the first day of
the seventh month of the tax year.
To make the election, write “Election Pursu-
ant to Notice 2001–70” across the top of Form
4562.
Example. During the tax year, Jordan Greg-
ory purchased the following items to use in his
rental property.
• A dishwasher for $400, that he placed in
service in January.
• Used furniture for $100, that he placed in
service in September.
• A refrigerator for $500, that he placed in
Table 10–3. Optional MACRS Tables
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–A. MACRS 5-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
20.00%
5
6
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–B. MACRS 7-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
14.29%
5
6
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
Year First
quarter
1
Third
quarter
Mid-quarter convention
2
3
4
Table 10–3–C. MACRS 15-Year property
Half-year convention
Second
quarter
Fourth
quarter
5.00%
5
6
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Year 1
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
Table 10–3–D. Residential Rental Property (27.5-year)
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
3.485%
May
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
3.636%
3.636
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
1.970
Oct.
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
Nov.
Dec.
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
service in October. 2) Actually figure the deduction using the de-MACRS Depreciation preciation method and convention that ap-
Jordan uses the calendar year as his tax year.Under GDS ply over the recovery period of the
The total basis of all property placed in service in property.
You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-that year is $1,000. The $500 basis of the refrig- Publication 946 discusses computing deprecia-duction under GDS in one of two ways. Theerator placed in service during the last 3 months tion using the proper method and convention.deduction is substantially the same both ways.of his tax year exceeds $400 (40% × $1,000).
(The difference, if any, is slight.) You can either: Ordinarily, Jordan must use the mid-quarter
convention instead of the half-year convention Using the Optional Tables1) Use the percentage from the optionalfor all three items. However, for 2001 he can useMACRS tables, see Table 10–3, orthe half-year convention for all three items if he You can use the tables in Table 10–3 to com-
makes the election as discussed under Excep- pute annual depreciation under MACRS. The
tion above. tables show the percentages for the first 6 years.
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 75

Page 78 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The percentages in Tables 10–3–A, 10–3–B, Because you placed the refrigerator in ser- MACRS, ACRS, and any other method that al-
and 10–3–C make the change from declining vice in October, you use the fourth quarter col- lows you to deduct more depreciation than you
balance to straight line in the year that straightumn of Table 10 – 3 – A and find that the could deduct using a straight line method.
line will yield a larger deduction. See Appendix A depreciation percentage for year 1 is 5%. Your
of Publication 946 for complete tables. depreciation deduction for the refrigerator is $25
($500 × .05).If you elect to use the straight line method for
Because you placed the stove in service in5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150% declining Limits onFebruary, you use the first quarter column ofbalance method for 5- or 7-year property, use
Table 10–3–A and find that the depreciationthe tables in Appendix A of Publication 946. Rental Lossespercentage for year 1 is 35%. For that year, your
depreciation deduction for the stove is $105How to use the tables.The following section Rental real estate activities are generally con-($300 × .35).explains how to use the optional tables. sidered passive activities, and the amount of
Figure the depreciation deduction by multi- loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, youTable 10–3–D. Use this table for residentialplying your unadjusted basis in the property by cannot deduct losses from rental real estaterental property. Find the row for the month thatthe percentage shown in the appropriate table. activities unless you have income from otheryou placed the property in service. Use the per-Your unadjusted basis is your depreciable basis passive activities. However, you may be able tocentages listed for that month to figure yourwithout reduction for depreciation previously deduct rental losses without regard to whetherdepreciation deduction. The mid-month conven-claimed. you have income from other passive activities iftion is taken into account in the percentagesOnce you begin using an optional table to you “materially” or “actively” participated in yourshown in the table.figure depreciation, you must continue to use it rental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later.
for the entire recovery period unless there is an Losses from passive activities are first sub-Example. You purchased a single familyadjustment to the basis of your property for a ject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit therental house and placed it in service in February.reason other than: amount of deductible losses from holding mostYour basis in the house is $80,000. Using Table
real property placed in service after 1986.10–3–D, you find that the percentage for prop-1) Depreciation allowed or allowable, orerty placed in service in February of year 1 is
Exception. If your rental losses are less than2) An addition or improvement that is depre-3.182%. That year’s depreciation deduction is
$25,000 and you actively participated in theciated as a separate item of property.$2,546 ($80,000 × .03182).
rental activity, the passive activity limits probablyIf there is an adjustment for any other reason (for do not apply to you. See Losses From Rentalexample, because of a deductible casualtyMACRS Depreciation Real Estate Activities, later.loss), you can no longer use the table. For theUnder ADSyear of the adjustment and for the remaining Property used as a home. If you used therecovery period, figure depreciation using the rental property as a home during the year, theIf you choose, you can use the ADS method forproperty’s adjusted basis at the end of the year passive activity rules do not apply to that home.most property. Under ADS, you use the straightand the appropriate depreciation method, as Instead, you must follow the rules explainedline method of depreciation.explained in MACRS Depreciation Under GDS earlier under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (In-Table 10–2 shows the recovery periods forin Publication 527. cluding Vacation Home.)property used in rental activities that you depre-
ciate under ADS. See Appendix B in PublicationTables 10 –3–A, 10 –3–B, and 10 –3–C. 946 for other property. If your property is notAt-Risk RulesThe percentages in these tables take into ac-listed, it is considered to have no class life.count the half-year and mid-quarter conven-Under ADS, personal property with no class lifeThe at-risk rules place a limit on the amount youtions. Use Table 10–3–A for 5-year property,is depreciated using a recovery period of 12can deduct as losses from activities often de-Table 10–3–B for 7-year property, and Tableyears and real property with no class life isscribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real10–3–C for 15-year property. Use the percent-depreciated using a recovery period of 40 years.property (other than mineral property) placed inage in the second column (half-year convention)Use the mid-month convention for residentialservice before 1987 are not subject to the at-riskunless you must use the mid-quarter conventionrental property. For all other property, use therules.(explained earlier). If you must use the half-year or mid-quarter convention. Generally, any loss from an activity subjectmid-quarter convention, use the column that
to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent ofcorresponds to the calendar year quarter inElection. You choose to use ADS by entering
the total amount you have at risk in the activity atwhich you placed the property in service.the depreciation on line 16, Part II of Form 4562.
the end of the tax year. You are considered atThe election of ADS for one item in a class of
risk in an activity to the extent of cash and theExample 1. You purchased a stove and re-property generally applies to all property in that
adjusted basis of other property you contributedfrigerator and placed them in service in Febru-class that is placed in service during the tax year
to the activity and certain amounts borrowed forary. Your basis in the stove is $300 and yourof the election. However, the election applies on
use in the activity. See Publication 925 for morebasis in the refrigerator is $500. Both are 5-yeara property-by-property basis for residential
information.property. Using the half-year convention columnrental property.
in Table 10–3–A, you find the depreciation per-Once you choose to use ADS, you cannot
centage for year 1 is 20%. For that year, yourchange your election. Passive Activity Limits
depreciation deduction is $60 ($300 × .20) for
the stove, and is $100 ($500 × .20) for the In general, rental activities (except those meet-Other Rules Aboutrefrigerator. ing the exception for real estate professionals,
Depreciable PropertyFor the second tax year, you find your depre- below) are passive activities. For this purpose, a
ciation percentage is 32%. That year’s deprecia- rental activity is an activity from which you re-
In addition to the rules about what methods yoution deduction will be $96 ($300 × .32) for the ceive income mainly for the use of tangible prop-
can use, there are other rules you should bestove and $160 ($500 × .32) for the refrigerator. erty, rather than for services.
aware of with respect to depreciable property.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Limits on passive activity deductions andGain from disposition. If you dispose ofExample 1, except you buy the refrigerator in credits. Deductions for losses from passivedepreciable property at a gain, you may have toOctober instead of February. You must use the activities are limited. You generally cannot offsetreport, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain.mid-quarter convention to figure depreciation on income, other than passive income, with lossesSee Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi-the stove and refrigerator. The refrigerator was from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxestions of Assets.placed in service in the last 3 months of the tax on income, other than passive income, with
year and its basis ($500) is more than 40% ofAlternative minimum tax.If you use acceler- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex-
the total basis of all property placed in serviceated depreciation, you may have to file Form cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next
during the year ($800 × .40 = $320). 6251. Accelerated depreciation includes tax year.
Page 76 Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 79 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For a detailed discussion of these rules, see you normally report your rental income and ex-• Depreciation on property placed in servicePublication 925. penses in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). during 2001,You may have to complete Form 8582  to However, do not use that schedule to report a
• Depreciation on any property that is listedfigure the amount of any passive activity loss fornot-for-profit activity. See Not Rented for Profit, property (such as a car), regardless ofthe current year for all activities and the amountearlier. when it was placed in service, orof the passive activity loss allowed on your tax
If you provide significant services that arereturn. • Any car expenses (actual or the standardprimarily for your tenant’s convenience, such as mileage rate).Exception for real estate professionals. regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid ser-Rental activities in which you materially partici- Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your ownvice, you report your rental income and ex-pated during the year are not passive activities worksheet. You do not have to attach thesepenses on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orif, during that year, you were a real estate pro- computations to your return.Loss From Business or Schedule C–EZ, Netfessional because you met the requirements.
Profit From Business (Sole Proprietorship). Sig-For a detailed discussion of the requirements, Example. On January 1, Justin Cole boughtsee Publication 527. For a detailed discussion ofnificant services do not include the furnishing ofa townhouse and placed it in service as residen-material participation, see Publication 925.heat and light, cleaning of public areas, trashtial rental property. He receives $1,100 a month
collection, etc. For information, see Publicationrental income. His rental expenses for the year
334, Tax Guide for Small Business (For Individ-are as follows:Losses From Rental Real Estate uals Who Use Schedule C or C–EZ). You also
Activities Fire insurance (1-year policy)....... $200may have to pay self-employment tax on your
Mortgage interest............... 5,000rental income. See Publication 533, Self-Em-If you or your spouse actively participated in a Fee paid to real estate company forployment Tax.passive rental real estate activity, you can de- collecting monthly rent.......... 5 7 2
duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity from General repairs................ 1 7 5
your nonpassive income. This special allowance Real estate taxes imposed and paid . . 800Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort-is an exception to the general rule disallowinggage interest on your rental property to any oneJustin’s basis for depreciation of thelosses in excess of income from passive activi- townhouse is $65,000. He is using MACRS withperson, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the a 27.5-year recovery period. On April 1, Justingage Interest Statement, or similar statementactivity against the tax on up to $25,000 of bought a new refrigerator for the rental propertyshowing the interest you paid for the year. If younonpassive income after taking into account any at a cost of $425. He uses the MACRS methodand at least one other person (other than yourlosses allowed under this exception. with a 5-year recovery period.If you are married, filing a separate return,spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for,Justin uses the percentage for January inand lived apart from your spouse for the entireand paid interest on the mortgage, and the otherTable 10–3–D to figure his depreciation deduc-tax year, your special allowance cannot be moreperson received the Form 1098, report yourtion for the townhouse. He uses the percentagethan $12,500. If you lived with your spouse atshare of the interest on line 13 of Schedule Eunder “Half-year convention” in Table 10–3–Aany time during the year and are filing a sepa-(Form 1040). Attach a statement to your returnto figure his depreciation deduction for the refrig-rate return, you cannot use the special allow-showing the name and address of the othererator. He must report the depreciation on Formance to reduce your nonpassive income or taxperson. In the left margin of Schedule E (Form4562.on nonpassive income. Justin figures his net rental income or loss for1040), next to line 13, write “See attached.”The maximum amount of the special allow- the townhouse as follows:ance is reduced if your modified adjusted gross
income is more than $100,000 ($50,000 if mar-Schedule E (Form 1040) Total rental income receivedried filing separately). ($1,100 × 1 2 ) ................ $13,200Use Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040) to reportMinus Expenses:Active participation.You actively partici-your rental income and expenses. List your totalFire insurance (1-year policy) . . 200pated in a rental real estate activity if you (and
income, expenses, and depreciation for eachMortgage interest.......... 5,000your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental
Rent collection fee......... 5 7 2rental property. Be sure to answer the questionproperty and you made management decisions
General repairs........... 1 7 5on line 2.in a significant and bona fide sense. Manage-
Real estate taxes.......... 8 0 0ment decisions include approving new tenants,If you have more than three rental or royaltyTotal expenses............... 6,747deciding on rental terms, approving expendi-properties, complete and attach as many Balance .................... $6,453tures, and similar decisions. Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.Minus Depreciation:
More information. See Publication 925 for On townhouseComplete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
more information on the passive loss limits, in- ($65,000 × 3.485%)........ 2,265ever, fill in the “Totals” column on only one
cluding information on the treatment of unused On refrigeratorSchedule E. The figures in the “Totals” column ($425 × 20%) ............ 8 5disallowed passive losses and credits and theon that Schedule E should be the combinedTotal depreciation............. 2,350treatment of gains and losses realized on thetotals of all Schedules E. Net rental income for townhouse $4,103disposition of a passive activity.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
How To Report ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of
Schedule E, use page 2 of the same Schedule E
Rental Income you used to enter the combined totals in Part I.
On page 1, line 20 of Schedule E, enter theand Expenses
depreciation you are claiming. You must com-
plete and attach Form 4562 for rental activitiesIf you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and
only if you are claiming:provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,
Chapter 10 Rental Income and Expenses Page 77

Page 80 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
general information on traditional and Roth to tell you if you have more than one pension or
IRAs, is in chapter 18. annuity contract.
Railroad retirement benefits.Part of the rail-11.
road retirement benefits you receive is treatedUseful Items
for tax purposes like social security benefits, andYou may want to see:
part is treated like an employee pension. For
Retirement information about railroad retirement benefitsPublication
treated as social security benefits, see Publica-
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-Plans, Pensions, road Retirement Benefits. For information about❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
railroad retirement benefits treated as an em-Retirement Benefits
ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement inand Annuities ❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions and Publication 575.
Annuities
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If you
receive a pension or annuity, you may be able toForm (and Instructions)Important Change take the credit for the elderly or the disabled.
❏ W –4P Withholding Certificate for See chapter 34.Required distributions.The IRS proposed Pension or Annuity Payments
Withholding and estimated tax.The payernew rules that simplify the calculation of re-
❏ 1099–R Distributions From Pensions, of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an-quired distributions. See the discussion on re-
Annuities, Retirement or nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-quired distributions under Tax on Excess
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, hold income tax on the taxable parts of amountsAccumulation in Publication 575, Pension and
Insurance Contracts, etc. paid to you. You can choose not to have taxAnnuity Income.
withheld except for amounts paid to you that are❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum Distributions
eligible rollover distributions. See Eligible rol-
❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Planslover distributions under Rollovers, later. You
(Including IRAs) and Other make this choice by filing  Form W–4P.Important Reminder Tax-Favored Accounts For payments other than eligible rollover dis-
tributions, you can tell the payer how to withhold
5-year tax option repealed.The 5-year tax by filing Form W–4P. If an eligible rollover distri-
option for figuring the tax on lump-sum distribu- bution is paid directly to you, 20% will generally
tions from a qualified retirement plan has been be withheld. There is no withholding on a directEmployee Pensionsrepealed. However, a plan participant can con- rollover of an eligible rollover distribution. See
tinue to choose the 10-year tax option or capital Direct rollover option under Rollovers, later. Ifand Annuitiesgain treatment for a lump-sum distribution that you choose not to have tax withheld or you do
qualifies for the special treatment. not have enough tax withheld, you may have toGenerally, if you did not pay any part of the costpay estimated tax.of your employee pension or annuity and yourFor more information, see Pensions and An-employer did not withhold part of the cost fromnuities under Withholding in chapter 5.your pay while you worked, the amounts youIntroduction Loans. If you borrow money from your quali-receive each year are fully taxable. You must
fied pension or annuity plan, tax-sheltered annu-This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-report them on your income tax return.
ity program, government plan, or contracttributions you receive from:
purchased under any of these plans, you mayPartly taxable payments.If you paid part of
1) An employee pension or annuity from a have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-the cost of your annuity, you are not taxed on the
qualified plan, tion. This means that you may have to include inpart of the annuity you receive that represents a
income all or part of the amount borrowed un-return of your cost. The rest of the amount you2) A disability retirement, and less certain exceptions apply. Even if you do notreceive is taxable. Your annuity starting date
3) A purchased commercial annuity. have to treat the loan as a nonperiodic distribu-(defined later) determines which method you
tion, you may not be able to deduct the interestmust or may use.
on the loan in some situations. For details, seeIf you contributed to your pension or annuityWhat is not covered in this chapter.The
Loans Treated as Distributions in Publicationplan, you figure the tax-free and the taxablefollowing topics are not discussed in this chap-
575. For information on the deductibility of inter-parts of your annuity payments under either theter:
est, see chapter 25.Simplified Method or the General Rule. If your
1) The General Rule. This is the method annuity starting date is after November 18, Qualified plans for self-employedgenerally used to determine the tax treat-1996, and your payments are from a qualifiedindividuals.Qualified plans set up by self-em-ment of pension and annuity income fromplan, you must use the Simplified Method. Gen-ployed individuals are sometimes called Keoghnonqualified plans. If your annuity startingerally, you must use the General Rule only foror H.R. 10 plans. Qualified plans can be set update is after November 18, 1996, you gen-nonqualified plans. by sole proprietors, partnerships (but not a part-erally cannot use the General Rule for aIf your annuity starting date is after July 1,ner), and corporations. They can cover self-em-qualified plan. For more information about1986, but before November 19, 1996, you can ployed persons, such as the sole proprietor orthe General Rule, see Publication 939.use either the General Rule or, if you qualify, thepartners, as well as regular (common-law) em-Simplified Method. ployees.2) Civil service retirement benefits. If you
Distributions from a qualified plan are usuallyare retired from the federal governmentMore than one program.If you receive bene-fully taxable because most recipients have no(either regular or disability retirement), seefits from more than one program, such as acost basis. If you have an investment (cost) inPublication 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil pension plan and a profit-sharing plan, you mustthe plan, however, your pension or annuity pay-Service Retirement Benefits. Publication figure the taxable part of each separately. Makements from a qualified plan are taxed under the721 also covers the information that youseparate computations even if the benefits fromSimplified Method. For more information aboutneed if you are the survivor or beneficiaryboth are included in the same check. For exam-qualified plans, see Publication 560, Retirementof a federal employee or retiree who died.ple, benefits from one of your programs could bePlans for Small Business.3) Individual retirement arrangements fully taxable, while the benefits from your other
(IRAs). Information on the tax treatment of program could be taxable under the GeneralDeferred compensation plans of state and
amounts you receive from an individual re- Rule or the Simplified Method. Your former em-local governments and tax-exempt organiza-
tirement arrangement (IRA), as well as ployer or the plan administrator should be abletions. If you participate in one of these non-
Page 78 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 81 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
qualified plans (known as section 457 plans), Who must use the Simplified Method.You How to use it. Complete the Simplified
you will not be taxed currently on your pay that is must use the Simplified Method if your annuity Method Worksheet to figure your taxable annu-
deferred under the plan. You or your beneficiary starting date is after November 18, 1996, and ity for 2001. If the annuity is payable only over
will be taxed on this deferred pay only when it is you receive pension or annuity payments from a your life, use your age at the birthday preceding
distributed or otherwise made available to either qualified plan or annuity, unless you were at your annuity starting date. For annuity starting
of you. least 75 years old and entitled to annuity pay- dates beginning in 1998, if your annuity is pay-
For information on the limits on deferrals ments from a qualified plan that are guaranteed able over your life and the lives of other individu-
under section 457 plans and how to treat excess for 5 years or more. als, use your combined ages at the birthdays
deferrals, see Retirement Plan Contributions preceding the annuity starting date.
Who must use the General Rule.You mustunder Employee Compensation in Publication If your annuity starting date begins inuse the General Rule if you receive pension or525. 1998 and your annuity is payable overannuity payments from:Distributions of deferred pay are not eligible the lives of more than one annuitant,
CAUTION
!
for the 10-year tax option and rollover treatment the total number of monthly annuity payments1) A nonqualified plan (such as a private an-(discussed later). Distributions are, however, expected to be received is based on the com-nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, orsubject to the tax for failure to make minimum bined ages of the annuitants at the annuity start-a nonqualified employee plan), ordistributions. See Required distributions not ing date. However, if your annuity starting datemade, under Tax on Excess Accumulation, 2) A qualified plan if you are age 75 or olderbegan before January 1, 1998, the total numberlater. on your annuity starting date and your an-of monthly annuity payments expected to beFor general information on these deferred nuity payments are guaranteed for at leastreceived is based on the primary annuitant’s agecompensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred 5 years. at the annuity starting date.Compensation Plans in Publication 575.
You can use the General Rule for a quali-
Be sure to keep a copy of the com-fied plan if your annuity starting date is before
Cost (Investment in the pleted worksheet; it will help you figureNovember 19, 1996 (but after July 1, 1986), and
your taxable annuity in later years.
TIP
you do not qualify to use, or choose not to use,Contract)
the Simplified Method.
Before you can figure how much, if any, of yourYou generally cannot use the General Example. Bill Kirkland, age 65, began re-pension or annuity benefits is taxable, you mustRule for a qualified plan if your annuity startingceiving retirement benefits on January 1, 2001,determine your cost (your investment in the con-date is after November 18, 1996. Complete in-under a joint and survivor annuity. Bill’s annuitytract). Your total cost in the plan includes every-formation on the General Rule, including thestarting date is January 1, 2001. The benefitsthing that you paid. It also includes amountstables you need, is contained in Publication 939.are to be paid for the joint lives of Bill and hisyour employer paid that were taxable at the time wife, Kathy, age 65. Bill had contributed $31,000If you are age 75 or older, and yourpaid. Cost does not include any amounts you to a qualified plan and had received no distribu-annuity starting date is after Novemberdeducted or excluded from income. tions before the annuity starting date. Bill is to18, 1996, you must use the General
TIP
From this total cost paid or considered paid receive a retirement benefit of $1,200 a month,Rule if the payments are guaranteed for at leastby you, subtract any refunds of premiums, re- and Kathy is to receive a monthly survivor bene-5 years. You must use the Simplified Method ifbates, dividends, unrepaid loans, or other fit of $600 upon Bill’s death.the payments are guaranteed for less than 5tax-free amounts you received by the later of theyears. Bill must use the Simplified Method to figureannuity starting date or the date on which you his taxable annuity because his payments arereceived your first payment. from a qualified plan and he is under age 75.Your annuity starting date is the later of theNote. If you are not sure whether your retire-Because his annuity is payable over the lives offirst day of the first period for which you receivedment plan is a qualified plan (that meets certainmore than one annuitant, he uses his anda payment, or the date the plan’s obligation Internal Revenue Code requirements), ask yourKathy’s combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-became fixed. employer or plan administrator. tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of theYour employer or the organization that pays worksheet. His completed worksheet is shownGuaranteed payments. Your annuity contractyou the benefits (plan administrator) should in Table 11–1.provides guaranteed payments if a minimumshow your cost in Box 5 of your Form 1099–R.
Bill’s tax-free monthly amount is $100number of payments or a minimum amount (for
Foreign employment contributions.If you ($31,000 ÷ 310 as shown on line 4 of the work-example, the amount of your investment) is pay-
worked in a foreign country and your employer sheet). Upon Bill’s death, if Bill has not recov-able even if you and any survivor annuitant do
contributed to your retirement plan, a part of ered the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will alsonot live to receive the minimum. If the minimum
those payments may be considered part of your exclude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.amount is less than the total amount of the
cost. This applies to contributions that were The full amount of any annuity payments re-payments you are to receive, barring death, dur-
made: ceived after 310 payments are paid must being the first 5 years after payments begin (fig-
included in gross income.ured by ignoring any payment increases), you1) Before 1963, If Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments areare entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed
2) After 1962 for work if you performed the made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction willpayments.
services under a plan that existed on be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the finalIf you are the survivor of a deceased retiree,
March 12, 1962, or income tax return of the last to die. This deduc-you can use the Simplified Method if the retiree
tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-used it.3) After 1996 if you performed the services of gross-income limit.a foreign missionary. Exclusion limit.Your annuity starting date Had Bill’s retirement annuity paymentsdetermines the total amount that you can ex- been from a nonqualified plan, heclude from your taxable income over the years.Simplified Method would have used the General Rule. He
TIP
If your annuity starting date is after 1986,uses the Simplified Method Worksheet because
your exclusion is limited to your cost. If it wasUnder the Simplified Method, you figure the his annuity payments are from a qualified plan.
before January 1, 1987, you can continue totax-free part of each monthly annuity payment
take your monthly exclusion for as long as youby dividing your cost by the total number of
receive your annuity.expected monthly payments. For an annuity that Survivors
is payable for the lives of the annuitants, this If your annuity starting date is after 1986, any
number is based on the annuitants’ ages on the unrecovered cost at your (or the last annuitant’s) If you receive a survivor annuity because of the
annuity starting date and is determined from a death is allowed as a miscellaneous itemized death of a retiree who had reported the annuity
table. For any other annuity, this number is the deduction on the final return of the decedent. under the Three-Year Rule, include the total
number of monthly annuity payments under theThis deduction is not subject to the received in income. (The retiree’s cost has al-
contract. 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. ready been recovered tax free.)
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 79

Page 82 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
adjusted-gross-income limit. The deceased an-Table 11–1 Simplified Method Worksheet
nuitant must have died after the annuity starting(Keep for Your Records)
date. (For details, see section 1.691(d)-1 of the
regulations.) This amount cannot be deducted in1.Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.
one year. It must be deducted in equal amountsAlso, enter this amount on Form 1040, line 16a, or Form 1040A,
over your remaining life expectancy.line 12a.......................................... 1. 14,400
2.Enter your cost in the plan at the annuity
How To Reportstarting date plus any death benefit exclusion2. 31,000
3.Enter the appropriate number from Table 1 If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity on
below. But if your annuity starting date was line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If your
after 1997 and the payments are for your life pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on line
and that of your beneficiary, enter the 16b; do not make an entry on line 16a.
appropriate number from Table 2 below..... 3. 310 If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-
nuity on line 12a and the taxable part on line4.Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 4. 100
12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable,5.Multiply line 4 by the number of months for enter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on linewhich this year’s payments were made. If your 12a.annuity starting date was before 1987, skip
lines 6 and 7 and enter this amount on line 8. More than one annuity.If you receive moreOtherwise, go to line 6................. 5. 1,200 than one annuity and at least one of them is not
fully taxable, enter the total amount received6.Enter the amount, if any, recovered tax free in
from all annuities on line 16a, Form 1040, or lineyears after 1986..................... 6. –0–
12a, Form 1040A, and enter the taxable part on7.Subtract line 6 from line 2.............. 7. 31,000 line 16b, Form 1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A. If
8.Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7....................... 8. 1,200 all the annuities you receive are fully taxable,
enter the total of all of them on line 16b, Form9. Taxable amount. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter the result, but
1040, or line 12b, Form 1040A.not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total on Form 1040,
line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. If your Form 1099–R shows a Joint return.If you file a joint return and yoularger amount, use the amount on this line instead of the amount and your spouse each receive one or more pen-from Form 1099–R.................................. 9. 13,200 sions or annuities, report the total of the pen-
sions and annuities on line 16a, Form 1040, or
TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE line 12a, Form 1040A, and report the taxable
part on line 16b, Form 1040, or line 12b, FormAND your annuity starting date was—
1040A.IF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18,
starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3...
Lump-Sum Distributions55 or under 300 360
56–60 260 310 If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a
qualified employee plan or qualified employee61–65 240 260 annuity and the plan participant was born before
66–70 170 210 1936, you may be able to elect optional methods
of figuring the tax on the distribution. The part71 or older 120 160
from active participation in the plan before 1974
may qualify as capital gain subject to a 20% taxTABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVE
rate. The part from participation after 1973 (andIF the combined ages any part from participation before 1974 that youat annuity starting THEN  enter do not report as capital gain) is ordinary income.date were... on line 3... You may be able to use the 10-year tax option,
110 or under 410 discussed later, to figure tax on the ordinary
income part.111–120 360
The 5-year tax option for figuring the121–130 310
tax on lump-sum distributions has131–140 260 been repealed.CAUTION
!
141 or older 210
Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on
a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-
ods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added toIf the retiree was reporting the annuity pay- In any case, if the annuity starting date is
the regular tax figured on your other income.ments under the General Rule, apply the same after 1986, the total exclusion over the years
This may result in a smaller tax than you wouldexclusion percentage the retiree used to your cannot be more than the cost.
pay by including the taxable amount of the distri-initial payment called for in the contract. The If you are the survivor of an employee, or
bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-resulting tax-free amount will then remain fixed. former employee, who died before becoming
lar tax.Any increases in the survivor annuity are fully entitled to any annuity payments, you must fig-
taxable. ure the taxable and tax-free parts of your annuity
Lump-sum distribution defined. AIf the retiree was reporting the annuity pay- payments.
lump-sum distribution is the distribution or pay-ments under the Simplified Method, the part of
ment in 1 tax year of a plan participant’s entireEstate tax.If your annuity was a joint andeach payment that is tax free is the same as the
balance from all of the employer’s qualifiedsurvivor annuity that was included in thetax-free amount figured by the retiree at the
plans of one kind (for example, pension,decedent’s estate, an estate tax may have beenannuity starting date. See Simplified Method,
profit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu-paid on it. You can deduct, as a miscellaneousearlier.
tion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privatelyitemized deduction, the part of the total estate
purchased commercial annuity or a section 457tax that was based on the annuity. This deduc-
deferred compensation plan of a state or localtion is not subject to the 2%-of-
Page 80 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 83 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
government or tax-exempt organization) cannot The 60-day period may be extendedCapital Gain Treatment
for distributions made after 2001 in cer-qualify as a lump-sum distribution.
Capital gain treatment applies only to the taxa-tain cases of casualty, disaster, orThe participant’s entire balance from a plan
TIP
ble part of a lump-sum distribution resulting fromother events beyond your reasonable control.does not include certain forfeited amounts. It
participation in the plan before 1974. Thealso does not include any deductible voluntary
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20%Eligible rollover distributions.Generally,employee contributions allowed by the plan after
rate. You can elect this treatment only once foryou can roll over any part of the taxable portion1981 and before 1987. For more information
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici-of most nonperiodic distributions from a qualifiedabout distributions that do not qualify as
pant was born before 1936. retirement plan, unless it is a required minimumlump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do
distribution.Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose thenot qualify under Lump-Sum Distributions in
Publication 575. 20% capital gain election. For more information, Hardship distributions.Hardship distribu-see Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum tions from 401(k) plans and similarDistributions in Publication 575.How to treat the distribution.If you receive a employer-sponsored retirement plans are no
lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow- longer treated as eligible rollover distributions.
ing options for how you treat the taxable part.
Direct rollover option.You can choose to10-Year Tax Option
have the administrator of your old plan transfer1) Report the part of the distribution from par-
The 10-year tax option is a special formula usedthe distribution directly from your old plan to theticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if
to figure a separate tax on the ordinary incomenew plan (if permitted) or traditional IRA. If youyou qualify) and the part from participation
part of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the taxdecide on a rollover, it is generally to your ad-after 1973 as ordinary income.
only once, for the year in which you receive thevantage to choose this direct rollover option.2) Report the part of the distribution from par-distribution, not over the next 10 years. You canUnder this option, the plan administrator wouldticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (ifelect this treatment only once for any plan par-not withhold tax from your distribution.you qualify) and use the 10-year tax optionticipant, and only if the plan participant was bornto figure the tax on the part from partici- Withholding tax.If you choose to have thebefore 1936.pation after 1973 (if you qualify). distribution paid to you, it is taxable in the yearThe ordinary income part of the distribution isdistributed unless you roll it over to a new plan or3) Use the 10-year tax option to figure the taxthe amount shown in box 2a of the Form IRA within 60 days. The plan administrator muston the total taxable amount (if you qualify).1099–R given to you by the payer, minus thewithhold income tax of 20% from the taxableamount, if any, shown in box 3. You also can4) Roll over all or part of the distribution. See distribution paid to you. (See Pensions and An-treat the capital gain part of the distribution (boxRollovers, later. No tax is currently due on nuities under Withholding in chapter 5.)3 of Form 1099–R) as ordinary income for thethe part rolled over. Report any part not If you decide to roll over an amount10-year tax option if you do not choose capitalrolled over as ordinary income. equal to the distribution before with-gain treatment for that part.
5) Report the entire taxable part of the distri- holding, your contribution to the newCAUTION
!
Complete Part III of Form 4972 to choose thebution as ordinary income on your tax re- plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-10-year tax option. You must use the special taxturn. ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-rates shown in the instructions for Part III toplace the amount withheld.figure the tax. Publication 575 illustrates how toThe first three options are explained in the
complete Form 4972 to figure the separate tax.following discussions. The administrator must give you a written
explanation of your distribution options within a
reasonable period of time before making an eli-Electing optional lump-sum treatment.You
Rollovers gible rollover distribution.can choose to use the 10-year tax option or
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 forIf you withdraw cash or other assets from aDeductible voluntary employeeany plan participant. If you make this choice, youqualified retirement plan in an eligible rollovercontributions.If you receive an eligible rol-cannot use either of these optional treatmentsdistribution, you can defer tax on the distributionlover distribution from your employer’s qualifiedfor any future distributions for the participant.by rolling it over to another qualified retirementplan of a part of the balance of your accumulated
plan or a traditional IRA. deductible voluntary employee contributions,Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.For this purpose, a qualified retirement planyou can roll over tax free any part of this distribu-The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is thegenerally is: tion. The rollover can be either to a traditionalemployer’s contributions and income earned on IRA or to certain other qualified plans.your account. You may recover your cost in the 1) A qualified employee plan, or
lump sum and any net unrealized appreciation Rollover by surviving spouse.You may be2) A qualified employee annuity.(NUA) in employer securities tax free. able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-
tion from a qualified retirement plan you receiveCost. In general, your cost is the total of: This discussion applies only to tradi-as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-tional IRAs. ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if you1) The plan participant’s nondeductible con- CAUTION
!
were the employee except that you generallytributions to the plan, can roll over the distribution only into a tradi-In general, the most you can roll over is the2) The plan participant’s taxable costs of any tional IRA.part that would be taxable if you did not roll itlife insurance contract distributed, over. You cannot roll over your contributions, You can roll over a distribution made
3) Any employer contributions that were taxa-other than your deductible employee contribu- after 2001 into a qualified retirement
ble to the plan participant, and tions. You do not pay tax on the amount that youplan or a traditional IRA.
TIP
roll over. This amount, however, is generally4) Repayments of any loans that were taxa- A beneficiary other than the employee’s sur-taxable later when it is paid to you or your survi-ble to the plan participant. viving spouse cannot roll over a distribution.vor.
You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-You must generally complete the rollover byAlternate payee under qualified domestic re-ously distributed tax free. the 60th day following the day on which youlations order.You may be able to roll over all
receive the distribution from your employer’sNUA. The NUA in employer securities (box or any part of a distribution from a qualified
plan. (This 60-day period is extended for the6 of Form 1099 –R) received as part of a retirement plan that you receive under a quali-
period during which the distribution is in a frozenlump-sum distribution is generally tax free until fied domestic relations order (QDRO). If you
deposit in a financial institution.) For all rolloversyou sell or exchange the securities. (For more receive the distribution as an employee’s
information, see Distributions of employer se-to an IRA, you must irrevocably elect rolloverspouse or former spouse (not as a nonspousal
curities under Taxation of Nonperiodic Pay-treatment by written notice to the trustee or is-beneficiary), the rollover rules apply to you as if
ments, in Publication 575.) suer of the IRA. you were the employee. You can roll over the
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 81

Page 84 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
distribution from the plan into a traditional IRA or5% rate on certain early distributions from service and had begun receiving pay-
deferred annuity contracts.If an early with- ments under the election,to another eligible retirement plan. See Publica-
drawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-tion 575 for more information on benefits re- • From an employee stock ownership planject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate mayceived under a QDRO. for dividends on employer securities heldapply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributionsby the plan, orunder a written election providing a specificRetirement bonds. If you redeem a retire-
schedule for the distribution of your interest in• From a qualified retirement plan due to anment bond, you can defer the tax on the amount
the contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you hadIRS levy of the plan.received by rolling it over to an IRA or qualifiedbegun receiving payments under the election.employer plan as discussed in Publication 590.On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply by 5% insteadAdditional exceptions for nonqualified an-For more information on the rules for rollingof 10%. Attach an explanation to your return.nuity contracts.The tax does not apply toover distributions, see Publication 575. distributions that are:
Exceptions to tax.Certain early distributions
• From a deferred annuity contract to theare excepted from the early distribution tax. IfSpecial Additional Taxes
extent allocable to investment in the con-the payer knows that an exception applies to
tract before August 14, 1982,To discourage the use of pension funds for pur-your early distribution, distribution code “2,” “3,”
poses other than normal retirement, the law im-or “4” should be shown in box 7 of your Form• From a deferred annuity contract under a
poses additional taxes on early distributions of1099–R and you do not have to report the qualified personal injury settlement,
those funds and on failures to withdraw the distribution on Form 5329. If an exception ap-
• From a deferred annuity contract pur-plies but distribution code “1” (early distribution,funds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to
chased by your employer upon terminationno known exception) is shown in box 7, youthese taxes if you roll over all early distributions
of a qualified employee plan or qualifiedmust file Form 5329. Enter the taxable amountyou receive, as explained earlier, and begin employee annuity plan and held by yourof the distribution shown in box 2a of your Formdrawing out the funds at a normal retirement employer until your separation from ser-1099–R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterage, in reasonable amounts over your life ex- vice, orthe amount that can be excluded and the excep-pectancy. These special additional taxes are the
tion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-• From an immediate annuity contract (ataxes on:
tions. single premium contract providing sub-
• Early distributions, and stantially equal annuity payments that startIf distribution code “1” is incorrectly
within one year from the date of purchase• Excess accumulation (not receiving mini- shown on your Form 1099–R for a
and are paid at least annually).mum distributions). distribution received when you were
TIP
age 591/2 or older, include that distribution onThese taxes are discussed in the following sec-Form 5329. Enter exception number “11” on line Tax on Excess Accumulationtions. 2.
If you must pay either of these taxes, report To make sure that most of your retirement bene-The early distribution tax does not apply tothem on Form 5329.  However, you do not have fits are paid to you during your lifetime, ratherany distribution that meets one of the followingto file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early than to your beneficiaries after your death, theexceptions.distributions and your Form 1099–R shows a payments that you receive from qualified retire-
General exceptions.The tax does not ap-“1” in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the taxable ment plans must begin no later than on your
ply to distributions that are: required beginning date (defined next).part of the distribution on line 55 of Form 1040
and write “No ” on the dotted line next to line 55. Unless the rule for 5% owners applies, you• Made as part of a series of substantially
must begin to receive distributions from yourEven if you do not owe any of these taxes,equal periodic payments (made at least
qualified retirement plan by April 1 of the yearyou may have to complete Form 5329 and at- annually) for your life (or life expectancy)
that follows the later of:tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if youor the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
received an early distribution and your Formof you and your designated beneficiary (if
1) The calendar year in which you reach agefrom a qualified retirement plan, the pay-1099–R does not show distribution code “2,” 701/2, orments must begin after your separation“3,” or “4” in box 7 (or the code shown is incor-
from service),rect). 2) The calendar year in which you retire.
• Made because you are totally and perma-However, your plan may require you to begin to
nently disabled, or receive distributions by April 1 of the year thatTax on Early Distributions follows the year in which you reach age 701/2,• Made on or after the death of the plan
even if you have not retired.Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi-participant or contract holder.
For this purpose, a qualified retirementodic) from qualified retirement plans and non-
plan includes a:Additional exceptions for qualified retire-qualified annuity contracts made to you before
ment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-you reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional
1) Qualified employee plan,butions that are:tax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the
distribution that you must include in gross in- 2) Qualified employee annuity plan,• From a qualified retirement plan after yourcome. separation from service in or after the year3) Section 457 deferred compensation plan,
you reached age 55, or
For this purpose, a qualified retirement plan is: • From a qualified retirement plan to an al-4) Tax-sheltered annuity plans (for benefits
ternate payee under a qualified domestic accruing after 1986).
1) A qualified employee plan, relations order,
2) A qualified employee annuity plan, or • From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-Age 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that
tent you have deductible medical ex- is 6 calendar months after the date of your 70th3) A tax-sheltered annuity plan. penses (medical expenses that exceed birthday.
7.5% of your adjusted gross income),A state or local government section For example, if you are retired and your 70thwhether or not you itemize your deduc-457 deferred compensation plan is birthday was on July 1, 2000, you were age 701/2
tions for the year,also treated as a qualified retirement on January 1, 2001. Your required beginningCAUTION
!
plan to the extent that any distribution made date is April 1, 2002. If your 70th birthday was on• From an employer plan under a written
after 2001 is attributable to amounts the plan June 30, 2000, you were age 701/2 on Decemberelection that provides a specific schedule
received in a direct transfer or rollover from one 30, 2000, and your required beginning date isfor distribution of your entire interest if, as
April 1, 2001, unless you had not yet retired.of the plans listed above. of March 1, 1986, you had separated from
Page 82 Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 85 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5% owners. If you are a 5% owner of the State insurer delinquency proceedings. taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
company maintaining your qualified retirement You might not receive the minimum distribution payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040, or
plan, you must begin to receive distributions by because of state insurer delinquency proceed- on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
April 1 of the calendar year that follows the year ings for an insurance company. If your pay- For more information on how to report disa-
in which you reach age 701/2, regardless of when ments are reduced below the minimum due to bility pensions, including military and certain
you retire. these proceedings, you should contact your plan government disability pensions, see chapter 6.
administrator. Under certain conditions, you willRequired distributions.By the required be-not have to pay the excise tax.ginning date, as explained above, you must ei-
ther: Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 if
Purchased Annuitiesyou owe a tax because you did not receive a
1) Receive your entire interest in the plan (forminimum required distribution from your quali-
a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit If you privately purchased an annuity contractfied retirement plan.
accruing after 1986), or from a commercial organization, such as an
insurance company, you generally must use the2) Begin receiving periodic distributions in an- General Rule to figure the tax-free part of eachnual amounts calculated to distribute your annuity payment. For more information aboutentire interest (for a tax-sheltered annuity,Disability Pensions the General Rule, get Publication 939. Also, seeyour entire benefit accruing after 1986) Variable Annuities in Publication 575 for theover your life or life expectancy or over theIf you retired on disability, you must include inspecial provisions that apply to these annuityjoint lives or joint life expectancies of youincome any disability pension you receive undercontracts.and a designated beneficiary (or over aa plan that is paid for by your employer. You
shorter period). must report your taxable disability payments asSale of annuity.Gain on the exchange of an
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A annuity contract is ordinary income to the extent
Additional information.For more informa-until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- that the gain is due to interest accumulated on
tion on this rule and how to figure the requiredmum retirement age generally is the age at the contract and the exchange is for a life insur-
amount to be distributed, see Tax on Excess which you can first receive a pension or annuity ance or endowment contract. You do not recog-
Accumulation in Publication 575. if you are not disabled. nize gain or loss on an exchange of an annuity
You may be entitled to a tax credit if you were contract solely for another annuity contract if theRequired distributions not made.If you permanently and totally disabled when you re- insured or annuitant remains the same. Seedo not receive required minimum distributions,tired. For information on this credit, see chapterTransfers of Annuity Contracts in Publicationyou are subject to an additional excise tax. The34. 575 for more information about exchanges oftax equals 50% of the difference between theBeginning on the day after you reach mini- annuity contracts.amount that must be distributed and the amountmum retirement age, payments you receive arethat was distributed during the tax year. You can
get this excise tax waived if you establish that
the shortfall in distributions was due to reasona-
ble error and that you are taking reasonable
steps to remedy the shortfall.
Chapter 11 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and AnnuitiesPage 83

Page 86 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the only income you received during• Non-social security equivalent benefit 2001 was your social security or the(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits, SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
12. ment benefits, your benefits generally are not• Tier 2 benefits,
taxable and you probably do not have to file a• Vested dual benefits, and return. If you have income in addition to your
• Supplemental annuity benefits. benefits, you may have to file a return even ifSocial Security none of your benefits are taxable.For information on these benefits, see Publica-
tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income.and Equivalent Base amount. Your base amount is:This chapter also does not cover the tax rules
for foreign social security or railroad retirement• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-Railroad benefits. These benefits are taxable as annui-hold, or qualifying widow(er),
ties, unless they are exempt from U.S. tax under• $25,000 if you are married filing separatelyRetirement a treaty. For more information, see Publicationand lived apart from your spouse for all of915. 2001,
Benefits • $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, orUseful Items
• $–0– if you are married filing separatelyYou may want to see:
and lived with your spouse at any time
Introduction during 2001.Publication
This chapter explains the federal income tax❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Incomerules for social security benefits and equivalent Worksheet. You can use the following❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementstier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains: worksheet to figure the amount of in-
(IRAs) come to compare with your base• How to figure whether your benefits are
amount. This is a quick way to check whether❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalenttaxable,
some of your benefits may be taxable.Railroad Retirement Benefits• How to use the social security benefits
worksheet (with examples), Forms (and Instructions) A. Write in the amount from box 5 of• How to report your taxable benefits, and❏ 1040–ES Estimated Tax for Individuals all your Forms SSA–1099 and
• How to treat repayments that are more RRB –1099. Include the full❏ W –4V Voluntary Withholding Requestthan the benefits you received during the amount of any lump-sum benefit
payments received in 2001, foryear.
2001 and earlier years. (If you
received more than one form,Social security benefits include monthly survi-
combine the amounts from box 5vor and disability benefits. They do not include
Are Any of Your and write in the total.) A.supplemental security income (SSI) payments,
which are not taxable. Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less,
Benefits Taxable?Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits stop here; none of your benefits are taxable
this year.are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad
To find out whether any of your benefits areemployee or beneficiary would have been enti-
taxable, compare the base amount for your B. Enter one-half of the amount ontled to receive under the social security system.
line A.................... B .filing status with the total of:They are commonly called the social security
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- C. Add your taxable pensions, wages,1) One-half of your benefits, plusfits. interest, dividends, and otherIf you received these benefits during 2001,2) All your other income, including tax-ex-taxable income and write in theyou should have received a Form SSA–1099 or total.................... C .empt interest.Form RRB –1099 ( Form SSA–1042S or Form
When making this comparison, do not re-RRB –1042S if you are a nonresident alien). D. Write in any tax-exempt interest
These forms show the amounts received andduce your other income by any exclusions for: income (such as interest on
repaid, and taxes withheld for the year. You may municipal bonds) plus any
• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,receive more than one of these forms for the exclusions from income (listed
same year. You should add the amounts shown earlier)................... D .• Employer-provided adoption benefits,on all forms you receive for the year to deter-
• Foreign earned income or foreign housing,E. Add lines B, C, and D and write inmine the “total” amounts received and repaid,
the total.................. E .orand taxes withheld for that year. See the Appen-
dix at the end of Publication 915 for more infor- Note. Compare the amount on line E to your• Income earned in American Samoa or Pu-mation. base amount for your filing status. If theerto Rico by bona fide residents. amount on line E equals or is less than the
Note. When the term “benefits” is used in base amount for your filing status, none of
Figuring total income.To figure the total ofthis chapter, it applies to both social security your benefits are taxable this year. If the
amount on line E is more than your basebenefits and equivalent tier 1 railroad retirementone-half of your benefits plus your other income,
amount, some of your benefits may bebenefits. use the worksheet later in this discussion. If the
taxable. You then need to complete Worksheettotal is more than your base amount, part of yourLegislation in 2000 removed the “earn- 1 in Publication 915 (or in your tax formbenefits may be taxable.ings test” for social security recipients instruction booklet).
who work and are ages 65 through 70.If you are married and file a joint return forCAUTION
!
This change has no effect on the federal income2001, you and your spouse must combine your
tax rules for social security benefits. incomes and your benefits to figure whether anyExample. You and your spouse (both over
of your combined benefits are taxable. Even if65) are filing a joint return for 2001, and you both
your spouse did not receive any benefits, youreceived social security benefits during the year.What is not covered in this chapter.This
must add your spouse’s income to yours to fig-In January 2002, you received a Formchapter does not cover the tax rules for the
SSA –1099 showing net benefits of $6,600 infollowing railroad retirement benefits: ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.
Page 84 Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 87 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
box 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA–1099 benefits you received in 2001, see Repayments 2) You are married filing separately and lived
More Than Gross Benefits, later. with your spouse at any time duringshowing net benefits of $2,400 in box 5. You
Your gross benefits are shown in box 3 of 2001.also received a taxable pension of $17,000 and
Form SSA –1099 or RRB –1099. Your repay-interest income of $500. You did not have any
Which worksheet to use.A worksheet to fig-ments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are
ure your taxable benefits is in the instructions forshows your net benefits for 2001 ( box 3 minusnot taxable for 2001 because your income, as
your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can usebox 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figurefigured in the following worksheet, is not more
either that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica-whether any of your benefits are taxable.than your base amount ($32,000) for married
tion 915, unless any of the following situationsfiling jointly. Tax withholding and estimated tax.You can applies to you.Even though none of your benefits are taxa-choose to have federal income tax withheld fromble, you must file a return for 2001 because youryour social security benefits and/or the SSEB 1) You contributed to a traditional individualtaxable gross income ($17,500) exceeds theportion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. retirement arrangement (IRA) and yourminimum filing requirement amount for your fil-If you choose to do this, you must complete a IRA deduction is limited because you oring status. Form W –4V. For 2002, you can choose with- your spouse is covered by a retirement
holding at 7%, 10%, 15%, or 27% of your total plan at work. In this situation you must
benefit payment. use the special worksheets in Appendix BA. Write in the amount from box 5 If you do not choose to have income tax of Publication 590 to figure both your IRAof all your Forms SSA–1099
withheld, you may have to request additional deduction and your taxable benefits.and RRB –1099. Include the full
withholding from other income or pay estimatedamount of any lump-sum 2) Situation (1) does not apply and you taketax during the year. For details, get Publicationbenefit payments received in an exclusion for interest from qualified505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the2001, for 2001 and earlier U.S. savings bonds ( Form 8815), forinstructions for Form 1040–ES.years. (If you received more adoption benefits ( Form 8839), for foreignthan one form, combine the earned income or housing ( Form 2555 oramounts from box 5 and write $ Form 2555–EZ), or for income earned inin the total.) A. 9,000 American Samoa ( Form 4563) or Puerto
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less,How To Report Rico by bona fide residents. In this situa-
stop here; none of your benefits are taxable tion, you must use Worksheet 1 in Publi-this year. Your Benefits cation 915 to figure your taxable benefits.
3) You received a lump-sum payment for anB. Enter one-half of the amount on If part of your benefits are taxable, you must useline A................. B . 4,500 earlier year. In this situation, also completeForm 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-Form 1040EZ.C. Add your taxable pensions, lication 915. See Lump-sum election.
wages, interest, dividends, and Reporting on Form 1040. Report your netother taxable income and write Lump-sum election. You must include thebenefits (the amount in box 5 of your Formin the total.............. C . 17,500 taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-SSA –1099 or Form RRB –1099) on line 20a
ment of benefits received in 2001 in your 2001and the taxable part on line 20b. If you areD. Write in any tax-exempt interest income, even if the payment includes benefitsmarried filing separately and you lived apartincome (such as interest on for an earlier year.from your spouse for all of 2001, also enter “D ”municipal bonds) plus any
to the left of line 20a.exclusions from income (listed This type of lump-sum benefit payment
earlier)................. D . –0– should not be confused with theReporting on Form 1040A. Report your net lump-sum death benefit that both the
TIP
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your FormE. Add lines B, C, and D and write SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.SSA –1099 or Form RRB –1099) on line 14ain the total.............. E . $22,000 No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectand the taxable part on line 14b. If you areNote. Compare the amount on line E to your to tax.married filing separately and you lived apartbase amount for your filing status. If thefrom your spouse for all of 2001, also enter “D ” Generally, you use your 2001 income to fig-amount on line E equals or is less than theto the right of the word “benefits” on line 14a. ure the taxable part of the total benefits receivedbase amount for your filing status, none of
in 2001. However, you may be able to figure theyour benefits are taxable this year. If theBenefits not taxable.If none of your benefitstaxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-amount on line E is more than your base are taxable, do not report any of them on yourlier year separately, using your income for theamount, some of your benefits may be tax return. But if you are married filing separatelyearlier year. You can elect this method if it low-taxable. You then need to complete Worksheetand you lived apart from your spouse for all ofers your taxable benefits.1 in Publication 915 (or in your tax form2001, make the following entries. On Forminstruction booklet). Making the election. If you received a1040, enter “D ” to the left of line 20a and “–0–”
lump-sum benefit payment in 2001 that includeson line 20b. On Form 1040A, enter “D ” to the
benefits for one or more earlier years, follow theright of the word “benefits” on line 14a andWho is taxed. The person who has the legal instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Sum“–0–” on line 14b.right to receive the benefits must determine Election to see whether making the election will
whether the benefits are taxable. For example, if lower your taxable benefits. That discussionHow Much Is Taxable?you and your child receive benefits, but the also explains how to make the election.
check for your child is made out in your name,
If part of your benefits are taxable, how much isSince the earlier year’s taxable bene-you must use only your part of the benefits to
taxable depends on the total amount of your fits are included in your 2001 income,see whether any benefits are taxable to you.
benefits and other income. Generally, the higherno adjustment is made to the earlierOne-half of the part that belongs to your child
CAUTION
!
that total amount, the greater the taxable part ofyear’s return. Do not file an amended return formust be added to your child’s other income to
your benefits. the earlier year.see whether any of those benefits are taxable to
your child. Maximum taxable part.Generally, up to 50%
of your benefits will be taxable. However, up to
Repayment of benefits. Any repayment of 85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of
benefits you made during 2001 must be sub-the following situations applies to you.
tracted from the gross benefits you received in
2001. It does not matter whether the repayment1) The total of one-half of your benefits and
was for a benefit you received in 2001 or in anall your other income is more than $34,000
earlier year. If you repaid more than the gross($44,000 if you are married filing jointly).
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 85

Page 88 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040 filers: Enter the They leave lines 14a and 14b of their Form
amount from Form 1040, line 32, 1040A blank.Examples minus any amount on Form 1040,
line 24.................. –0– Worksheet 1.The following are a few examples you can use Figuring Your Taxable Benefits7. Subtract line 6 from line 5..... 31,980as a guide to figure the taxable part of your
benefits. 8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married 1. Enter the total amount from box 5
filing jointly; $0 if married filing of ALL  your Forms SSA–1099Example 1. George White is single and filesseparately and you lived with and RRB –1099 ............  5,600
Form 1040 for 2001. He received the followingyour spouse at any time during Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop2001) .................. 25,000income in 2001: here; none of your benefits are
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero taxable. Otherwise, go on to line 2.Fully taxable pension........... $18,600 or less, enter –0– .......... 6,980Wages from part-time job........  9,400 2. Enter one-half of line 1........ 2,800
Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stopTaxable interest income......... 9 9 0 3. Enter the total of the amountshere; none of your benefits areTotal...................... $28,990 from:taxable. (Do not enter any
George also received social security benefitsamounts on Form 1040, line 20a Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b,during 2001. The Form SSA–1099 he received or 20b, or on Form 1040A, line 9–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and 21.
in January 2002 shows $5,980 in box 5. To 14a or 14b. But if you are married Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9,figure his taxable benefits, George completesfiling separately and you lived 10, 11b, 12b, and 13....... 29,750the worksheet shown here. apart from your spouse for all of
2001, enter “D ” to the left of line 4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total
Worksheet 1. 20a, Form 1040, or to the right of of any exclusion for qualified U.S.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits the word “benefits” on line 14a, savings bond interest (Form 8815,
Form 1040A. Also enter –0– on line 14) or for adoption benefits (
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 Form 1040, line 20b or on Form Form 8839, line 26).
of ALL  your Forms SSA–1099 1040A, line 14b.) Otherwise, go Form 1040 filers: Enter the totaland RRB –1099 ...........  5,980 on to line 10. of any exclusions/adjustments for:
Note. If line 1 is zero or less, stop 10. Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married • Qualified U.S. savings bondhere; none of your benefits are filing jointly; $0 if married filing  interest (Form 8815, line 14),taxable. Otherwise, go on to line 2. separately and you lived with
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839,your spouse at any time in 2001) 9,0002. Enter one-half of line 1....... 2,990 line11. Subtract line 10 from line 9. If3. Enter the total of the amounts  26),zero or less, enter –0– ...... –0–from: • Foreign earned income or12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or lineForm 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, housing10 6,9809–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and  (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48,
21. 13. Enter one-half of line 12...... 3,490 or
 Form 2555–EZ, line 18), andForm 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9, 14. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line
10, 11b, 12b, and 13....... 28,990 13 2,990 • Certain income of bona fide
 residents of American4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the 15. Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)total of any exclusions for line 11 is zero, enter –0– ..... –0–  or Puerto Rico.......... –0–qualified U.S. savings bond 16. Add lines 14 and 15......... 2,990interest ( Form 8815, line 14) or 5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4......... 32,550
17. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85).... 5,083for adoption benefits ( Form 6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the8839, line 26). 18. Taxable benefits. Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 16
smaller of line 16 or line 17 . . . 2,990Form 1040 filers: Enter the total Form 1040 filers: Enter theof any exclusions/adjustments • Enter the amount from line 1 amount from Form 1040, line 32,for: above minus any amount on Form 1040,
 on Form 1040, line 20a or on• Qualified U.S. savings bond line 24.................. 1,000
 Form 1040A, line 14a. interest (Form 8815, line 7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 31,55014), • Enter the amount from line 18 8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if marriedabove• Adoption benefits (Form filing jointly; $0 if married filing on Form 1040, line 20b or on8839, line separately and you lived with your Form 1040A, line 14b. 26), spouse at any time during 2001) 32,000
• Foreign earned income or 9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zerohousing The amount on line 18 of George’s work- or less, enter –0– .......... –0– (Form 2555, lines 43 and sheet shows that $2,990 of his social security
Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop48, or benefits is taxable. On line 20a of his Form
here; none of your benefits are Form 2555–EZ, line 18), 1040, George enters his net benefits of $5,980.taxable. (Do not enter anyand On line 20b, he enters his taxable part of $2,990.amounts on Form 1040, line 20a• Certain income of bona fide or 20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14aExample 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a residents of American or 14b. But if you are married filing Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) joint return on Form 1040A for 2001. Ray is separately and you lived apart or Puerto Rico......... –0– retired and received a fully taxable pension offrom your spouse for all of 2001,$15,500. He also received social security bene-5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4........ 31,980 enter “D ” to the left of line 20a,
fits, and his Form SSA–1099 for 2001 shows Form 1040, or to the right of the6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the net benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice workedword “benefits” on line 14a, Formamount from Form 1040A, line 16 during the year and had wages of $14,000. She1040A. Also enter –0– on Form
made a deductible payment to her IRA account1040, line 20b or on Form 1040A,
of $1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac-line 14b.) Otherwise, go on to line
counts with a total of $250 in interest income.10.
They complete Worksheet 1 and find that none
of Ray’s social security benefits are taxable.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 89 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10.Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, worksheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe
filing jointly; $0 if married filing line and Betty enter $10,000 on line 20a, Form 1040,
separately and you lived with your  26), and $6,275 on line 20b, Form 1040.
spouse at any time in 2001).... • Foreign earned income or
11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero housing
or less, enter –0– ..........  (Form 2555, lines 43 and 48,
or Deductions Related to12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line  Form 2555–EZ, line 18), and10
Your Benefits• Certain income of bona fide13.Enter one-half of line 12.......  residents of American
14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line  Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts
13  or Puerto Rico.......... 2 0 0 related to the benefits you receive.
15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line5. Add lines 2, 3, and 4......... 45,500 Disability payments.You may have received11 is zero, enter –0– ........ 6. Form 1040A filers: Enter the disability payments from your employer or an
16.Add lines 14 and 15......... amount from Form 1040A, line 16 insurance company that you included as income
on your tax return in an earlier year. If you17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)..... Form 1040 filers: Enter the
received a lump-sum payment from SSA oramount from Form 1040, line 32,18. Taxable benefits. Enter the RRB, and you had to repay the employer orminus any amount on Form 1040,smaller of line 16 or line 17.... insurance company for the disability payments,line 24.................. –0–
• Enter the amount from line 1 you can take an itemized deduction for the part7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 45,500above of the payments you included in gross income in on Form 1040, line 20a or on 8. Enter $25,000 ($32,000 if married the earlier year. If the amount you repay is more Form 1040A, line 14a. filing jointly; $0 if married filing than $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxseparately and you lived with your• Enter the amount from line 18 credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit inspouse at any time during 2001) 32,000above the same way explained under Repayments
 on Form 1040, line 20b or on 9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero More Than Gross Benefits, later.
 Form 1040A, line 14b. or less, enter –0– .......... 13,500
Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le-Note. If line 9 is zero or less, stop gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce orhere; none of your benefits are collect taxable income or in connection with theExample 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file a taxable. (Do not enter any determination, collection, or refund of any tax.joint return on Form 1040 for 2001. Joe is aamounts on Form 1040, line 20a Legal expenses for collecting the taxableretired railroad worker and in 2001 received theor 20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14a part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portionor 14b. But if you are married filing
laneous itemized deduction on line 22, Scheduleof tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe’s Form separately and you lived apart
A (Form 1040).RRB –1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is afrom your spouse for all of 2001,
enter “D ” to the left of line 20a,retired government worker and receives a fully
Form 1040, or to the right of thetaxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 in Repayments More Thanword “benefits” on line 14a, Forminterest income plus interest of $200 on a quali-
Gross Benefits1040A. Also enter –0– on Formfied U.S. savings bond. The savings bond inter-
1040, line 20b or on Form 1040A,est qualified for the exclusion. Thus, they have a In some situations, your Form SSA–1099 orline 14b.) Otherwise, go on to linetotal income of $40,300 ($38,000 + $2,300). Form RRB –1099 will show that the total bene-10.They figure their taxable benefits by completing fits you repaid (box 4) are more than the grossWorksheet 1. 10.Enter $9,000 ($12,000 if married benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred,filing jointly; $0 if married filing your net benefits in box 5 will be a negativeWorksheet 1. separately and you lived with your
figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of yourFiguring Your Taxable Benefits spouse at any time in 2001).... 12,000
benefits will be taxable. If you receive more than11.Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero one form, a negative figure in box 5 of one form1. Enter the total amount from box 5 or less, enter –0– .......... 1,500 is used to offset a positive figure in box 5 ofof ALL  your Forms SSA–1099
12.Enter the smaller of line 9 or line another form for that same year.and RRB –1099 ............  10,000
10 12,000 If you have any questions about this negativeNote. If line 1 is zero or less, stop figure, contact your local SSA office or your local13.Enter one-half of line 12....... 6,000here; none of your benefits are U.S. RRB field office.taxable. Otherwise, go on to line 2. 14.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line
13 5,0002. Enter one-half of line 1........ 5,000 Joint return.If you and your spouse file a joint
return, and your Form SSA – 1099 or15.Multiply line 11 by 85% (.85). If line3. Enter the total of the amounts
RRB –1099 has a negative figure in box 5, but11 is zero, enter –0– ........ 1,275from:
your spouse’s does not, subtract the amount in16.Add lines 14 and 15......... 6,275Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 8b, box 5 of your form from the amount in box 5 of9–14, 15b, 16b, 17–19, and 21. 17.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85)..... 8,500 your spouse’s form. You do this to get your net
Form 1040A: lines 7, 8a, 8b, 9, benefits when figuring if your combined benefits18. Taxable benefits. Enter the10, 11b, 12b, and 13....... 40,300 are taxable.smaller of line 16 or line 17.... 6,275
4. Form 1040A filers: Enter the total • Enter the amount from line 1 Example. John and Mary file a joint returnof any exclusion for qualified U.S. above for 2001. John received Form SSA–1099 show-savings bond interest (Form 8815,  on Form 1040, line 20a or on ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Formline 14) or for adoption benefits  Form 1040A, line 14a. SSA –1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500).(Form 8839, line 26).
• Enter the amount from line 18 John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minusForm 1040 filers: Enter the total above $500) as the amount of their net benefits whenof any exclusions/adjustments for:  on Form 1040, line 20b or on figuring if any of their combined benefits are Form 1040A, line 14b.• Qualified U.S. savings bond taxable.
 interest (Form 8815, line 14),
Repayment of benefits received in an earlierMore than 50% of Joe’s net benefits are
year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of alltaxable because the income on line 7 of the
of your Forms SSA–1099 and RRB–1099 is a
Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement BenefitsPage 87

Page 90 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc- a) Figure the tax without the itemized de- d) Subtract the result in (c) from the result
tion for the part of this negative figure that repre- duction included on line 27 of Schedule in (a).
sents benefits you included in gross income in A.
Compare the tax figured in methods (1) andan earlier year. b) For each year after 1983 for which part(2). Your tax for 2001 is the smaller of the twoIf this deduction is $3,000 or less, it is of the negative figure represents a re-amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takesubject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income payment of benefits, refigure your taxa-the itemized deduction on line 27, Schedule Alimit that applies to certain miscellaneous item-ble benefits as if your total benefits for(Form 1040). If method (2) results in less tax,ized deductions. Claim it on line 22, Schedule Athe year were reduced by that part ofclaim a credit for the applicable amount on line(Form 1040). the negative figure. Then refigure the65 of Form 1040 and write “I.R.C. 1341” in theIf this deduction is more than $3,000, you tax for that year. margin to the left of line 65. If both methodsshould figure your tax two ways:
c) Subtract the total of the refigured tax produce the same tax, deduct the repayment
1) Figure your tax for 2001 with the itemized amounts in (b) from the total of your on line 27, Schedule A (Form 1040).
deduction included on line 27 of Schedule actual tax amounts.
A.
2) Figure your tax for 2001 in the following
steps.
Page 88 Chapter 12 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 91 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the services, that value will be accepted asForm 1099 – C. If a federal government
agency, financial institution, or credit unionfair market value unless the value can be shown
cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orto be otherwise.13. more, you will receive a Form 1099–C, Cancel-Generally, you report this income on Sched-
lation of Debt. The amount of the canceled debtule C, Profit or Loss From Business, or Schedule
is shown in box 2.C –EZ, Net Profit From Business (Form 1040).
But if the barter involves an exchange of some-Other Income Interest included in canceled debt.If any
thing other than services, such as in Example 3 interest is forgiven and included in the amount of
below, you may have to use another form orcanceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest
schedule instead. will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not youIntroduction must include the interest portion of the canceled
Example 1. You are a self-employed attor-This chapter discusses many kinds of income debt in your income depends on whether the
ney who performs legal services for a client, aand explains whether they are taxable or non- interest would be deductible if you paid it. See
small corporation. The corporation gives youtaxable. Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.
shares of its stock as payment for your services.If the interest would not be deductible (such• Income that is taxable must be reportedYou must include the fair market value of theas interest on a personal loan), include in youron your tax return and is subject to tax.shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched-income the amount from box 2 of Form 1099–C.
ule C–EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive• Income that is nontaxable may have to be If the interest would be deductible (such as on a
them.shown on your tax return but is not subject business loan), include in your income the net
to tax. amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown
Example 2. You are self-employed and ain box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
This chapter begins with discussions of the member of a barter club. The club uses “credit 3).
following income items. units” as a means of exchange. It adds creditDiscounted mortgage loan. If your financialunits to your account for goods or services you• Bartering. institution offers a discount for the early paymentprovide to members, which you can use to of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-• Canceled debts. purchase goods and services offered by othercount is canceled debt. You must include themembers of the barter club. The club subtracts• Life insurance proceeds. canceled amount in your income.credit units from your account when you receive
• Partnership income. goods or services from other members. YouStockholder debt.If you are a stockholder in
must include in your income the value of thea corporation and the corporation cancels or• S Corporation income.
credit units that are added to your account, evenforgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is
• Recoveries (including state income tax re-though you may not actually receive goods ordividend income to you.
funds). services from other members until a later taxIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and
year. you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-• Rents from personal property.
tion, you generally do not realize income. This is
• Repayments. Example 3. You own a small apartment because the canceled debt is considered as a
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use ofcontribution to the capital of the corporation• Royalties.
equal to the amount of debt principal that youan apartment, an artist gives you a work of art• Unemployment benefits. canceled.she created. You must report as rental income
on Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss• Welfare and other public assistance bene-
(Form 1040), the fair market value of the art-fits. Exceptionswork, and the artist must report as income onThese discussions are followed by brief discus-Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) theThere are several exceptions to the inclusion ofsions of many income items arranged in alpha-fair rental value of the apartment. canceled debt in income. These are explainedbetical order. next.
You must include on your return all incomeForm 1099 –B from barter exchange.If you
Nonrecourse debt. If you are not personallyyou receive in the form of money, property, andexchanged property or services through a barterliable for the debt (nonrecourse debt), differentservices unless the tax law states that you doexchange, you should receive  Form 1099–B, rules apply. You may have a gain or loss ifnot include them. Some items, however, areProceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange nonrecourse debt is canceled or forgiven in con-only partly excluded from income. Transactions, or a similar statement from thejunction with the foreclosure or repossession ofbarter exchange by January 31, 2002. It shouldproperty to which the debt attaches. See Publi-show the value of cash, property, services, cred-Useful Items cation 544 for more information.its, or scrip you received from exchanges duringYou may want to see:
2001. The IRS will also receive a copy of FormStudent loans. Certain student loans contain
1099–B.Publication a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to
attend the qualified educational institution will be❏ 520 Scholarships and Fellowships canceled if you work for a certain period of time
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income in certain professions for any of a broad class of
employers.❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Canceled Debts You do not have income if your student loanAssets is canceled after you agreed to this provisionGenerally, if a debt you owe is canceled or❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses and then performed the services required. Toforgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youqualify, the loan must have been made by:must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. You have no income from the canceled1) The federal government, a state or local
debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,
includes any indebtedness for which you areBartering or subdivision thereof,
liable or which attaches to property you hold.
2) A tax-exempt public benefit corporationIf the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report theBartering is an exchange of property or services. that has assumed control of a state,canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040. If it isYou must include in your income, at the time county, or municipal hospital, and whosea business debt, report the amount on Schedulereceived, the fair market value of property or employees are considered public employ-C or C–EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedule F,services you receive in bartering. If you ex- ees under state law, orProfit or Loss From Farming (Form 1040), if youchange services with another person and you
are a farmer).both have agreed ahead of time as to the value 3) An educational institution:
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 89

Page 92 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Under an agreement with an entity de- benefit payments that are more than the present lance crews. See Publication 525 for more
scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the value of the payments at the time of death. information.
funds to the institution to make the
Proceeds received in installments.If you re-loan, or
Accelerated Deathceive life insurance proceeds in installments,b) As part of a program of the institutionyou can exclude part of each installment fromBenefitsdesigned to encourage students to your income.serve in occupations or areas with un- Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-To determine the excluded part, divide themet needs and under which the ser- efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalamount held by the insurance company (gener-vices provided are for or under the settlement before the individual’s death are ex-ally the total lump sum payable at the death ofdirection of a governmental unit or a cluded from income if the insured is terminally orthe insured person) by the number of install-tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- chronically ill.ments to be paid. Include anything over thistion. excluded part in your income as interest.Viatical settlement.This is the sale or assign-
ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeA loan to refinance a qualified student loanSurviving spouse. If your spouse died
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-will also qualify if it was made by an educationalbefore October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personinstitution or a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) organiza-ceeds paid to you because of the death of your
who regularly engages in the business of buyingtion under its program designed as described inspouse are received in installments, you can
or taking assignment of life insurance contracts(3)(b) above. exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-
on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-Section 501(c)(3) organizations are definedcluded in the installments. If you remarry, you
nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-in Publication 525. can continue to take the exclusion.
ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the InternalMore information. For more information,Deductible debt. You do not have income Revenue Code.see Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of
Exclusion for terminal illness.Acceleratedthe debt would be deductible. This exception
Surrender of policy for cash.If you surren-death benefits are fully excludable if the insuredapplies only if you use the cash method of ac-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you mustis a terminally ill individual. This is a person whocounting. For more information, see chapter 5 of
include in income any proceeds that are morehas been certified by a physician as having anPublication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.
than the cost of the life insurance policy. Inillness or physical condition that can reasonably
Price reduced after purchase.Generally, ifgeneral, your cost (or investment in the contract)be expected to result in death within 24 months
the seller reduces the amount of debt you oweis the total of premiums that you paid for the lifefrom the date of the certification.
for property you purchased, you do not haveinsurance policy, less any refunded premiums,
Exclusion for chronic illness.If the insuredincome from the reduction. The reduction of therebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallydebt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentnot included in your income.
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisand reduces your basis in the property. You should receive a Form 1099–R showing of costs incurred for qualified long-term carethe total proceeds and the taxable part. ReportExcluded debt. Do not include a canceled services are fully excludable. Accelerated deaththese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Formdebt in your gross income in the following situa- benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic1040, or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.tions. basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit
applies to the total of the accelerated deathEndowment proceeds. Endowment pro-1) The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case benefits and any periodic payments receivedceeds paid in a lump sum to you at maturity areunder title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi- from long-term care insurance contracts. Fortaxable only if the proceeds are more than thecation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. information on the limit and the definitions ofcost of the policy. To determine your cost, add2) The debt is canceled when you are insol- chronically ill individual and long-term carethe aggregate amount of premiums (or othervent. However, you cannot exclude any insurance contracts, see Long-Term Care In-consideration) paid for the contract and subtractamount of canceled debt that is more than surance Contracts under Sickness and Injuryany amount that you previously received underthe amount by which you are insolvent. Benefits in chapter 6.the contract and excluded from your income.See Publication 908. Include the part of the lump sum payment that isException. The exclusion does not apply to
more than your cost in your income.3) The debt is qualified farm debt and is can- any amount paid to a person (other than the
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 4 insured) who has an insurable interest in the lifeDeceased public safety officers.If you are aof Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide. of the insured because the insured:survivor of a public safety officer who died in the
4) The debt is qualified real property busi- • Is a director, officer, or employee of theline of duty, you may be able to exclude from
ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publication other person, orincome certain amounts you receive.
334. • Has a financial interest in the person’sBureau of Justice Assistance payments.
business.If you are a surviving dependent of a public
safety officer (law enforcement officer or
firefighter) who died in the line of duty, do notForm 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-include in your income the death benefit paid toLife Insurance ated death benefits made on a per diem or otheryou by the Bureau of Justice Assistance. periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer
Proceeds MSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con-Governmental plan annuity.If you receive
tracts, with your return. You do not have to filea survivor annuity as the child or spouse (orLife insurance proceeds paid to you because of Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene-former spouse) of a public safety officer whothe death of the insured person are not taxable fits paid on the basis of actual expenses in-was killed in the line of duty after 1996, youunless the policy was turned over to you for a curred.generally do not have to include it in income.price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidThis exclusion applies to the amount of the an-under an accident or health insurance policy ornuity that is based on the officer’s service as aan endowment contract. public safety officer.
Proceeds not received in installments.If Partnership IncomeBeginning in 2002, this exclusion ap-
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or plies regardless of when the officer
other than at regular intervals, include in your A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.was killed.CAUTION
!
income only the benefits that are more than the The income, gains, losses, deductions, and
amount payable to you at the time of the insured For this purpose, the term public safety credits of a partnership are passed through to
person’s death. If the benefit payable at death isofficer includes police and law enforcement of- the partners based on each partner’s distributive
not specified, you include in your income the ficers, firefighters and rescue squad and ambu- share of these items.
Page 90 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 93 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule K–1 (Form 1065).Although a part-State income tax refund.If you received a deduction that you could have claimed was
state or local income tax refund (or credit or $7,350, and you had itemized deductions ofnership generally pays no tax, it must file an
offset) in 2001, you must include it in income if $9,000. In 2001, you received the following re-information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. You coveries for amounts deducted on your 2000Partnership Income, and send Schedule K–1
should receive Form 1099–G, Certain Govern- return:(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the
ment and Qualified State Tuition Program Pay-partnership will send each partner a copy of the
Medical expenses.............. $200ments, from the payer by January 31, 2002. ThePartner’s Instructions for Schedule K–1 (Form
State and local income tax refund.... 4 0 0IRS will also receive a copy of the Form1065) to help each partner report his or her
Refund of mortgage interest........ 3 2 51099–G.share of the partnership’s income, deductions,
credits, and tax preference items. Total recoveries............... $925Mortgage interest refund.If you received a
Keep Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) for refund or credit in 2001 of mortgage interest paidNone of the recoveries were more than the de-
your records. Do not attach it to your in an earlier year, the amount should be shownductions taken for 2000.
Form 1040. in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage InterestRECORDS
Because your total recoveries are less thanStatement. Do not subtract the refund amountthe amount by which your itemized deductionsFor more information on partnerships, getfrom the interest you paid in 2001. You mayexceeded the standard deduction ($9,000 −Publication 541, Partnerships. have to include it in your income under the rules7,350 = $1,650), you must include your totalexplained in the following discussions. recoveries in your income for 2001. Report the
state and local income tax refund of $400 on lineInterest on recovery.Interest on any of the
10 of Form 1040 and the balance of your recov-amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
S Corporation Income eries, $525, on line 21 of Form 1040.est income in the year received. For example,
report any interest you received on state or localIn general, an S corporation does not pay tax on Standard deduction for earlier years.To de-income tax refunds on line 8a of Form 1040.
its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- termine if amounts recovered in 2001 must be
Recovery and expense in same year.If thetions, and credits of the corporation are passed included in your income, you must know the
refund or other recovery and the expense occurthrough to the shareholders. standard deduction for your filing status for the
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-year the deduction was claimed. Standard de-
duction or credit and is not reported as income.duction amounts for 2000, 1999, and 1998 are inSchedule K–1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora-
Publication 525.tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Recovery for 2 or more years.If you receiveIncome Tax Return for an S Corporation, and a refund or other recovery that is for amountsExample. You filed a joint return for 2000send Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) to each you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustwith taxable income of $25,000. Your itemizedshareholder. In addition, the S corporation willallocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovereddeductions were $8,700. The standard deduc-send each shareholder a copy of the amount between the years in which you paid it.tion that you could have claimed was $7,350. InShareholder’s Instructions for Schedule K–1 This allocation is necessary to determine the2001 you recovered $2,400 of your 2000 item-(Form 1120S) to help each shareholder reportamount of recovery from any earlier years and toized deductions. None of the recoveries werehis or her share of the S corporation’s income, determine the amount, if any, of your allowablemore than the actual deductions for 2000. In-losses, credits, and deductions. deduction for this item for the current year. Forclude $1,350 of the recoveries in your 2001information on how to compute the allocation,Keep Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S) for income. This is the smaller of your recoveriessee Recoveries in Publication 525.your records. Do not attach it to your ($2,400) or the amount by which your itemizedForm 1040.RECORDS
deductions were more than the standard deduc-
Itemized Deduction tion ($8,700 − 7,350 = $1,350).For more information on S corporations and
their shareholders, see the instructions for FormRecoveries Recovery limited to deduction.You do not1120S. include in your income any amount of your re-If you recover any amount that you deducted in
covery that is more than the amount you de-an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
ducted in the earlier year. The amount youmust generally include the full amount of the
include in your income is limited to the smallerrecovery in your income in the year you receiveRecoveries of:it.
A recovery is a return of an amount you de-Where to report.Enter your state or local in-1) The amount deducted on Schedule A
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The come tax refund on line 10 of Form 1040, and(Form 1040), or
most common recoveries are refunds, reim- the total of all other recoveries as other income2) The amount recovered.bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized on line 21 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also have 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Example. During 2000 you paid $1,700 forrecoveries of non-itemized deductions (such asStandard deduction limit.You are generallymedical expenses. From this amount you sub-payments on previously deducted bad debts)allowed to claim the standard deduction if you dotracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjustedand recoveries of items for which you previouslynot itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedgross income. Your actual medical expense de-claimed a tax credit. deductions that are more than your standardduction was $200. In 2001, you received a $500deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-reimbursement from your medical insurance forTax benefit rule.You must include a recoveryless you are required to itemize your deduc-your 2000 expenses. The only amount of thein your income in the year you receive it up to thetions). If your total deductions on the earlier year$500 reimbursement that must be included inamount by which the deduction or credit youreturn were not more than your income for thatyour income for 2001 is $200— the amount ac-took for the recovered amount reduced your taxyear, include in your income this year thetually deducted.in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-smaller of:crease to an amount carried over to the current
Other recoveries.See Recoveries in Publica-year that resulted from the deduction or credit is1) Your recoveries, or tion 525 if:considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
2) The amount by which your itemized de-lier year. For more information, get Publication
1) You have recoveries of items other thanductions exceeded the standard deduc-525.
itemized deductions, ortion.
Federal income tax refund.Refunds of fed- 2) You received a recovery for an item for
eral income taxes are not included in your in-Example. For 2000, you filed a joint return. which you claimed a tax credit (other than
come because they are never allowed as a Your taxable income was $20,000 and you were investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a
deduction from income. not entitled to any tax credits. The standard prior year.
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 91

Page 94 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Repayment – $3,000 or less.If the amount tracted from your property. The royalties are
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it frombased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., andRents from Personal your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustare paid to you by a person or company who
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,leases the property from you.Property enter it on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040).Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-Repayment – over $3,000.If the amount younomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas
ment or vehicles, how you report your incomerepaid was more than $3,000, you can deductwells, you can recover your investment through
and expenses is generally determined by: the repayment, as described earlier. However,the depletion allowance. For information on this
you can instead choose to take a tax credit forsubject, see chapter 10 of Publication 535, Busi-1) Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-the year of repayment if you included the incomeness Expenses.ness, and under a claim of right. This means that at theCoal and iron ore.Under certain circum-time you included the income, it appeared that2) Whether or not the rental activity is con- stances, you can treat amounts you receiveyou had an unrestricted right to it. If you qualifyducted for profit. from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-for this choice, figure your tax under both meth-Generally, if your primary purpose is income or ments from the sale of a capital asset, ratherods and compare the results. Use the methodprofit and you are involved in the rental activity than as royalty income. For information about(deduction or credit) that results in less tax.with continuity and regularity, your rental activity gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2001 claimingis a business. See Publication 535 for details on get Publication 544.
a deduction for the repaid amount. If you mustdeducting expenses for both business and Sale of property interest.If you sell yourdeduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,not-for-profit activities. complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,enter it on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040).the amount you receive is considered paymentReporting business income and expenses.
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2001 claimingfor the sale of section 1231 property, not royaltyIf you are in the business of renting personal
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow theseincome. Under certain circumstances, the saleproperty, report your income and expenses on
steps. is subject to capital gain or loss treatment onSchedule C or C–EZ (Form 1040). The form
Schedule D (Form 1040). For more informationinstructions have information on how to com-1) Figure your tax for 2001 without deduct- on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3plete them. ing the repaid amount. of Publication 544. If you retain a royalty, anReporting nonbusiness income. If you are 2) Refigure your tax from the earlier year overriding royalty, or a net profit interest in anot in the business of renting personal property,without including in income the amountmineral property for the life of the property, youreport your rental income on line 21 of Formyou repaid in 2001. have made a lease or a sublease, and any cash1040. List the type and amount of the income on you receive for the assignment of other interests3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownthe dotted line to the left of the amount you in the property is ordinary income subject to aon your return for the earlier year. This isreport on line 21. depletion allowance.the credit.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you Part of future production sold.If you own4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forrent personal property for profit, include your mineral property but sell part of the future pro-2001 figured without the deduction (Steprental expenses in the total amount you enter on duction, you generally treat the money you re-1).line 32 of Form 1040. Also enter the amount and ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a
“PPR ” on the dotted line to the left of line 32.If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theloan from the buyer. Do not include it in your
If you do not rent personal property for aamount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,income or take depletion based on it.
profit, your deductions are limited and you can-claim a credit for the amount repaid on line 65 ofWhen production begins, you include all thenot report a loss to offset other income. SeeForm 1040, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to lineproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-Activity not for profit, under Other Income, later. 65. tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that
An example of this computation can be foundamount to arrive at your taxable income from the
in Publication 525. property.
Repaid social security benefits.If you re-
Repayments paid social security benefits, see Repayment of
benefits in chapter 12.
If you had to repay an amount that you included Unemploymentin your income in an earlier year, you may be
able to deduct the amount repaid from your Benefitsincome for the year in which you repaid it. Or, ifRoyaltiesthe amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youmay be able to take a credit against your tax for receive depends on the type of program payingRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas,the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you the benefits.and mineral properties are taxable as ordinarycan claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-income.ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in Unemployment compensation. You must in-You generally report royalties in Part I ofyour trade or business or in a for-profit transac- clude in your income all unemployment compen-Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you holdtion. sation you receive. You should receive a Forman operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in
1099–G, Certain Government and QualifiedType of deduction.The type of deduction youbusiness as a self-employed writer, inventor,
State Tuition Program Payments, showing theare allowed in the year of repayment dependsartist, etc., report your income and expenses on
amount paid to you. Generally, you enter unem-on the type of income you included in the earlierSchedule C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).
ployment compensation on line 19 of Formyear. You generally deduct the repayment onCopyrights and patents. Royalties from 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Formthe same form or schedule on which you previ-copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,1040EZ.ously reported it as income. For example, if youand similar property, or from patents on inven-reported it as self-employment income, deduct it Types of unemployment compensation.tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useas a business expense on Schedule C or C-EZ Unemployment compensation generally in-your work over a specified period of time. Royal-(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you cludes any amount received under an unem-ties are generally based on the number of unitsreported it as a capital gain, deduct it as a capital ployment compensation law of the United Statessold, such as the number of books, tickets to aloss on Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported or of a state. It includes the following benefits.performance, or machines sold.it as wages, unemployment compensation, or
• Benefits paid by a state or the District ofother nonbusiness income, deduct it as a mis-Oil, gas, and minerals.Royalty income from
Columbia from the Federal Unemploymentcellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule A oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount
Trust Fund.(Form 1040). you receive when natural resources are ex-
Page 92 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 95 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• State unemployment insurance benefits. include the full amount of the benefits received for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and
in your income for the year you received them. services to help mentally retarded persons do• Railroad unemployment compensation Deduct the repayment in the later year as an their work.benefits. adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (YouDisaster relief grants.Grants made under• Disability payments from a governmentcannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 to help victims ofprogram paid as a substitute for unem- clude the repayment on line 32 of Form 1040,natural disasters are not included in income. Doployment compensation. (Amounts re- and write “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on thenot deduct casualty losses or medical expensesceived as workers’ compensation for dotted line next to line 32. If the amount youthat are specifically reimbursed by these disas-injuries or illness are not unemployment repay in a later year is more than $3,000, youter relief grants. Unemployment assistance pay-compensation. See chapter 6 for more in-may be able to take a credit against your tax forments under the Act are taxable unemploymentformation.) the later year instead of deducting the amountcompensation. See Unemployment compensa-repaid. For more information on this, see Repay-• Trade readjustment allowances under the tion, earlier.ments, earlier.Trade Act of 1974.
Mortgage assistance payments. PaymentsPrivate unemployment fund. Unemploy-• Benefits under the Airline Deregulation Act made under section 235 of the National Housingment benefit payments from a private fund toof 1978. Act for mortgage assistance are not included inwhich you voluntarily contribute are taxable only
the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-if the amounts you receive are more than your
homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-aster Relief Act Amendments of 1974. total payments into the fund. Report the taxable
gram cannot be deducted.amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Governmental program. If you contribute Nutrition Program for the Elderly.FoodPayments by a union.Benefits paid to you asto a governmental unemployment compensa- benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-an unemployed member of a union from regulartion program and your contributions are not de- gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-union dues are included in your gross income onductible, amounts you receive under the pare and serve free meals for the program,line 21 of Form 1040.program are not included as unemployment include in your income as wages the cash paycompensation until you recover your contribu-Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re- you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodtions. ceive from your employer during periods of un-benefits.employment, under a union agreement thatRepayment of unemployment compensa- guarantees you full pay during the year, arePayments to reduce cost of winter energy.tion. If you repaid in 2001 unemployment taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 of Payments made by a state to qualified people tocompensation you received in 2001, subtractForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form reduce their cost of winter energy use are notthe amount you repaid from the total amount you1040EZ. taxable.received and enter the difference on line 19 of
Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofState employees. Payments similar to a
Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourstate’s unemployment compensation may be
entry write “Repaid” and the amount you repaid.made by the state to its employees who are not
Other IncomeIf you repaid unemployment compensation incovered by the state’s unemployment compen-
2001 that you included in income in an earliersation law. Although the payments are fully taxa-
The following brief discussions are arranged inyear, you can deduct the amount repaid onble, do not report them as unemployment
alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-compensation. Report these payments on line
cussed in greater detail in another publicationtions. For more information, see  Repayments, 21 of Form 1040.
include a reference to that publication.earlier.
Tax withholding.You can choose to have Activity not for profit.You must include on
federal income tax withheld from your unem- your return income from an activity from which
Welfare and Otherployment compensation. To make this choice, you do not expect to make a profit. An example
complete Form W–4V, Voluntary Withholding of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you
Public AssistanceRequest, and give it to the paying office. Tax will operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.
be withheld at 15% of your payment. Enter this income on line 21 of Form 1040.
Benefits Deductions for expenses related to the activityIf you do not choose to have tax with- are limited. They cannot total more than theheld from your unemployment com- Do not include in your income benefit paymentsincome you report and can be taken only if youpensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
from a public welfare fund, such as paymentsitemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).estimated tax. For more information on esti-due to blindness. Payments from a state fund forSee Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publi-mated tax, see chapter 5. the victims of crime should not be included in thecation 535 for information on whether an activity
victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofis considered carried on for a profit.Supplemental unemployment benefits. welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-Benefits received from an employer-financed Advance payment of the rate reductionpenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youfund (to which the employees did not contribute) credit.If you received a check from the IRSmust include in your income any welfare pay-are not unemployment compensation. They are during 2001 for the advance payment of the ratements obtained fraudulently.taxable as wages and are subject to withholding reduction credit, do not report it on your tax
Alaska residents. Payments the state offor income tax. They may be subject to social return. It is not taxable. For more information
Alaska makes to its citizens who meet certainsecurity and Medicare taxes. For more informa- about the rate reduction credit, see chapter 38.
age and residency tests that are not based ontion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefits
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend income.need are not welfare benefits. Include them inin section 5 of Publication 15–A, Employer’s
If you received a payment from Alaska’s mineralincome on line 21 of Form 1040.Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay-
income fund (Alaska Permanent Fund divi-ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orPersons with disabilities.If you have a disa-dend), report it as income on line 21 of Formon line 1 of Form 1040EZ. bility, you must include in income compensation1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of FormRepayment of benefits.You may have to you receive for services you perform unless the1040EZ. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-repay some of your supplemental unemploy- compensation is otherwise excluded. However,ent a document that shows the amount of thement benefits to qualify for trade readjustment you do not include in income the value of goods,payment with the check. The amount is alsoallowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you services, and cash that you receive, not in returnreported to IRS.repay supplemental unemployment benefits in for your services, but for your training and reha-
the same year you receive them, reduce the bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-Alimony. Include in your income on line 11 of
total benefits by the amount you repay. If you ble amounts include payments for transportation Form 1040 any alimony payments you receive.
repay the benefits in a later year, you must and attendant care, such as interpreter services Amounts you receive for child support are not
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 93

Page 96 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income to you. Alimony and child support pay- personal injury that is unrelated to a physical The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell
ments are discussed in chapter 20. injury or sickness (for example, employment dis- you the type of items making up your share of
crimination or injury to reputation), you must the estate or trust income and any credits youCampaign contributions. These contribu- include the damages in your income, except for are allowed on your individual income tax return.tions are not income to a candidate unless theyany damages you receive for medical care dueLosses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-are diverted to his or her personal use. To beto that emotional distress. Emotional distressally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.exempt from tax, the contributions must beincludes physical symptoms that result fromspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund Grantor trust.Income earned by a grantoremotional distress, such as headaches, insom-for use in future campaigns. However, interest trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-nia, and stomach disorders.earned on bank deposits, dividends received on ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control overcontributed securities, and net gains realized onCredit card insurance.Generally, if you re-the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredsales of contributed securities are taxable andceive benefits under a credit card disability orproperty to the trust.) This rule applies if themust be reported on Form 1120–POL, U.S. unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areproperty (or income from the property) put intoIncome Tax Return for Certain Political Organi-taxable to you. These plans make the minimumthe trust will or may revert (be returned) to thezations. Excess campaign funds transferred tomonthly payment on your credit card account ifgrantor or the grantor’s spouse.an office account must be included in theyou cannot make the payment due to injury, Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theofficeholder’s income on line 21 of Form 1040 inillness, disability, or unemployment. Report ongrantor has a reversionary interest valued (atthe year transferred. line 21 of Form 1040 the amount of benefits youthe date of transfer) at more than 5% of thereceived during the year that is more than thevalue of the transferred property.Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive fromamount of the premiums you paid during thea dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy isyear. Fees for services.Include all fees for yournot income.
services in your income. Examples of these feesEnergy conservation subsidies. You can
are amounts you receive for services you per-Example. You buy a new car for $9,000 exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
form as:cash and receive a $400 rebate check from thevided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you.ties for the purchase or installation of an energy1) A corporate director, Your cost is $8,600. This is your basis on whichconservation measure for a dwelling unit.
you figure gain or loss if you sell the car, and 2) An executor or administrator of an estate,Energy conservation measure. This in-depreciation if you use it for business. 3) A notary public, orcludes installations or modifications that are pri-
Casualty insurance and other reimburse- marily designed to reduce consumption of 4) An election precinct official.ments. You generally should not report theseelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man-
reimbursements on your return. Get Publicationagement of energy demand. Nonemployee compensation. If you are547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts, for more not an employee and the fees for your servicesDwelling unit.This includes a house, apart-information. from the same payer total $600 or more for thement, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-
Child support payments.You should not re- year, you may receive a Form 1099–MISC. Yoular property. If a building or structure contains
port these payments on your return. Get Publi- may need to report your fees as self-employ-both dwelling and other units, any subsidy must
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, ment income. See Self-Employed Persons, inbe properly allocated.
for more information. chapter 1, for a discussion of when you are
Estate and trust income.An estate or trust,considered self-employed.Court awards and damages. To determine ifunlike a partnership, may have to pay federal
settlement amounts you receive by compromise Corporate director. Corporate directorincome tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate
or judgment must be included in your income, fees are self-employment income. Report theseor trust, you may be taxed on your share of its
you must consider the item that the settlement payments on Schedule C (Form 1040) orincome distributed or required to be distributed
replaces. Include the following as ordinary in- Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).to you. However, there is never a double tax.
come. Estates and trusts file their returns on FormExecutor or administrator of an estate.If
1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andyou are not in the trade or business of being an1) Interest on any award. Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedexecutor (for instance, you are the executor of a
to you on Schedule K–1 of Form 1041.2) Compensation for lost wages or lost profits friend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on
in most cases. line 21 of Form 1040. If you provide the servicesCurrent income required to be distributed.
as a trade or business, report them as self-em-If you are the beneficiary of a trust that must3) Punitive damages. It does not matter if
ployment income on Schedule C (Form 1040) ordistribute all of its current income, you mustthey relate to a physical injury or physical
Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040).report your share of the distributable net income,sickness.
whether or not you have actually received it.Notary public.Report payments for these4) Amounts received in settlement of pension
services on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Sched-Current income not required to berights (if you did not contribute to the plan).
ule C–EZ (Form 1040). These payments aredistributed.If you are the beneficiary of an5) Damages for: not subject to self-employment tax. (See theestate or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of
separate instructions for Schedule C (Formwhether to distribute all or part of the currenta) Patent or copyright infringement, 1040) for details.)income, you must report:
b) Breach of contract, or Election precinct official.You should re-1) All income that is required to be distributedc) Interference with business operations. ceive a Form W–2 showing payments for ser-to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-vices performed as an election official oruted, plus6) Back pay and damages for emotional dis- election worker. Report these payments on line
tress received to satisfy a claim under Title 2) All other amounts actually paid or credited7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. to you, Form 1040EZ.
Do not include in your income compensatory up to the amount of your share of distributableFoster-care providers.Payments you re-damages for personal physical injury or physical net income. ceive from a state, political subdivision, orsickness (whether received in a lump sum orHow to report. Treat each item of income tax-exempt child-placement agency for provid-installments). the same way that the estate or trust would treat ing care to qualified foster individuals in your
Emotional distress.Damages you receive it. For example, if a trust’s dividend income is home generally are not included in your income.
for emotional distress due to a physical injury or distributed to you, you report the distribution as However, you must include in your income pay-
sickness are treated as received for the physical dividend income on your return. The same rule ments received for the care of more than 5
injury or sickness. Do not include them in your applies to distributions of tax-exempt interestindividuals age 19 or older and certain
income. If the emotional distress is due to a and capital gains. difficulty-of-care payments.
Page 94 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 97 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A qualified foster individual is a person who:Form W –2G. You may have received a generally file the amended return by April 15,
Form W – 2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, 2004. See the form instructions for more infor-
1) Is living in a foster family home, andshowing the amount of your gambling winnings mation.
and any tax taken out of them. Include the2) Was placed there by: Illegal income.Illegal income, such as stolenamount from box 1 on line 21 of Form 1040. Be
or embezzled funds, must be included in yoursure to include any amount from box 2 on line 59a) An agency of a state or one of its politi- income on line 21 of Form 1040, or on Scheduleof Form 1040.cal subdivisions, or C or Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040) if from your
b) If the individual is under age 19, aGifts and inheritances.Generally, propertyself-employment activity.
tax-exempt child placement agency li-you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is
Indian fishing rights.If you are a member ofcensed by a state or one of its politicalnot included in your income. However, if prop-
a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightssubdivisions. erty you receive this way later produces income
secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofsuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that income
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeis taxable to you. If property is given to a trustDifficulty-of-care payments.These are in your income amounts you receive from activi-and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-additional payments that are designated by the ties related to those fishing rights. The income istributed to you, that income is also taxable topayer as compensation for providing the addi- not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is thetional care that is required for physically, men- or employment taxes.income from the property, that income is taxabletally, or emotionally handicapped qualified fosterto you.individuals. A state must determine that the ad- Interest on frozen deposits.In general, you
Inherited pension or IRA.If you inherited aditional compensation is needed, and the care exclude from your income the amount of interest
pension or an individual retirement arrangementfor which the payments are made must be pro- earned on a frozen deposit. See  Interest income
(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-vided in your home. on frozen deposits in chapter 8.
ited amount in your income. See chapter 11 ifYou must include in your income Interest on qualified savings bonds.Youyou inherited a pension. See chapter 18 if youdifficulty-of-care payments received for more may be able to exclude from income the interestinherited an IRA.than: from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notyou pay qualified higher educational expenses1) 10 qualified foster individuals under agedeductible from other income. A hobby is anin the same year. For more information on this19, or activity from which you do not expect to make aexclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-
2) 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 orprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier. gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 8.
older. If you collect stamps, coins, or otherJob interview expenses.If a prospective em-items as a hobby for recreation andployer asks you to appear for an interview andMaintaining space in home.If you are paid pleasure, and you sell any of the items,CAUTION
!
either pays you an allowance or reimburses youto maintain space in your home for emergencyyour gain is taxable as a capital gain. (Seefor your transportation and other travel ex-foster care, you must include the payment inchapter 17.) However, if you sell items from yourpenses, the amount you receive is generally notyour income. collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.taxable. You include in income only the amountReporting taxable payments. If you re- you receive that is more than your actual ex-ceive payments that you must include in yourHolocaust victims restitution.Under new penses.income, you are in business as a foster-carelaw enacted in 2001, the federal tax treatment of
provider and you are self-employed. Report the Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must bepayments received by Holocaust victims (or
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZ included in your income on line 21 of Form 1040.their heirs) as restitution for Nazi persecution
(Form 1040). Get Publication 587, Business Use If you must give the pay to your employer be-has been clarified. Restitution payments re-
of Your Home (Including Use by Day-Care Prov- cause your employer continues to pay your sal-ceived after December 31, 1999 (and interest
iders), to help you determine the amount you ary while you serve on the jury, you can deductearned on the payments, including interest
can deduct for the use of your home. the amount turned over to your employer as anearned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-
adjustment to your income. Include the amountcounts or funds) are not taxable. You also do not
Free tour. If you received a free tour from a you repay your employer on line 32 of Forminclude them in any computations in which you
1040. Write “Jury Pay” and the amount on thetravel agency for organizing a group of tourists, would ordinarily add excludable income to your
dotted line next to line 32.adjusted gross income, such as the computationyou must include its value in your income. Re-
to determine the taxable part of social securityport the fair market value of the tour on line 21 of
Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, sidebenefits. If the payments are made in property,Form 1040 if you are not in the trade or business
commissions, push money, or similar paymentsyour basis in the property is its fair market valueof organizing tours. You cannot deduct your
you receive in your income on line 21 of Formwhen you receive it.expenses in serving as the voluntary leader of
1040, or on Schedule C or Schedule C–EZExcludable restitution payments are pay-the group at the group’s request. If you organize
(Form 1040), if from your self-employment activ-ments or distributions made by any country ortours as a trade or business, report the tour’s
ity.any other entity because of persecution of anvalue on Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule
individual on the basis of race, religion, physicalC –EZ (Form 1040). Example. You sell cars and help arrangeor mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payGermany, any other Axis regime, or any otherGambling winnings. You must include your back part of their commissions to you for refer-Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whethergambling winnings in income on line 21 of Form ring customers to them. You must include thethe payments are made under a law or as a1040. If you itemize your deductions on Sched- kickbacks in your income.result of a legal action. They include compensa-ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling
tion or reparation for property losses resultinglosses you had during the year, but only up to Medical savings accounts (MSAs).You dofrom Nazi persecution, including proceedsthe amount of your winnings. See chapter 30 for not generally include in income amounts youunder insurance policies issued before and dur-information on recordkeeping. withdraw from your Archer MSA oring World War II by European insurance compa-Medicare+Choice MSA if you use the money toLotteries and raffles.Winnings from lotter-nies. pay for qualified medical expenses. Generally,ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-
Amending your 2000 return.If your treat- qualified medical expenses are those you cantion to cash winnings, you must include in your
ment of restitution payments received in 2000 deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemizedincome the fair market value of bonds, cars,
was different from the treatment describedDeductions. For more information about quali-houses, and other noncash prizes.
above and caused you to pay more tax, you fied medical expenses, see chapter 23. For
If you win a state lottery prize payableshould file an amended return for 2000 on Formmore information about Archer MSAs or
in installments, see Publication 525 for1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income TaxMedicare+Choice MSAs, see Publication 969,
more information.
TIP
Return. To claim a refund of tax, you shouldMedical Savings Accounts (MSAs).
Chapter 13 Other Income Page 95

Page 98 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot buy health insurance withannuity income and are taxable under the rulesScholarship prizes. Scholarship prizes
distributions from your MSA unless youexplained in chapter 12. won in a contest are not scholarships or fellow-
are receiving unemployment benefits, ships if you do not have to use the prizes forCAUTION
!
1) Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that arebuying continuation coverage required by fed- educational purposes. You must include these
more than the social security equivalenteral law, or buying long-term care insurance. amounts in your income on line 21 of Form
benefit. 1040, whether or not you use the amounts for
Taxable distributions and penalty.If you educational purposes.2) Tier 2 benefits.
use the money from your MSA for any purpose State tuition programs.If you receive distri-3) Vested dual benefits.besides qualified medical expenses, it will be butions from a qualified state tuition program,taxable income that you must report on your tax only the amount that is more than the amountSale of home. You may be able to excludereturn. In addition to the tax, you will be charged contributed to the program is taxable.from income all or part of any gain from the salea 15% penalty for an early distribution. The pen- Qualified state tuition programs are definedor exchange of a personal residence. See chap-alty will not be charged if you are disabled, age in Publication 970. For more information on ater 16.65, or die during the year. specific program, contact the state or agency
Sale of personal items.If you sold an itemPrizes and awards. If you win a prize in a that established and maintains it.
you owned for personal use, such as a car,lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz Transporting school children.Do not in-refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orprogram, beauty contest, or other event, you clude in your income a school board mileagesilverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.must include it in your income. For example, if allowance for taking children to and from schoolReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, if you are not in the business of taking children tonot deduct a loss.you must report this income on line 21 of Form school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-However, if you sold an item you held for1040. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not ing this transportation.investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,include its value in your income.
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainPrizes and awards in goods or services must Union benefits and dues.Amounts deducted
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.be included in your income at their fair market from your pay for union dues, assessments,
value. contributions, or other payments to a union can-Scholarships and fellowships.A candidate
not be excluded from your income.for a degree can exclude amounts received as aEmployee awards or bonuses. Cash You may be able to deduct some of thesequalified scholarship or fellowship. A qualifiedawards or bonuses given to you by your em- payments as a miscellaneous deduction subjectscholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-ployer for good work or suggestions generally to the 2% limit if they are related to your job andceive that is for:must be included in your income as wages. if you itemize your deductions on Schedule AHowever, certain noncash employee achieve-1) Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an(Form 1040). For more information, see  Unionment awards can be excluded from income. Seeeducational organization, or Dues and Expenses in chapter 30.Bonuses and awards in chapter 6.
2) Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-Strike and lockout benefits.Benefits paidPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.If you quired for courses at the educational insti-to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,were awarded a prize in recognition of past tution. including both cash and the fair market value ofaccomplishments in religious, charitable, scien- other property, are usually included in your in-Amounts used for room and board do not qual-tific, artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, come as compensation. You can exclude theseify. Get Publication 520 for more information onyou generally must include the value of the prize benefits from your income only when the factsqualified scholarships and fellowship grants.in your income. However, you do not include this clearly show that the union intended them asprize in your income if you meet all of the follow- Payments for services.Payments you re- gifts to you.ing requirements. ceive for services required as a condition ofUtility rebates.If you are a customer of anreceiving a scholarship or fellowship grant must1) You were selected without any action on electric utility company and you participate in thebe included in your income, even if the servicesyour part to enter the contest or proceed- utility’s energy conservation program, you mayare required of all candidates for the degree.ing. receive on your monthly electric bill either:This includes amounts received for teaching and
2) You are not required to perform substantialresearch. Include these payments on line 7 of1) A reduction in the purchase price of elec-future services as a condition to receivingForm 1040 or Form 1040A, or on line 1 of Formtricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orthe prize or award. 1040EZ.
2) A nonrefundable credit against theFor information about the rules that apply to3) The prize or award is transferred by the purchase price of the electricity.a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided topayer directly to a governmental unit or
employees and their families by an educationaltax-exempt charitable organization as des- The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-
institution, see Publication 520.ignated by you. able credit is not included in your income.
VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-See Publication 525 for more information about
partment of Veterans Affairs are not included inthe conditions that apply to the transfer.
your income. These allowances are not consid-
Railroad retirement annuities.The following ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
types of payments are treated as pension or
Page 96 Chapter 13 Other Income

Page 99 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use —  including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 27 in Part Five.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Fair market value (FMV) is the price at
which the property would change hands be-❏ 551 Basis of Assets tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither
14. ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions having to buy or sell, who both have reasonable
knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales of❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property similar property on or about the same date may
be helpful in figuring the FMV of the property.
Basis of
Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-
erty and assume (or buy subject to) an existing
Property Cost Basis mortgage on the property, your basis includes
the amount you pay for the property plus the
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.amount to be paid on the mortgage.
The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtIntroduction Settlement costs.You can include in the ba-obligations, other property, or services. Yoursis of property you buy the settlement fees andcost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-This chapter discusses how to figure your basis closing costs you pay for buying the property. (Alowing items.in property. It is divided into the following sec- fee for buying property is a cost that must betions. • Sales tax. paid even if you buy the property for cash.) You
cannot include fees and costs for getting a loan• Cost basis. • Freight. on the property.• Adjusted basis. • Installation and testing. The following are some of the settlement
fees or closing costs you can include in the basis• Basis other than cost. • Excise taxes. of your property.
• Legal and accounting fees (when theyBasis is the amount of your investment in • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).must be capitalized).property for tax purposes. Use the basis of prop-
• Charges for installing utility services.erty to figure gain or loss on the sale, exchange,• Revenue stamps.or other disposition of property. Also use it to • Legal fees (including title search and prep-• Recording fees.figure deductions for depreciation, amortization, aration of the sales contract and deed).depletion, and casualty losses. You must keep• Real estate taxes (if assumed for the • Recording fees.accurate records of all items that affect the basisseller).of property so you can make these computa- • Surveys.In addition, the basis of real estate and businesstions.
assets may include other items. • Transfer taxes.If you use property for both business and
personal purposes, you must allocate the basis • Owner ’s title insurance.Loans with low or no interest.If you buybased on the use. Only the basis allocated to the
property on any time-payment plan that charges• Any amounts the seller owes that youbusiness use of the property can be depreci-
little or no interest, the basis of your property isagree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-ated.
your stated purchase price minus any amount est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesYour original basis in property is adjustedconsidered to be unstated interest. You gener-for improvements or repairs, and sales(increased or decreased) by certain events. Ifally have unstated interest if your interest rate iscommissions.you make improvements to the property, in-less than the applicable federal rate.crease your basis. If you take deductions for
Settlement costs do not include amountsFor more information, see Unstated Interestdepreciation or casualty losses, reduce your ba-
placed in escrow for the future payment of itemsand Original Issue Discount in Publication 537.sis.
such as taxes and insurance.
The following are some of the settlementReal PropertyUseful Items fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
You may want to see: basis of property. Real property, also called real estate, is land and
generally anything built on, growing on, or at-1) Casualty insurance premiums.Publication
tached to land.
2) Rent for occupancy of the property before❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe If you buy real property, certain fees andclosing.Benefits other expenses you pay are part of your cost
basis in the property. 3) Charges for utilities or other services re-❏ 523 Selling Your Home
If you buy buildings and the land on whichlated to occupancy of the property before❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income they stand for a lump sum, allocate the basisclosing.
among the land and the buildings so you can❏ 535 Business Expenses 4) Fees for refinancing a mortgage.figure the allowable depreciation on the build-❏ 537 Installment Sales ings. Land is not depreciable. Allocate the cost 5) Charges connected with getting a loan.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of according to the fair market values of the land The following are examples of these
Assets and buildings at the time of purchase. charges.
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Points (discount points, loan originationTable 14–1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees).
b) Mortgage insurance premiums. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
c) Loan assumption fees. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
d) Cost of a credit report. – Putting an addition on your home subsidies for energy conservation
e) Fees for an appraisal required by a – Replacing an entire roof measures.lender.
– Paving your driveway
– Installing central air conditioning• Casualty or theft loss deductionsReal estate taxes.If you pay real estate taxes
the seller owed on real property you bought, and– Rewiring your home and insurance reimbursements
the seller did not reimburse you, treat those
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
• Assessments for local improvements: • Credit for qualified electric vehiclesthem as taxes.
If you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller– Water connectionspaid for you, you can usually deduct that amount
– Sidewalks • Section 179 deductionas an expense in the year of purchase. Do not
include that amount in the basis of your property.– Roads
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must
• Depreciationreduce your basis by the amount of those taxes.
• Costs of restoring damaged propertyPoints. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
after a casualty loss • Deduction for clean-fuel vehiclesing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,
or a home equity loan), do not add the points to and clean-fuel refueling property
the basis of the related property. Generally, you• Legal fees for defending and perfectingdeduct the points over the term of the loan. For
more information on how to deduct points, seea title • Nontaxable corporate distributions
Points in chapter 5 of Publication 535.
Points on home mortgage. Special rules • Zoning costsmay apply to points you and the seller pay when
you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If
certain requirements are met, you can deducterty if they increase the value of the property
• Rebates received from a manufacturer orthe points in full for the year in which they are seller.assessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. How-paid. Reduce the basis of your home by anyever, you can deduct as taxes assessments forseller-paid points. For more information, see • Easements.maintenance, repairs, or interest charges on thePoints in chapter 25. • Gas-guzzler tax.improvements.
• Adoption tax benefits.Example. Your city changes the street in
front of your store into an enclosed pedestrianAdjusted Basis Casualties and thefts.If you have a casualtymall and assesses you and other affected prop-
or theft loss, decrease the basis of your propertyerty owners for the cost of the conversion. AddBefore figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange, by any insurance proceeds or other reimburse-the assessment to your property’s basis. In thisor other disposition of property or figuring allow- ment and by any deductible loss not covered byexample, the assessment is a depreciable as-able depreciation, depletion, or amortization, insurance.set.you must usually make certain adjustments (in- You must increase your basis in the property
creases and decreases) to the basis of the prop- by the amount you spend on repairs that sub-
Decreases to Basiserty. The result of these adjustments to the basis stantially prolong the life of the property, in-
is the adjusted basis. crease its value, or adapt it to a different use. ToThe following items reduce the basis of yourmake this determination, compare the repairedproperty. property to the property before the casualty.Increases to Basis
For more information on casualty and theft• The section 179 deduction.
losses, see chapter 27.Increase the basis of any property by all items• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicles andproperly added to a capital account. These in- Easements. The amount you receive forclean-fuel vehicle refueling property.clude the cost of any improvements having a granting an easement is generally considered touseful life of more than 1 year. Other items• Nontaxable corporate distributions (seebe from the sale of an interest in real property. Itadded to the basis of property include the cost ofchapter 9). reduces the basis of the affected part of theextending utility service lines to the property and property. If the amount received is more than the• Deductions previously allowed (or allowa-legal fees, such as the cost of defending and basis of the part of the property affected by theble) for amortization, depreciation, and de-perfecting title. easement, reduce your basis in that part to zeropletion.
and treat the excess as a recognized gain.Improvements. Add the cost of improve- • Exclusion of subsidies for energy conser-If the gain is on a capital asset, see chapterments to your basis in the property if they in-vation measures (see Energy conserva- 17 for information about how to report it. If thecrease the value of the property, lengthen its life,tion subsidies in chapter 13). gain is on property used in a trade or business,or adapt it to a different use. For example, im-
see Publication 544 for information about how to• Credit for qualified electric vehicles.provements include putting a recreation room in
report it.your unfinished basement, adding another bath-• Postponed gain from the sale of yourroom or bedroom, putting up a fence, putting inhome. Depreciation and section 179 deduction.new plumbing or wiring, installing a new roof, or Decrease the basis of your qualifying business• Casualty and theft losses and insurancepaving your driveway. property by any section 179 deduction you takereimbursements.Assessments for local improvements. and the depreciation you deducted, or could
• Certain canceled debt excluded from in-Add assessments for improvements such as have deducted, on your tax returns under the
streets and sidewalks to the basis of the prop- come. method of depreciation you selected.
Page 98 Chapter 14 Basis of Property

Page 101 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about depreciation and a) Any loss you recognize on the conver-
the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946. sion.Basis Other Than Cost
b) Any money you receive that you do notCredit for qualified electric vehicles.If you
spend on similar property.There are many times when you cannot use costclaim the credit for a qualified electric vehicle,
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value oryou must reduce your basis in that vehicle by the
2) Increase the basis by the following.the adjusted basis of the property can be used.lesser of the following amounts.
Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis a) Any gain you recognize on the conver-• $4,000. were discussed earlier. sion.• 10% of the vehicle’s cost.
b) Any cost of acquiring the replacementProperty Received for
property.This basis reduction rule applies even if theServices
credit allowed is less than the reduction. For
more information on this credit, see chapter 12If you receive property for your services, includeMoney or property not similar or related. Ifin Publication 535. its FMV in income. The amount you include inyou receive money or property not similar or
income becomes your basis. If the servicesrelated in service or use to the converted prop-Deduction for clean-fuel vehicle and refuel-were performed for a price agreed on before-erty, and you buy replacement property similaring property. If you take the deduction forhand, it will be accepted as the FMV of theor related in service or use to the convertedclean-fuel vehicles or clean-fuel vehicle refuel-property if there is no evidence to the contrary.property, the basis of the replacement propertying property, decrease the basis of the property is its cost decreased by the gain not recognizedRestricted property.If you receive prop-by the amount taken. For more information on the conversion.erty for your services and the property is subjectabout these deductions, see chapter 12 in Publi-to certain restrictions, your basis in the propertycation 535. Example. The state condemned your prop-is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested.
erty. The adjusted basis of the property wasHowever, this rule does not apply if you make anExclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it.election to include in income the FMV of thetion measures. You can exclude from gross You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −property at the time it is transferred to you, lessincome any subsidy you received from a public $26,000). You bought replacement propertyany amount you paid for it. Property becomesutility company for the purchase or installation of similar in use to the converted property forsubstantially vested when your rights in thean energy conservation measure for a dwelling $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000property or the rights of any person to whom youunit. Reduce the basis of the property for which ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of thetransfer the property are not subject to a sub-you received the subsidy by the excluded payment from the state. Your unrecognized gainstantial risk of forfeiture. For more information,amount. For more information about this sub- is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000see Restricted Property in Publication 525.sidy, see chapter 13. realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.
Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase isThe basis of the replacement property is figuredPostponed gain from sale of home.If you a purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asas follows:postponed gain from the sale of your main homecompensation for services, you buy goods orbefore May 7, 1997, you must reduce the basisother property at less than FMV, include theCost of replacement property...... $29,000of your new home by the amount of the post-difference between the purchase price and theMinus: Gain not recognized....... 3,000poned gain. For more information on the rulesproperty’s FMV in your income. Your basis in theBasis of replacement property... $26,000for the sale of a home, see Publication 523.property is its FMV (your purchase price plus the
amount you include in income). Allocating the basis.If you buy more thanExample If the difference between your purchaseone piece of replacement property, allocate your
price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis-basis among the properties based on their re-You owned a duplex used as rental property thatcount, do not include the difference in income.spective costs.cost you $40,000, of which $35,000 was allo-However, your basis in the property is still itscated to the building and $5,000 to the land. YouFMV. See Employee Discounts in Publicationadded an improvement to the duplex that cost Nontaxable Exchanges15–B.$10,000. In February last year the duplex was
A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichdamaged by fire. Up to that time you had been
Taxable Exchanges you are not taxed on any gain and you cannotallowed depreciation of $23,000. You sold some
deduct any loss. If you receive property in asalvaged material for $1,300 and collected
A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isnontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the$19,700 from your insurance company. You de-
taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gainsame as the basis of the property you trans-ducted a casualty loss of $1,000 on your income
or deductible loss also is known as a recognizedferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 15.tax return for last year. You spent $19,000 of the
gain or loss. If you receive property in exchangeinsurance proceeds for restoration of the duplex,
for other property in a taxable exchange, thewhich was completed this year. You must use Like-Kind Exchangesbasis of the property you receive is usually itsthe duplex’s adjusted basis after the restoration
FMV at the time of the exchange.to determine depreciation for the rest of the The exchange of property for the same kind of
property’s recovery period. Figure the adjusted property is the most common type of nontaxable
basis of the duplex as follows: Involuntary Conversions exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,
the property traded and the property receivedOriginal cost of duplex.......... $35,000 If you receive property as a result of an involun-must be both of the following.Addition to duplex............. 10,000 tary conversion, such as a casualty, theft, or
Total cost of duplex............ $45,000 1) Qualifying property.condemnation, you can figure the basis of the
Minus: Depreciation.......... 23,000 replacement property using the basis of the con-2) Like-kind property.Adjusted basis before casualty..... $22,000 verted property.Minus: Insurance proceeds $19,700 The basis of the property you receive is gen-Deducted casualty Similar or related property.If you receive erally the same as the basis of the property youloss........... 1,000 property similar or related in service or use to thegave up. If you trade property in a like-kindSalvage proceeds 1,300  22,000 converted property, the replacement property’s exchange and also pay money, the basis of theAdjusted basis after casualty...... $ –0– basis is the same as the converted property’s property received is the basis of the property youAdd: Cost of restoring duplex...... 19,000 basis on the date of the conversion, with thegave up increased by the money you paid.Adjusted basis after restoration.. $19,000 following adjustments.
Your basis in the land is its original cost of Qualifying property.In a like-kind exchange,
$5,000. 1) Decrease the basis by the following. you must hold for investment or for productive
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use in your trade or business both the property income includible in the transferor’s income. For Gift received after 1976.If you received a
you give up and the property you receive.more information on these bonds, see chapter 8.gift after 1976, increase your basis in the gift (the
donor’s adjusted basis) by the part of the gift taxThe transferor must give you, at the time of
Like-kind property.There must be an ex- paid on it that is due to the net increase in valuethe transfer, the records needed to determine
change of like property. The exchange of real of the gift. Figure the increase by multiplying thethe adjusted basis and holding period of theestate for real estate or personal property for gift tax paid by a fraction. The numerator of theproperty as of the date of the transfer.similar personal property is an exchange of like fraction is the net increase in value of the gift andFor more information about the transfer ofproperty. the denominator is the amount of the gift.property from a spouse, see chapter 15.
The net increase in value of the gift is theExample. You trade in an old truck used in FMV of the gift minus the donor’s adjusted basis.Property Received as ayour business with an adjusted basis of $1,700 The amount of the gift is its value for gift taxfor a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowsGift purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800. sion and marital or charitable deduction thatThis is a like-kind exchange. The basis of theTo figure the basis of property you receive as aapplies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the oldgift, you must know its adjusted basis to thesee Publication 950, Introduction to Estate andone, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).donor just before it was given to you, its FMV atGift Taxes.If you sell your old truck to a third party forthe time it was given to you, and any gift tax paid$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy aon it. Example. In 2001, you received a gift ofnew one from the dealer, you have a taxable property from your mother that had an FMV ofgain of $300 on the sale ($2,000 sale priceFMV less than donor’s adjusted basis.If the $50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. Theminus $1,700 basis). The basis of the new truckFMV of the property at the time of the gift is lessamount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasis the price you pay the dealer. than the donor’s adjusted basis, your basis de-$40,000 ($50,000 minus the $10,000 annual
pends on whether you have a gain or a lossexclusion). She paid a gift tax of $9,000 on thePartially nontaxable exchange.A partially
when you dispose of the property. Your basis forproperty. Your basis is $26,750, figured as fol-nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which
figuring gain is the same as the donor’s adjusted lows:you receive unlike property or money in addition
basis plus or minus any required adjustments toto like property. The basis of the property you
basis while you held the property. Your basis forFair market value.............. $50,000receive is the basis of the property you gave up,
figuring loss is its FMV when you received theMinus: Adjusted basis........... −20,000with the following adjustments.
Net increase in value........... $30,000gift plus or minus any required adjustments to
1) Decrease the basis by the following basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
Gift tax paid................. $9,000amounts. Basis, earlier.
Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷ $40,000) . . .× .75
a) Any money you receive. Gift tax due to net increase in value $6,750Example. You received an acre of land as a
Adjusted basis of property to your +20,000gift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMVb) Any loss you recognize on the ex- mother.....................of $8,000. The donor’s adjusted basis waschange. Your basis in the property....... $26,750$10,000. After you received the property, no
events occurred to increase or decrease your2) Increase the basis by the following
basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000,amounts. Inherited Propertyyou will have a $2,000 gain because you must
a) Any additional costs you incur. use the donor’s adjusted basis at the time of theYour basis in property you inherit from a dece-gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If youb) Any gain you recognize on the ex- dent is generally one of the following.sell the property for $7,000, you will have achange. $1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at1) The FMV of the property at the date of the
the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis toindividual’s death.Allocation of basis.Allocate the basis firstfigure loss.
2) The FMV on the alternate valuation date ifto the unlike property, other than money, up toIf the sales price is between $8,000 and the personal representative for the estateits FMV on the date of the exchange. The rest is$10,000, you have neither gain nor loss.the basis of the like property. chooses to use alternate valuation.
Business property. If you hold the gift as3) The value under the special-use valuationbusiness property, your basis for figuring anyMore information.See Like-Kind Exchanges method for real property used in farming ordepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-in chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- another closely held business, if chosention is the same as the donor’s adjusted basistion.
for estate tax purposes.plus or minus any required adjustments to basis
while you hold the property. 4) The decedent’s adjusted basis in land toProperty Transferred
the extent of the value excluded from the
From a Spouse FMV equal to or greater than donor’s ad- decedent’s taxable estate as a qualified
justed basis.If the FMV of the property is conservation easement.The basis of property transferred to you or trans-equal to or greater than the donor’s adjusted If a federal estate tax return does not have toferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse isbasis, your basis is the donor’s adjusted basis atbe filed, your basis in the inherited property is itsthe same as your spouse’s adjusted basis. Thethe time you received the gift. Increase yourappraised value at the date of death for statesame rule applies to a transfer by your formerbasis by all or part of any gift tax paid, dependinginheritance or transmission taxes.spouse that is incident to divorce. However, ad-on the date of the gift, explained later.
just your basis for any gain recognized by your For more information, see the instructions toAlso, for figuring gain or loss from a sale orspouse or former spouse on property trans- Form 706, U.S. Estate Tax Return.other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de-ferred in trust. This rule applies only to a transferpletion, or amortization deductions on businessof property in trust in which the liabilities as-property, you must increase or decrease yourProperty Changed tosumed, plus the liabilities to which the propertybasis (the donor’s adjusted basis) by any re-is subject, are more than the adjusted basis of Business or Rental Usequired adjustments to basis while you held thethe property transferred. property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier. When you hold property for personal use andIf the property transferred to you is a series
change it to business use or use it to produceGift received before 1977.If you receivedE, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the
rent, you must figure its basis for depreciation.a gift before 1977, increase your basis in the gifttransferor must include in income the interest
(the donor’s adjusted basis) by any gift tax paid An example of changing property held for per-accrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the
on it. However, do not increase your basis abovesonal use to business use would be renting outbond immediately after the transfer is equal to
the FMV of the gift at the time it was given to you.your former personal residence.the transferor’s basis increased by the interest
Page 100 Chapter 14 Basis of Property

Page 103 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis for depreciation.The basis for depre- use, as discussed earlier under Adjusted Basis, you acquired them. For detailed information, see
ciation is the lesser of the following amounts. to arrive at a basis for loss. Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investment
Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.
1) The FMV of the property on the date of theExample. Assume the same facts as in the
change. Identifying stocks or bonds sold.If you canprevious example, except that you sell the prop-
adequately identify the shares of stock or theerty at a loss after being allowed depreciation2) Your adjusted basis on the date of the
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or otherdeductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldchange.
basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds.start with the FMV on the date of the change to
If you buy and sell securities at various times inrental use ($180,000), because it is less than the
Example. Several years ago, you paid varying quantities and you cannot adequatelyadjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 +
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that identify the shares you sell, the basis of the$25,000) on that date. Reduce that amount
cost $25,000. Before changing the property to securities you sell is the basis of the securities($180,000) by the depreciation deductions to
rental use last year, you paid $20,000 for perma- you acquired first. For more information aboutarrive at a basis for loss of $142,500 ($180,000
nent improvements to the house and claimed a identifying securities you sell, see Stocks and− $37,500).
$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to Bonds under Basis of Investment Property in
the house. Because land is not depreciable, you chapter 4 of Publication 550.Stocks and Bondscan only include the cost of the house when
figuring the basis for depreciation. Mutual fund shares.If you sell mutual fundsThe basis of stocks or bonds you buy generallyYour adjusted basis in the house when you you acquired at various times and prices, youis the purchase price plus any costs of purchase,changed its use was $178,000 ($160,000 + can choose to use an average basis. For moresuch as commissions and recording or transfer$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your information, see Average Basis in Publicationfees. If you get stocks or bonds other than byproperty had an FMV of $180,000, of which 564.purchase, your basis is usually determined by$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was forthe FMV or the previous owner’s adjusted basis,the house. The basis for figuring depreciation on Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at aas discussed earlier.the house is its FMV on the date of the change premium and choose to amortize the premium,You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted reduce the basis of the bond by the amortizedtain events that occur after purchase. For exam-basis ($178,000). premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-ple, if you receive additional stock frommium Amortization in chapter 3 of PublicationSale of property.If you later sell or dispose ofnontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, di-550 for more information. Although you cannotthe property, the basis you use will depend onvide the adjusted basis of the old stock by thededuct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, youwhether you are figuring gain or loss. number of shares of old and new stock. This rulemust amortize the premium each year and re-applies only when the additional stock receivedGain. The basis for figuring a gain is your duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedis identical to the stock held. Also reduce youradjusted basis when you sell the property. amount.basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-
tions. They are a return of capital.Example. Assume the same facts as in the Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-
previous example except that you sell the prop- ments. You must increase your basis in anExample. In 1999 you bought 100 shares oferty at a gain after being allowed depreciation OID debt instrument by the OID you include inXYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2000deductions of $37,500. The basis for figuring income for that instrument. See Original Issueyou bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000 (land) − Discount in chapter 8.or $16 a share. In 2001 XYZ declared a 2-for-1$37,500). Tax-exempt bonds. OID on tax-exemptstock split. You now have 200 shares of stock
Loss. Figure the basis for a loss starting bonds is generally not taxable. However, therewith a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a
with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the are special rules for figuring the basis of thesebasis of $8 a share.
FMV of the property at the time of the change to bonds issued after September 3, 1982, and ac-
business or rental use. Then adjust this amountOther basis. There are other ways to figure quired after March 1, 1984. See chapter 4 of
for the period after the change in the property’s the basis of stocks or bonds depending on how Publication 550.
Chapter 14 Basis of Property Page 101

Page 104 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption or retirement of bonds.A re-Useful Items
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirYou may want to see:
maturity is generally treated as a sale or trade.
15. Publication Surrender of stock.A surrender of stock by a
dominant shareholder who retains control of the❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
corporation is treated as a contribution to capital❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale of Property
from taxable income. The surrendering share-❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
holder must reallocate his or her basis in the
surrendered shares to the shares he or sheForm (and Instructions)
retains.Important Reminder ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
Worthless securities.Stocks, stock rights,and Losses
Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with and bonds (other than those held for sale by a❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchangesinvestment property from sources outside the securities dealer) that became worthless during
United States, you must report all gains and the tax year are treated as though they were
losses from the sale of that property on your tax sold on the last day of the tax year. This affects
return unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is whether your capital loss is long-term or
true whether you reside inside or outside the short-term. See Holding Period, later.Sales and Trades If you are a cash basis taxpayer and makeUnited States and whether or not you receive a
payments on a negotiable promissory note thatForm 1099 from the foreign payer. If you sold property such as stocks, bonds, oryou issued for stock that became worthless, youcertain commodities through a broker during thecan deduct these payments as losses in theyear, you should receive, for each sale, a Form years you actually make the payments. Do not1099–B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-deduct them in the year the stock became worth-change Transactions, or an equivalent state-Introduction less.ment from the broker. You should receive the
This chapter discusses the tax consequences ofstatement by January 31 of the next year. It willHow to report loss.Report worthless se-selling or trading investment property. It ex-show the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRScurities on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Formplains: will also get a copy of Form 1099–B from the 1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and
broker. (d), write “Worthless.” Enter the amount of your• What is a sale or trade, Use Form 1099–B (or an equivalent state-loss in parentheses in column (f).
• When you have a nontaxable trade, ment received from your broker) to completeFiling a claim for refund.If you do notSchedule D of Form 1040.• What to do with a related party transac- claim a loss for a worthless security on your
tion, original return for the year it becomes worthless,
What is a Sale or Trade? you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to• Whether the property you sell is a capital the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amendedasset or a noncapital asset, This section explains what is a sale or trade. ItU.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend
also explains certain transactions and events• Whether you have a capital or ordinary your return for the year the security became
that are treated as sales or trades.gain or loss from the sale of property, worthless. You must file it within 7 years from the
A sale is generally a transfer of property fordate your original return for that year had to be• How to determine your holding period, andmoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise tofiled, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,
pay money. A trade is a transfer of property for• When you can make a tax-free rollover of whichever is later. For more information about
other property or services and may be taxed ina gain from selling certain securities. filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claims
the same way as a sale. for Refund in chapter 1.
Sales not discussed in this publication. Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction
How To FigureCertain sales or trades of property are dis-is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property
for cash and immediately buy similar property tocussed in other publications. Gain or Lossreplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
Installment sales are covered in Publicationrate transactions. But see Like-kind exchangesYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of537, Installment Sales. under Nontaxable Trades, later. property by comparing the amount you realize
with the adjusted basis of the property.Transfers of property at death are covered inRedemption of stock.A redemption of stock
Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Ad-is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theGain. If the amount you realize from a sale orministrators. capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
demption is a dividend or other distribution onproperty you transfer, the difference is a gain.Transactions involving business property are
stock.covered in Publication 544, Sales and Other Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property you
Dispositions of Assets. Dividend versus sale or trade.Whether a transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,difference is a loss.Dispositions of an interest in a passive activity
or other distribution depends on the circum-are covered in Publication 925, Passive Activity Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-stances in each case. Both direct and indirectand At-Risk Rules. erty is your original cost or other original basisownership of stock will be considered. The re-
properly adjusted (increased or decreased) forSales of a main home are covered in chapterdemption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if: 
certain items. See chapter 14 for more informa-16.
tion about determining the adjusted basis of1) The redemption is not essentially
property.equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 9),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-
penses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), Amount realized. The amount you realize2) There is a substantially disproportionate
provides more detailed discussion about sales from a sale or trade of property is everything youredemption of stock,
and trades of investment property. Publication receive for the property. This includes the3) There is a complete redemption of all the550 includes information about the rules cover- money you receive plus the fair market value ofstock of the corporation owned by theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section any property or services you receive.shareholder, or1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu- If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your
tures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis-4) The redemption is a distribution in partial property and the debt instrument does not pro-
cusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated
Page 102 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 105 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
interest will reduce the amount realized. For receive for productive use in your trade orLike property and money transferred. If
more information, see Publication 537. conditions (1) - (6) are met, you have a nontax-business or for investment. Neither prop-
able trade even if you pay money in addition toerty may be property used for personalFair market value.Fair market value is the the like property.purposes, such as your home or familyprice at which the property would change handscar.between a buyer and a seller, neither being Basis of property received.To figure the ba-
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable2) The property must not be held primarily forsis of the property received, see Nontaxable
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Exchanges in chapter 14.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
The fair market value of notes or other debterty you receive must not be property youHow to report. You must report the trade ofinstruments you receive as a part of the salesell to customers, such as merchandise.like property on Form 8824. If you figure a rec-price is usually the best amount you can get3) The property must not be stocks, bonds,ognized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onfrom selling them to, or discounting them with, anotes, choses in action, certificates of trustSchedule D of Form 1040 or on Form 4797,bank or other buyer of debt instruments.
or beneficial interest, or other securities orSales of Business Property, whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, seeevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-Example. You trade A Company stock with
chapter 4 of Publication 544.cluding partnership interests. However,an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
you can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which Corporate stocks. The following trades ofrate stocks under a different rule, as dis-is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 corporate stocks generally do not result in acussed later.($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a taxable gain or a deductible loss.
note for $6,000 that has a discount value of4) There must be a trade of like property. TheCorporate reorganizations.In some in-$4,000, your gain is $7,000 ($10,000 plus trade of real estate for real estate, or per-stances, a company will give you common stock$4,000 minus $7,000). sonal property for similar personal propertyfor preferred stock, preferred stock for commonis a trade of like property. The trade of anDebt paid off.A debt against the property, stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inapartment house for a store building, or aor against you, that is paid off as a part of the another corporation. If this is part of a merger,panel truck for a pickup truck, is a trade oftransaction, or that is assumed by the buyer, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled corpora-like property. The trade of a piece of ma-must be included in the amount realized. This is tion, bankruptcy, corporate division, corporatechinery for a store building is not a trade oftrue even if neither you nor the buyer is person- acquisition, or other corporate reorganization,like property. Real property located in theally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or you do not recognize gain or loss.United States and real property locatedtrade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
Stock for stock of the same corporation.outside the United States are not like prop-loan, the amount you realize generally includes
You can exchange common stock for commonerty. Also, personal property usedthe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in thepredominantly within the United States andeven if the amount of the note is more than the
same corporation without having a recognizedpersonal property used predominantlyfair market value of the property.
gain or loss. This is true for a trade between twooutside the United States are not like prop-
stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-erty.Example. You sell stock that you had
holder and the corporation.pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.5) The property to be received must be iden-Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer Convertible stocks and bonds.You gen-tified within 45 days after the date youpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in erally will not have a recognized gain or loss iftransfer the property given up in the trade.cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 you convert bonds into stock or preferred stock6) The property to be received must be re-plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 into common stock of the same corporation ac-
ceived by the earlier of:minus $6,000). cording to a conversion privilege in the terms of
the bond or the preferred stock certificate.Payment of cash. If you trade property and a) The 180th day after the date on which
cash for other property, the amount you realizeyou transfer the property given up inProperty for stock of a controlled corpora-
is the fair market value of the property you re-the trade, or tion. If you transfer property to a corporation
ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub- solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,b) The due date, including extensions, fortracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis and immediately after the trade you are in con-your tax return for the year in which theof the property you traded in from the amount trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will nottransfer of the property given up oc-you realize. If the result is a positive number, it is recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothcurs.a gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-
loss. erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theIf you trade property with a related party in acorporation is an investment company.No gain or loss.You may have to use a basis like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-for figuring gain that is different from the basisSee Related Party Transactions, later in thisration, you or your group of transferors mustused for figuring loss. In this case, you may havechapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544own, immediately after the exchange, at leastneither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than for more information on exchanges of business80% of the total combined voting power of allCost in chapter 14. property and special rules for exchanges usingclasses of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%qualified intermediaries or involving multipleof the outstanding shares of each class of non-properties.Nontaxable Trades voting stock of the corporation.
If this provision applies to you, you mustPartially nontaxable exchange.If you re-This section discusses trades that generally do attach to your return a complete statement of all
ceive cash or unlike property in addition to likenot result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. facts pertinent to the exchange.
property, and the above six conditions are met,For more information on nontaxable trades, see
Additional information.For more informa-you have a partially nontaxable trade. You arechapter 1 of Publication 544.
tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradestaxed on any gain you realize, but only up to the
in chapter 4 of Publication 550.Like-kind exchanges. If you trade businessamount of the cash and the fair market value of
or investment property for other business orthe unlike property you receive. You cannot de-Insurance policies and annuities.You willinvestment property of a like kind, you do notduct a loss. not have a recognized gain or loss if you trade:pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until youLike property and unlike property trans-sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be 1) A life insurance contract for another lifeferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-nontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the insurance contract or for an endowment ortion to the like property, you must recognize gainfollowing conditions. annuity contract,or loss on the unlike property you give up. The
gain or loss is the difference between the ad-1) The property must be business or invest- 2) An endowment contract for an annuity
justed basis of the unlike property and its fairment property. You must hold both the contract or for another endowment con-
market value.property you trade and the property you tract that provides for regular payments
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 103

Page 106 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
beginning at a date not later than the be-Losses on sales or trades of property. However, of the capital interests or the profit inter-
ginning date under the old contract, or if either you or the related party disposes of theests in both partnerships.
like property within 2 years after the trade, you3) An annuity contract for another annuityboth must report any gain or loss not recognizedMultiple property sales or trades.If youcontract. on the original trade on your return filed for thesell or trade to a related party a number of blocks
The insured or annuitant must be the sameyear in which the later disposition occurs.of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you
under both contracts. Exchanges of contracts must figure the gain or loss separately for eachLosses on sales or trades of property.Younot included in this list, such as an annuity con- block of stock or piece of property. The gain oncannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade oftract for an endowment contract, or an annuity or each item may be taxable. However, you cannotproperty, other than a distribution in completeendowment contract for a life insurance con- deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction istract, are taxable. reduce gains from the sales of any of thesedirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-items by losses on the sales of any of the otherDemutualization of life insurance compa-ing related parties. items.nies. If you received stock or cash in ex-
1) Members of your family. This includes onlychange for your equity interest as a policyholder Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct
your brothers and sisters, half-brothersor an annuitant, you generally will not have a your loss on the sale of stock through yourand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-recognized gain or loss. See Demutualization of broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-Life Insurance Companies in Publication 550. party buys the same stock you had owned. Thisscendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).does not apply to a trade between related par-U.S. Treasury notes or bonds.You can trade ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-2) A partnership in which you directly or indi-certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for dental and is not prearranged.rectly own more than 50% of the capitalother issues designated by the Secretary of theinterest or the profits interest.Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized. Constructive ownership of stock.In de-
termining whether a person directly or indirectly3) A corporation in which you directly or indi-
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-rectly own more than 50% in value of theTransfers Between outstanding stock. (See Constructive own- tion, the following rules apply.
Spouses ership of stock, later.) Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trustGenerally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
ganization that is directly or indirectly con-is considered owned proportionately by or for itstransfer of property from an individual to (or in
trolled, in any manner or by any method,shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to
by you or by a member of your family,a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownwhether or not this control is legally en-rule does not apply if the recipient spouse or the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orforceable.former spouse is a nonresident alien. The rule for his or her family. Family includes only broth-also does not apply to a transfer in trust to theIn addition, a loss on the sale or trade ofers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,extent the adjusted basis of the property is lessproperty is not deductible if the transaction isspouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.than the amount of the liabilities assumed plusdirectly or indirectly between the following re-Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byany liabilities on the property. lated parties. applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation isAny transfer of property to a spouse or for-
considered to own the stock that is directly or1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciarymer spouse on which gain or loss is not recog-
indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.and beneficiary, of any trust.nized is treated by the recipient as a gift and is
not considered a sale or exchange. The Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or therecipient’s basis in the property will be the samefiduciary and beneficiary of two different constructively owned by a person under rule 1 isas the adjusted basis of the giver immediatelytrusts, if the same person is the grantor oftreated as actually owned by that person. Butbefore the transfer. This carryover basis ruleboth trusts. stock constructively owned by an individualapplies whether the adjusted basis of the trans- under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichferred property is less than, equal to, or greater that individual for again applying either rule 2 ormore than 50% in value of the outstandingthan either its fair market value at the time of rule 3 to make another person the constructivestock is directly or indirectly owned by ortransfer or any consideration paid by the recipi- owner of the stock.for the trust, or by or for the grantor of theent. This rule applies for purposes of determin-
trust.ing loss as well as gain. Any gain recognized on
Property received from a related party.Ifa transfer in trust increases the basis. 4) A corporation and a partnership if theyou sell or trade at a gain property that youA transfer of property is incident to a divorcesame persons own more than 50% in acquired from a related party, you recognize theif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the datevalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-gain only to the extent it is more than the losson which the marriage ends, or if the transfer isporation and more than 50% of the capitalpreviously disallowed to the related party. Thisrelated to the ending of the marriage. interest, or the profits interest, in the part-rule applies only if you are the original transferee
nership. and you acquired the property by purchase orRelated Party Transactions exchange. This rule does not apply if the related5) Two S corporations if the same persons
party’s loss was disallowed because of the washown more than 50% in value of the out-Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publicationstanding stock of each corporation.erty between related parties. 550 under Wash Sales.6) Two corporations, one of which is an S
Gain on sale or trade of depreciable prop- corporation, if the same persons own moreExample 1. Your brother sells you stock forerty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop-than 50% in value of the outstanding stock$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brothererty to a related party may be ordinary income,of each corporation. cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellrather than capital gain, if the property can be
the same stock to an unrelated party for7) An executor and a beneficiary of an estatedepreciated by the party receiving it. See chap-
$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-(except in the case of a sale or trade toter 2 of Publication 544 for more information.
able gain is $500 —  the $2,900 gain minus thesatisfy a pecuniary bequest).
$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.Like-kind exchanges.Generally, if you trade8) Two corporations that are members of thebusiness or investment property for other busi-same controlled group. (Under certain con-Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold theness or investment property of a like kind, noditions, however, these losses are not dis-stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-gain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- allowed but must be deferred.) nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minuschanges earlier under Nontaxable Trades.
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasThis rule also applies to trades of property 9) Two partnerships if the same persons
not allowed to your brother.between related parties, defined next under own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
Page 104 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 107 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or artis-Short-term government obligations.Treat
tic composition, a letter or memoran-gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-Capital Gains dum, or similar property: ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratableand Losses a) Created by your personal efforts, share of the acquisition discount. This treatment
applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityb) Prepared or produced for you as a let-This section discusses the tax treatment of date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.ter, memorandum, or similar property,gains and losses from different types of invest- Acquisition discount is the stated redemptionorment transactions. price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-
c) Acquired under circumstances (for ex-tion.Character of gain or loss.You need to clas- ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisHowever, do not treat these gains as income
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orof the person who created the propertyto the extent you previously included the dis-
capital gains or losses. You then need to classifyor for whom it was prepared or pro-count in income. See Discount on Short-Term
your capital gains and losses as either duced. Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.
short-term or long-term. If you have long-term
5) Accounts or notes receivable acquiredgains and losses, you must identify your 28% Short-term nongovernment obligations.
in the ordinary course of a trade or busi-rate gains and losses. If you have a net capital Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-
ness for services rendered or from the salegain, you must also identify your qualified 5-year gations as ordinary income up to your ratable
of property described in (1).gain and any unrecaptured section 1250 gain. share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-
ment applies to obligations that have a fixedThe correct classification and identification6) U.S. Government publications that you maturity date of not more than 1 year from thehelps you figure the limit on capital losses andreceived from the government free or fordate of issue.the correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi-less than the normal sales price, or thatHowever, to the extent you previously in-tal gains and losses is explained in chapter 17.you acquired under circumstances entitlingcluded the discount in income, you do not haveyou to the basis of someone who receivedto include it in income again. See Discount onthe publications free or for less than theCapital or Ordinary Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica-normal sales price. tion 550.Gain or Loss
7) Certain commodities derivative finan-
Tax-exempt state and local governmentIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible losscial instruments held by commodities de-
bonds. If these bonds were originally issuedfrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gain rivatives dealers.
at a discount before September 4, 1982, or youor loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on8) Hedging transactions, but only if the acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat yourthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade oftransaction is clearly identified as a hedg-part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figurea capital asset (defined next) results in a capitaling transaction before the close of the dayyour gain or loss on the sale or trade of thesegain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asseton which it was acquired, originated, orbonds, reduce the amount realized by your partgenerally results in ordinary gain or loss. De-entered into. of the OID.pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on
If the bonds were issued after September 3,9) Supplies of a type you regularly use ora sale or trade of property used in a trade or
1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in-consume in the ordinary course of yourbusiness may be treated as either capital or
crease the adjusted basis by your part of thetrade or business.ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In
OID to figure gain or loss. For more informationsome situations, part of your gain or loss may be
on the basis of these bonds, see Discounteda capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-
Debt Instruments in chapter 4 of Publicationnary gain or loss. Investment Property 550.
Any gain from market discount is usuallyInvestment property is a capital asset. Any gainCapital Assets and taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-ex-or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capitalempt bonds. If you bought the bonds before MayNoncapital Assets gain or loss. 1, 1993, the gain from market discount is capital
For the most part, everything you own and use gain. If you bought the bonds after April 30,Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment 1993, the gain is ordinary income.These are capital assets except when they are
is a capital asset. Some examples are: You figure the market discount by sub-held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you
tracting the price you paid for the bond from thehave from their sale or trade generally is a capi-• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- sum of the original issue price of the bond andtal gain or loss.count, the amount of accumulated OID from the date of
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.All of theseissue that represented interest to any earlier• A house owned and used by you and your
(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-holders. For more information, see Market Dis-family,
ital assets except when held for sale by a securi-count Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550.• Household furnishings, ties dealer. However, if you own small businessA loss on the sale or other disposition of a
stock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-tax-exempt state or local government bond is• A car used for pleasure or commuting,
ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-deductible as a capital loss.• Coin or stamp collections, vestment Company Stock in chapter 4 of Redeemed before maturity. If a state orPublication 550.• Gems and jewelry, and local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980,
is redeemed before it matures, the OID is not• Gold, silver, or any other metal. Personal use property.Property held for per-
taxable to you.sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
If a state or local bond issued after June 8,Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-capital asset, and you must report a gain from its
1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part ofcept the following noncapital assets. sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot
the OID that is earned while you hold the bond isdeduct a loss from selling personal use property.
1) Property held mainly for sale to cus- not taxable to you. However, you must report the
tomers or property that will physically be- unearned part of the OID as a capital gain.
come a part of the merchandise that is forDiscounted Debt Instruments
sale to customers. Example. On July 1, 1990, the date of is-
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond2) Depreciable property used in your trade or retirement of a bond or other debt instrument for $800. The face amount of the bond wasor business, even if fully depreciated.originally issued at a discount or bought at a $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time
3) Real property used in your trade or busi-discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention
ness. plained in the following discussions. of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 105

Page 108 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
callable at its face amount beginning 10 years eries in Publication 525, Taxable and
1) The lender is not in the business of lendingafter the issue date. Nontaxable Income.
money.The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of Nonbusiness bad debt. If you choose to11 years (July 1, 2001) for its face amount of2) The amount of the loan, plus the amounttreat the loss as a bad debt, see How to report$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. Theof any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000bad debts, later.OID earned during the time you held the bond,or less.
$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual
3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin-interest also is not taxable. However, you must Sale of Annuitycipal purposes of the loan.report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a
capital gain. The part of any gain on the sale of an annuityIf the exception applies, or the obligation was
contract before its maturity date that is based onissued before March 2, 1984, you do not includeLong-term debt instruments issued after
interest accumulated on the contract is ordinarythe OID in your income currently. When you sell1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July
income.or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain2, 1982, if a government instrument).If you
that is not more than your accrued share of thesell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these
OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest ofdebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not
Nonbusiness Bad Debtsthe gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on themore than your ratable share of the OID at the
time of the sale or redemption is ordinary in- sale or redemption is capital loss.If someone owes you money that you cannotcome. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tohowever, there was an intention to call the debt deduct the amount owed to you when you figureinstrument before maturity, all of your gain that isDeposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-not more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-Financial Institution less. A debt must be genuine for you to deduct anary income at the time of the sale. This treat- loss. A debt is genuine if it arises from ament of taxable gain also applies to corporateIf you lose money you have on deposit in adebtor-creditor relationship based on a valid andinstruments issued after May 27, 1969, under aqualified financial institution that becomes insol-enforceable obligation to repay a fixed or deter-written commitment that was binding on May 27,vent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductminable sum of money.1969, and at all times thereafter. your loss in one of three ways. Bad debts that you did not get in the course
Long-term debt instruments issued after of operating your trade or business are nonbusi-1) Ordinary loss,May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov- ness bad debts. To be deductible, nonbusiness
2) Casualty loss, orernment instrument).If you hold one of these bad debts must be totally worthless. You cannot
debt instruments, you must include a part of the deduct a partly worthless nonbusiness debt.3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalOID in your gross income each year that you loss). Basis in bad debt required.To deduct a badown the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-
debt, you must have a basis in it —  that is, youstrument is increased by the amount of OID thatOrdinary loss or casualty loss.If you can must have already included the amount in youryou have included in your gross income. Seereasonably estimate your loss, you can chooseincome or loaned out your cash. For example,Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 8 forto treat the estimated loss as either an ordinaryyou cannot claim a bad debt deduction forinformation about the OID that you must reportloss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eithercourt-ordered child support not paid to you byon your tax return. way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-your former spouse. If you are a cash methodIf you sell or trade the debt instrument beforetion. taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generallymaturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as acannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidat the time the instrument was originally issued
miscellaneous itemized deduction on line 22 ofsalaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,there was an intention to call it before its matur-
Schedule A (Form 1040). The maximum amountand similar items.ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the
you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you areextent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts
How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-married filing separately) reduced by any ex-of OID previously includible in your income. In
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses onpected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isthis case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
Schedule D (Form 1040).subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeMarket discount bonds.If the debt instru- In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter thelimit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryment has market discount and you chose to name of the debtor and “statement attached” inloss if any of the deposit is federally insured.include the discount in income as it accrued, column (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt inIf you claim a casualty loss, attach Formincrease your basis in the debt instrument by the parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on for each bad debt.Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your totalits disposition. If you did not choose to include For each bad debt, attach a statement tocasualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%the discount in income as it accrued, you must your return that contains:of your adjusted gross income.report gain as ordinary interest income up to the
You cannot choose either of these methods1) A description of the debt, including theinstrument’s accrued market discount. The rest
if: amount, and the date it became due,of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount
Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. 2) The name of the debtor, and any business1) You own at least 1% of the financial insti-A different rule applies to market discount or family relationship between you and thetution,bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur- debtor,chased by you before May 1, 1993. See chapter2) You are an officer of the institution, or
3) The efforts you made to collect the debt,4 of Publication 550.
3) You are related to such an owner or of- andRetirement of debt instrument. Any ficer. You are related if you and the owner
4) Why you decided the debt was worthless.amount that you receive on the retirement of aor officer are “related parties,” as defined
For example, you could show that the bor-debt instrument is treated in the same way as ifearlier under Related Party Transactions,
rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-you had sold or traded that instrument. or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orgal action to collect would probably notniece of the owner or officer.Notes of individuals.If you hold an obligation result in payment of any part of the debt.
If the actual loss that is finally determined isof an individual that was issued with OID after
more than the amount you deducted as an esti-March 1, 1984, you generally must include the Filing a claim for refund.If you do not
mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as aOID in your income currently, and your gain or deduct a bad debt on your original return for the
bad debt. If the actual loss is less than theloss on its sale or retirement is generally capital year it becomes worthless, you can file a claim
amount deducted as an estimated loss, yougain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do
must include in income (in the final determina-plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- this, use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual
als and all of the following requirements are met. tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov- Income Tax Return, to amend your return for the
Page 106 Chapter 15 Sale of Property

Page 109 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year the debt became worthless. You must file it January 3, 2002. You received payment of the day as the holding period of the underlying
within 7 years from the date your original return sales price on that same day. Report your gain stock. The holding period for stock acquired
for that year had to be filed, or 2 years from the on your 2001 return, even though you received through the exercise of stock rights begins on
date you paid the tax, whichever is later. For the payment in 2002. The gain is long term or the date the right was exercised.
more information about filing a claim, seeshort term depending on whether you held the
Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in stock more than 1 year. Your holding period
Rollover of Gain Fromchapter 1. ended on December 28. If you had sold the
Publicly Traded Securitiesstock at a loss, you would also report it on yourAdditional information.For more informa- 2001 return.tion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain
Nontaxable trades.If you acquire investment550. For information on business bad debts, see gains from the sale of publicly traded securities.
property in a trade for other investment propertychapter 11 of Publication 535, Business Ex- This means that if you buy certain replacement
and your basis for the new property is deter-penses. property and make the choice described in this
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in thesection, you postpone part or all of your gain.
old property, your holding period for the newYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basisproperty begins on the day following the dateLosses on Small Business Stock of the replacement property as described in Ba-you acquired the old property. sis of replacement property, later. ThisYou can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than postpones your gain until the year you disposeProperty received as a gift.If you receive aas a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, or of the replacement property.gift of property and your basis is determined byworthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report the You qualify to make this choice if you meetthe donor’s adjusted basis, your holding periodloss on Form 4797, line 10. Any gain on this all the following tests.is considered to have started on the same daystock is capital gain and is reported on Schedulethe donor’s holding period started.D (Form 1040) if the stock is a capital asset in 1) You sell publicly traded securities at aIf your basis is determined by the fair marketyour hands. See Losses on Section 1244 (Small gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-value of the property, your holding period startsBusiness) Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550. ties traded on an established securitieson the day after the date of the gift.
market.
Inherited property.If you inherit investment
2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.Losses on Small Business property, your capital gain or loss on any later
disposition of that property is treated as aInvestment Company Stock 3) During the 60-day period beginning on the
long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-date of the sale, you buy replacement
See Losses on Small Business Investment gardless of how long you actually held the prop-property. This replacement property must
Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.erty. be either common stock or a partnership
interest in a specialized small business in-Real property bought. To figure how long
vestment company (SSBIC). This is anyHolding Period you have held real property bought under an
partnership or corporation licensed by theunconditional contract, begin counting on the
Small Business Administration under sec-If you sold or traded investment property, youday after you received title to it or on the day
tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest-must determine your holding period for the prop-after you took possession of it and assumed the
ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,erty. Your holding period determines whetherburdens and privileges of ownership, whichever
1993.any capital gain or loss was a short-term orhappened first. However, taking delivery or pos-
long-term capital gain or loss. session of real property under an option agree-
ment is not enough to start the holding period.Amount of gain recognized.If you make theLong term or short term.If you hold invest-The holding period cannot start until there is anchoice described in this section, you must rec-ment property more than 1 year, any capital actual contract of sale. The holding period of theognize gain only up to the following amount:gain or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. Ifseller cannot end before that time.you hold the property 1 year or less, any capital 1) The amount realized on the sale, minusgain or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
To determine how long you held the invest- 2) The cost of any common stock or partner-months or less.If you hold stock in a mutual
ment property, begin counting on the date after ship interest in an SSBIC that you boughtfund or real estate investment trust (REIT) for 6
the day you acquired the property. The day you during the 60-day period beginning on themonths or less and then sell it at a loss, special
disposed of the property is part of your holding date of sale (and did not previously takerules may apply. See chapter 4 of Publication
period. into account on an earlier sale of publicly550.
traded securities).Automatic investment service.In determin-Example. If you bought investment property If this amount is less than the amount of youring your holding period for shares bought by theon February 5, 2000 and sold it on February 5, gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,bank or other agent, full shares are considered2001, your holding period is not more than 1 subject to the limit described next. If this amountbought first and any fractional shares are con-year and you will have a short-term capital gain is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,sidered bought last. Your holding period startsor loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2001, your you must recognize the full amount of your gain.on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If aholding period is more than 1 year and you willshare was bought over more than one purchasehave a long-term capital gain or loss. Limit on gain postponed.The amount ofdate, your holding period for that share is a splitgain you can postpone each year is limited to theholding period. A part of the share is consideredSecurities traded on established market. smaller of:to have been bought on each date that stockFor securities traded on an established securi-
was bought by the bank with the proceeds ofties market, your holding period begins the day 1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and
available funds.after the trade date you bought the securities, file a separate return), or
and ends on the trade date you sold them.Stock dividends.The holding period for stock2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married and
you received as a taxable stock dividend beginsDo not confuse the trade date with the file a separate return), minus the amount
on the date of distribution.settlement date, which is the date by of gain you postponed for all earlier years.
The holding period for new stock you re-which the stock must be delivered andCAUTION
!
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins onpayment must be made. Basis of replacement property.You mustthe same day as the holding period of the oldsubtract the amount of postponed gain from thestock. This rule also applies to stock acquired inExample. You are a cash method, calendar basis of your replacement property.a “spin-off,” which is a distribution of stock oryear taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-securities in a controlled corporation.cember 28, 2001. According to the rules of the How to report and postpone gain. See
stock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryNontaxable stock rights.Your holding period chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how to
of the stock three trading days after the sale, on for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same report and postpone the gain.
Chapter 15 Sale of Property Page 107

Page 110 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) You have not already reported to the IRSProperty used partly as your main home.If
your purchase of a new home within your you use only part of the property as your main
replacement period, or a taxable gain re- home, the rules discussed in this chapter apply
16. sulting from the end of your replacement only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of
period. the property. For details, see Property used
partly as your home and partly for business orIf all three statements are true or you haverental during the year of sale under BusinessSelling Your questions, see chapter 3 of Publication 523.Use or Rental of Home, later.
Useful ItemsHome
You may want to see:
How To Figure Gain orPublication
Important Reminders
❏ 523 Selling Your Home Loss
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-TimeChange of address. If you change your mail- To figure the gain or loss on the sale of yourHomeownersing address, be sure to notify the IRS using main home, you must know the selling price,Form 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to the the amount realized, and the adjusted basis.Form (and Instructions)Internal Revenue Service Center for your old
address. (Addresses for the Service Centers are Selling price.The selling price is the total❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainson the back of the form.) amount you receive for your home. It includesand Losses money, all notes, mortgages, or other debts as-Home sold with undeducted points.If you ❏ 8822 Change of Address sumed by the buyer as part of the sale, and thehave not deducted all the points you paid to fair market value of any other property or any❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgagesecure a mortgage on your old home, you may services you receive.Subsidybe able to deduct the remaining points in the
Payment by employer. You may have toyear of the sale. See Mortgage ending early
sell your home because of a job transfer. If yourunder Points in chapter 25.
employer pays you for a loss on the sale or for
your selling expenses, do not include the pay-
Main Home ment as part of the selling price. Your employer
will include it in box 1 of your Form W–2 and youIntroduction Usually, the home you live in most of the time iswill include it in your gross income as wages on
your main home and can be a: line 7 of Form 1040.This chapter explains the tax rules that apply
when you sell your main home. Generally, your• House, Option to buy.If you grant an option to buymain home is the one in which you live most of your home and the option is exercised, add the• Houseboat,the time. amount you receive for the option to the selling
• Mobile home, price of your home. If the option is not exercised,Gain. If you have a gain from the sale of your
you must report the amount as ordinary incomemain home, you may be able to exclude up to• Cooperative apartment, or
in the year the option expires. Report this$250,000 of the gain from your income • Condominium. amount on line 21 of Form 1040.($500,000 on a joint return in most cases). Any
gain not excluded is taxable. Form 1099–S. If you received Form 1099–S,To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-
Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2ter, you generally must have owned and lived inLoss. You cannot deduct a loss from the sale
(gross proceeds) should show the total amountthe property as your main home for at least 2of your main home.
you received for your home.years during the 5-year period ending on the
Worksheets. Publication 523, Selling Your However, box 2 will not include the fair mar-date of sale.
Home,  includes worksheets to help you figure ket value of any property other than cash or
the adjusted basis of the home you sold, theLand. If you sell the land on which your mainnotes, or any services, you received or will re-
gain (or loss) on the sale, and the amount of the home is located, but not the house itself, youceive. Instead, box 4 will be checked.
gain that you can exclude. cannot exclude any gain you have from the sale If you can exclude the entire gain, the person
of the land. responsible for closing the sale generally will notReporting the sale.Do not report the sale of have to report it on Form 1099–S. You will useyour main home on your tax return unless youExample. On March 2, 2001, you sell thesale documents and other records to figure thehave a gain and at least part of it is taxable.land on which your main home is located. Youtotal amount you received for your home.Report any taxable gain on Schedule D (Formbuy another piece of land and move your house1040). You may also have to include Form 4797, Amount realized. The amount realized is theto it. This sale is not considered a sale of yourSales of Business Property. See Reporting the selling price minus selling expenses.main home, and you cannot exclude tax on anyGain in chapter 2 of Publication 523. gain on the sale of the land. Selling expenses. Selling expenses in-
clude:Who may need to read chapter 3 in Publica-More than one home. If you have more thantion 523. Chapter 3 of Publication 523 ex-one home, you can exclude gain only from the• Commissions,plains the rules that applied to sales before Maysale of your main home. You must include in• Advertising fees,7, 1997. You may still need to know those rules,income the gain from the sale of any otherbut only if you sold your main home at a gain • Legal fees, andhome. If you have two homes and live in both ofbefore May 7, 1997, and all three of the followingthem, your main home is ordinarily the one you• Loan charges paid by the seller, such asstatements are true. live in most of the time. loan placement fees or “points.”
1) You postponed the gain on the sale.
Example 1. You own and live in a house in
2) The 2-year period you had to replace that Adjusted basis.  While you owned yourthe city. You also own a beach house, which you
home (your replacement period) was sus- home, you may have made adjustments (in-use during summer months. The house in the
pended while you either: creases or decreases) to the basis. This ad-city is your main home.
justed basis is used to figure gain or loss on thea) Served in the Armed Forces, or Example 2. You own a house, but you live in sale of your home. For information on how to
b) Lived and worked outside the United another house that you rent. The rented house is figure your home’s adjusted basis, see Basis
States. your main home. later.
Page 108 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 111 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount of gain or loss.To figure the amount or loss. This is true even if you receive cash or 4) Payments you received for granting an
of gain or loss, compare the amount realized to other consideration for the home. Therefore, theeasement or right-of-way,
the adjusted basis. rules in this chapter do not apply. 5) Depreciation allowed or allowable if you
Gain on sale.If the amount realized is moreMore information.If you need more infor- used your home for business or rental pur-
than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication poses,
and, except for any part you can exclude, gener- 523 and Property Settlements in Publication 6) Residential energy credit (generally al-ally is taxable. 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimed
Loss on sale.If the amount realized is less for the cost of energy improvements that
Basisthan the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss. you added to the basis of your home,
A loss on the sale of your main home cannot be 7) Adoption credit you claimed for improve-You need to know your basis in your home todeducted. ments added to the basis of your home,determine any gain or loss when you sell it. Your
Jointly owned home. If you and your spousebasis in your home is determined by how you got8) Nontaxable payments from an adoptionsell your jointly owned home and file a jointthe home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it orassistance program of your employer thatreturn, you figure your gain or loss as one tax-built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri-you used for improvements you added topayer. tance, gift, etc.), its basis is either its fair marketthe basis of your home,
value when you got it or the adjusted basis of theSeparate returns.If you file separate re- 9) First-time homebuyer credit (allowed toperson you got it from.turns, each of you must figure your own gain or certain first-time buyers of a home in theWhile you owned your home, you may haveloss according to your ownership interest in the District of Columbia), andmade adjustments (increases or decreases) tohome. Your ownership interest is determined by
your home’s basis. The result of these adjust-state law. 10) Energy conservation subsidy excluded
ments is your home’s adjusted basis, which is from your gross income because you re-Joint owners not married.If you and a used to figure gain or loss on the sale of yourceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-joint owner other than your spouse sell yourhome. lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyjointly owned home, each of you must figureYou can find more information on basis andenergy conservation measure. An energyyour own gain or loss according to your owner-adjusted basis in chapter 14 of this publicationconservation measure is an installation orship interest in the home. Each of you appliesand in Publication 523. modification that is primarily designed ei-the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ- ther to reduce consumption of electricity orSettlement fees or closing costs.When youual basis. natural gas or to improve the managementbought your home, you may have paid settle-Trading homes. If you trade your old home for of energy demand for a home.ment fees or closing costs in addition to theanother home, treat the trade as a sale and acontract price of the property. You can include inpurchase. your basis the settlement fees and closing costsImprovements. These add to the value ofyou paid for buying the home. You cannot in-your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it toExample. You owned and lived in a homeclude in your basis the fees and costs for gettingnew uses. You add the cost of additions andthat had an adjusted basis of $41,000. A reala mortgage loan. A fee for buying the home isother improvements to the basis of your prop-estate dealer accepted your old home as aany fee you would have had to pay even if youerty.trade-in and allowed you $50,000 toward a newpaid cash for the home.home priced at $80,000. This is treated as a saleChapter 14 lists some of the settlement feesExamples. Putting a recreation room or an-of your old home for $50,000 with a gain ofand closing costs that you can include in theother bathroom in your unfinished basement,$9,000 ($50,000 – $41,000). basis of property, including your home. It alsoputting up a new fence, putting in new plumbingIf the dealer had allowed you $27,000 andlists some settlement costs that cannot be in-or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving yourassumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 oncluded in basis. unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi-your old home, your sales price would still beIn addition to the items listed in chapter 14,tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun-$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus theyou cannot include in basis: room, or a garage, is also an improvement.$23,000 mortgage assumed).
1) Any fee or cost that you deducted as aForeclosure or repossession.If your home Repairs. These maintain your home in goodmoving expense (allowed for certain feeswas foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a condition but do not add to its value or prolongand costs before 1994), andsale. its life. You do not add their cost to the basis ofYou figure the gain or loss from the sale in2) VA funding fees. your property.generally the same way as gain or loss from any
sale. But the amount of your gain or loss de- Examples. Repainting your house inside orpends, in part, on whether you were personally outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairingAdjusted Basisliable for repaying the debt secured by the leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win-home. Get Publication 523 for more information. dow panes are examples of repairs.Adjusted basis is your basis increased or de-
creased by certain amounts.Form 1099 –A and Form 1099–C. Gener- Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-ally, you will receive Form 1099–A, Acquisition ords to prove your home’s adjustedIncreases to basis.These include any:or Abandonment of Secured Property, from your basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-RECORDS
lender. This form will have the information you1) Additions and other improvements thatords for 3 years after the due date for filing yourneed to determine the amount of your gain orhave a useful life of more than 1 year,return for the tax year in which you sold yourloss and any ordinary income from cancellation home. But if you sold a home before May 7,2) Special assessments for local improve-of debt. If your debt is canceled, you may re- 1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basisments, andceive Form 1099–C, Cancellation of Debt. of that home affects the basis of the new home
3) Amounts you spent after a casualty to re-you bought. Keep records proving the basis ofAbandonment. If you abandon your home,
store damaged property. both homes as long as they are needed for taxyou may have ordinary income. If the aban-
purposes.doned home secures a debt for which you are
Decreases to basis.These include any:personally liable and the debt is canceled, you The records you should keep include:
have ordinary income equal to the amount of the1) Gain you postponed from the sale of acanceled debt. Get Publication 523 for more • Proof of the home’s purchase price andprevious home before May 7, 1997,information. purchase expenses,
2) Deductible casualty losses, • Receipts and other records for all improve-Transfer to spouse.If you transfer your home
ments, additions, and other items that af-to your spouse, or to your former spouse inci- 3) Insurance payments you received or ex-
fect the home’s adjusted basis,dent to your divorce, you generally have no gain pect to receive for casualty losses,
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 109

Page 112 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any worksheets you used to figure the ad-Period, later, except that you sold theOwnership and use tests met at different times,
home due to: later.justed basis of the home you sold, the
gain or loss on the sale, the exclusion, anda) A change in place of employment, Example. Professor Paul Beard, who is sin-the taxable gain,
gle, bought and moved into a house on Augustb) Health, or• Any Form 2119 that you filed to postpone 28, 1998. He lived in it as his main home contin-gain from the sale of a previous home c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the ex-uously until January 5, 2000, when he wentbefore May 7, 1997, and tent provided in regulations (as dis-abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. During part
cussed next). of the period of leave, the house was unoccu-• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form
pied, and during the rest of the period, he rented2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of HomeUse Worksheet 3 in Publication 523 to figureit. On January 5, 2001, he sold the house at aSold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- your reduced maximum exclusion. gain.ments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in-
Because his leave was not a short temporarystructions. Unforeseen circumstances.The IRS has not
absence, he cannot include the period of leaveissued regulations defining unforeseen circum-
to meet the 2-year use test. He cannot excludestances. You cannot claim an exclusion based
any part of his gain, unless he sold the houseon unforeseen circumstances until the IRS is-
due to a change in place of employment orsues final regulations or other appropriate gui-
health, as explained under Reduced MaximumExcluding the Gain dance.
Exclusion, earlier. Even if he did sell the house
due to a change in place of employment orYou may qualify to exclude from your income allMore Than One Home Sold health, he cannot exclude the part of the gainor part of any gain from the sale of your main equal to the depreciation he claimed while rent-During 2-Year Periodhome. This means that, if you qualify, you will ing the house. See Depreciation for businessnot have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit use after May 6, 1997, later.You cannot exclude gain on the sale of yourdescribed under Maximum Amount of Exclu-
home if, during the 2-year period ending on thesion, next. To qualify, you must meet the owner- Ownership and use tests met at differentdate of the sale, you sold another home at a gainship and use tests described later. times. You can meet the ownership and useand excluded all or part of that gain. If youtests during different 2-year periods. However,You can choose not to take the exclusion. Incannot exclude the gain, you must include it inyou must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-that case, you must include in income your en-your income. riod ending on the date of the sale.tire gain. However, you can still claim an exclusion if
you sold the home due to: Example. In 1992, Helen Jones lived in aMaximum Amount of rented apartment. The apartment building was1) A change in place of employment, later changed to a condominium, and sheExclusion 2) Health, or bought her apartment on December 1, 1998. In
1999, Helen became ill and on April 14 of thatYou can exclude the entire gain on the sale of3) Unforeseen circumstances, to the extent
year she moved to her daughter’s home. On Julyyour main home up to: provided in regulations (as discussed ear-
10, 2001, while still living in her daughter’slier).1) $250,000, or home, she sold her apartment.
The maximum amount you can exclude is re- Helen can exclude gain on the sale of her2) $500,000 if all of the following are true.duced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion, ear- apartment because she met the ownership and
lier. use tests. Her 5-year period is from July 11,a) You are married and file a joint return
1996, to July 10, 2001, the date she sold thefor the year.
apartment. She owned her apartment from De-Ownership and Use Testsb) Either you or your spouse meets the cember 1, 1998, to July 10, 2001 (over 2 years).
ownership test. She lived in the apartment from July 11, 1996To claim the exclusion, you must meet the own-
(the beginning of the 5-year period), to April 14,ership and use tests. This means that during thec) Both you and your spouse meet the
1999 (over 2 years).5-year period ending on the date of the sale,use test.
you must have: Cooperative apartment.If you sold stock in ad) During the 2-year period ending on the
cooperative housing corporation, the ownershipdate of the sale, neither you nor your1) Owned the home for at least 2 years (the and use tests are met if, during the 5-year periodspouse excluded gain from the sale of ownership test), and ending on the date of sale, you:another home. 2) Lived in the home as your main home for
1) Owned the stock for at least 2 years, andat least 2 years (the use test).
2) Lived in the house or apartment that theReduced Maximum Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop-stock entitles you to occupy as your main
erty as your main home for less than 2 years,home for at least 2 years.Exclusion you can still claim an exclusion in some cases.
The maximum amount you can claim will beYou can claim an exclusion, but the maximum Exception for individuals with a disability.reduced. See Reduced Maximum Exclusion,amount of gain you can exclude will be reduced, There is an exception to the use test if during theearlier.if either of the following is true. 5-year period before the sale of your home:
Period of ownership and use.The required 2 1) You become physically or mentally unable1) You did not meet the ownership and useyears of ownership and use during the 5-yearto care for yourself, andtests, but you sold the home due to: period ending on the date of the sale do not have
to be continuous. 2) You owned and lived in your home as youra) A change in place of employment,  You meet the tests if you can show that you main home for a total of at least 1 year.
b) Health, or owned and lived in the property as your mainUnder this exception, you are considered to livehome for either 24 full months or 730 days (365c) Unforeseen circumstances, to the ex- in your home during any time that you own the× 2) during the 5-year period ending on the datetent provided in regulations (as dis- home and live in a facility (including a nursingof sale.cussed later). home) that is licensed by a state or political
Temporary absence. Short temporary ab- subdivision to care for persons in your condition.
2) Your exclusion would have been disal-sences for vacations or other seasonal ab- If you meet this exception to the use test, you
lowed because of the rule described insences, even if you rent the property during the still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership
More Than One Home Sold During 2-Yearabsences, are counted as periods of use. See test to claim the exclusion.
Page 110 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 113 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gain postponed on sale of previous home. house and put it up for rent. The house was ties. The sale of the part of your property used
For the ownership and use tests, you may be rented from June 1, 1997, to March 31, 1999. for business or rental is reported on Form 4797.
able to add the time you owned and lived in a Amy moved back into the house on April 1, For more information, see Property used partly
previous home to the time you lived in the home 1999, and lived there until she sold it on Januaryas your home and partly for business or rental
on which you wish to exclude gain. You can do 31, 2001. During the 5-year period ending on theduring the year of sale under Business Use or
this if you postponed all or part of the gain on the date of the sale (February 1, 1996 – January 31, Rental of Home in chapter 2 of Publication 523.
sale of the previous home because of buying the 2001), Amy owned and lived in the house for
home on which you wish to exclude gain. more than 2 years as shown in the table below.
Special Situations
Previous home destroyed or condemned. Five Year Used as Used as The situations that follow may affect your exclu-For the ownership and use tests, you add thePeriod  Home  Rental sion.time you owned and lived in a previous home 2/1/96 –that was destroyed or condemned to the time 5/31/97 16 months Expatriates.You cannot claim the exclusion ifyou owned and lived in the home on which you the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria- 6/1/97 –wish to exclude gain. This rule applies if any part tion tax applies to U.S. citizens who have re-3/31/99  22 monthsof the basis of the home you sold depended on nounced their citizenship (and long-termthe basis of the destroyed or condemned home. 4/1/99 – residents who have ended their residency) if oneOtherwise, you must have owned and lived in 1/31/01 22 months of their principal purposes was to avoid U.S.the same home for 2 of the 5 years before the 38 months 22 months taxes. See chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.sale to qualify for the exclusion. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more information aboutAmy can exclude gain up to $250,000. But she
expatriation tax.cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the
depreciation she claimed for renting the house,Married Persons Home destroyed or condemned. If youras explained after Example 2.
home was destroyed or condemned, any gainIf you and your spouse file a joint return for the (for example, because of insurance proceedsExample 2. William owned and used ayear of sale, you can exclude gain if either you received) qualifies for the exclusion.house as his main home from 1995 throughspouse meets the ownership and use tests. (But
Any part of the gain that cannot be excluded1998. On January 1, 1999, he moved to anothersee Maximum Amount of Exclusion, earlier.)
(because it is more than the limit) may be post-state. He rented his house from that date until
poned under the rules explained in:April 30, 2001, when he sold it. During the 5-yearExample 1 – one spouse sells a home.
period ending on the date of sale (May 1, 1996 –Emily sells her home in June 2001. She marries • Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,April 30, 2001), William owned and lived in theJamie later in the year. She meets the owner- and Thefts, in the case of a home that washouse for 32 months (more than 2 years). Heship and use tests, but Jamie does not. She can destroyed, orcan exclude gain up to $250,000. However, heexclude up to $250,000 of gain on a separate or
cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to thejoint return for 2001. • Chapter 1 of Publication 544, Sales and
depreciation he claimed for renting the house,Other Dispositions of Assets, in the case
as explained next.Example 2 – each spouse sells a home. of a home that was condemned.
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except Depreciation for business use after May 6,that Jamie also sells a home. He meets the1997. If you were entitled to take depreciationSale of remainder interest.Subject to theownership and use tests on his home. Emily anddeductions because you used your home forother rules in this chapter, you can choose toJamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain.business purposes or as rental property, youexclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-
cannot exclude the part of your gain equal to anyest in your home. If you make this choice, youDeath of spouse before sale.If your spouse
depreciation allowed or allowable as a deduc-cannot choose to exclude gain from your sale ofdied before the date of sale, you are considered
tion for periods after May 6, 1997. If you canany other interest in the home that you sellto have owned and lived in the property as your
show by adequate records or other evidenceseparately.main home during any period of time when your
that the depreciation deduction allowed was lessspouse owned and lived in it as a main home. Exception for sales to related persons.than the amount allowable, the amount you can-You cannot exclude gain from the sale of aHome transferred from spouse. If your not exclude is the smaller figure. remainder interest in your home to a relatedhome was transferred to you by your spouse (or
person. Related persons include your brothersformer spouse if the transfer was incident toExample. Ray sold his main home in 2001and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,divorce), you are considered to have owned itat a $30,000 gain. He meets the ownership andspouse, ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),during any period of time when your spouseuse tests to exclude the gain from his income.and lineal descendants (children, grandchildren,owned it. However, he used part of the home for businessetc.). Related persons also include certain cor-in 2000 and claimed $500 depreciation. He canUse of home after divorce.You are consid- porations, partnerships, trusts, and exempt or-exclude $29,500 ($30,000 – $500) of his gain.ered to have used property as your main home ganizations.He has a taxable gain of $500.during any period when:
Property used partly as your home and Reporting the Gain1) You owned it, and partly for business or rental during the year
of sale.In the year of sale you may have used2) Your spouse or former spouse is allowed Do not report the 2001 sale of your main home
part of your property as your home and part of itto live in it under a divorce or separation on your tax return unless:
for business or to produce income. Examplesinstrument.
• You have a gain and you do not qualify toare:
exclude all of it, or• A working farm on which your house wasBusiness Use or • You have a gain and you choose not tolocated,
exclude it.Rental of Home • An apartment building in which you lived in
one unit and rented out the others, If you have any taxable gain on the sale ofYou may be able to exclude your gain from the
your main home that cannot be excluded, reportsale of a home that you have used for business• A store building with an upstairs apartment
the entire gain realized on Schedule D (Formor to produce rental income. But you must meet in which you lived, or
1040). Report it on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,the ownership and use tests. • A home with a room used for business depending on how long you owned the home. If(home office) or to produce income.Example 1. On May 30, 1995, Amy bought you qualify for an exclusion, show it on the line
a house. She moved in on that date and lived in If you sell the entire property you should con- directly below the line on which you report the
it until May 31, 1997, when she moved out of the sider the transaction as the sale of two proper- gain. Write “Section 121 exclusion” in column (a)
Chapter 16 Selling Your Home Page 111

Page 114 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of that line and show the amount of the exclusion qualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort-• Your mortgage loan was a qualified homein column (f) as a loss (in parentheses). gage credit certificates), you may have to recap-improvement loan of not more thanIf you used the home for business or to ture all or part of the benefit you received from$15,000,produce rental income during the year of sale, that program when you sell or otherwise dispose
• The home is disposed of as a result ofyou must use Form 4797 to report the sale of the of your home. You recapture the benefit by in-
your death,business or rental part (or the sale of the entire creasing your federal income tax for the year of
property if used entirely for business or rental in the sale. You may have to pay this recapture tax• You dispose of the home more than 9that year). See Business Use or Rental of Homeeven if you can exclude your gain from income;years after the date you closed your mort-in chapter 2 of Publication 523. that exclusion does not affect the recapture tax. gage loan,
Installment sale.Some sales are made underLoans subject to recapture rules.The re- • You transfer the home to your spouse, orarrangements that provide for part or all of the capture applies to loans that: to your former spouse incident to a di-selling price to be paid in a later year. These vorce, where no gain is included in your1) Came from the proceeds of qualified mort-sales are called “installment sales.” If you fi- income,gage bonds, ornance the buyer’s purchase of your home your-
• You dispose of the home at a loss,self, instead of having the buyer get a loan or2) Were based on mortgage credit certifi-
mortgage from a bank, you probably have an cates. • Your home is destroyed by a casualty, andinstallment sale. You may be able to report the you repair it or replace it on its original siteThe recapture also applies to assumptions ofpart of the gain you cannot exclude on the in- within 2 years after the end of the tax yearthese loans.stallment basis. when the destruction happened, orUse Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, to When the recapture applies.The recapture
• You refinance your mortgage loan (unlessreport the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15of the federal mortgage subsidy applies only if
you later meet all of the conditions listedof Form 6252. you meet both of the following conditions. 
previously under When the recapture ap-Seller-financed mortgage.If you sell your1) You sell or otherwise dispose of your plies).home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan-home:cial agreement, the payments you receive gen-
Notice of amounts. At or near the time oferally consist of both interest and principal. Youa) At a gain, and
settlement of your mortgage loan, you shouldmust report the interest you receive as part of
b) During the first 9 years after the datereceive a notice that provides the federally sub-each payment separately as interest income. If
you closed your mortgage loan. sidized amount and other information you willthe buyer of your home uses the property as a
need to figure your recapture tax.main or second home, you must also report the
2) Your income for the year of disposition isname, address, and social security number How to figure and report the recapture.Themore than that year’s adjusted qualifying(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of either Schedule B recapture tax is figured on Form 8828, Recap-income for your family size for that year(Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A). The ture of Federal Mortgage Subsidy. If you sell(related to the income requirements a per-buyer must give you his or her SSN and you your home and your mortgage is subject to re-son must meet to qualify for the federallymust give the buyer your SSN. Failure to meet capture rules, you must file Form 8828 even ifsubsidized program).these requirements may result in a $50 penalty you do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Formfor each failure. If you or the buyer does not 8828 to your Form 1040. For more information,When recapture does not apply.The recap-have and is not eligible to get an SSN, see see Form 8828 and its instructions.ture does not apply if any of the following situa-Social Security Number in chapter 1. tions apply to you:
More information.For more information on
installment sales, see Publication 537, Install-
ment Sales.
Recapture of
Federal Subsidy
If you financed your home under a federally
subsidized program (loans from tax-exempt
Page 112 Chapter 16 Selling Your Home

Page 115 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Include all these transactions even if you did notReconciling Forms 1099 with Schedule D.
receive a Form 1099–B, Proceeds From Broker Add the following amounts reported to you for
and Barter Exchange Transactions, or Form 2001 on Forms 1099 –B and 1099–S (or on
17. 1099–S, Proceeds From Real Estate Transac-substitute statements):
tions (or substitute statement). You can use
1) Proceeds from transactions involvingSchedule D–1 as a continuation schedule to
stocks, bonds, and other securities, andreport more transactions.Reporting Gains
2) Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
Installment sales.You cannot use the install-tions (other than the sale of your main
ment method to report a gain from the sale ofand Losses home if you had no taxable gain) not re-
stock or securities traded on an established se-ported on another form or schedule.
curities market. You must report the entire gain
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and 10in the year of sale (the year in which the trade
of Schedule D, attach a statement to your returnImportant Change date occurs).
explaining the difference.
Passive activity gains and losses.If you8% capital gain rate.Beginning in 2001, the Sale of property bought at various times.Ifhave gains or losses from a passive activity, you10% capital gain rate is lowered to 8% for quali- you sell a block of stock or other property thatmay also have to report them on Form 8582. Infied 5-year gain. For more information, see Cap- you bought at various times, report thesome cases, the loss may be limited under theital Gain Tax Rates, later. short-term gain or loss from the sale on one linepassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsin Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orseparate instructions for more information aboutloss on one line in Part II. Write “Various” inreporting capital gains and losses from a pas-column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See thesive activity.Introduction Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.
Form 1099–B transactions.If you sold prop-This chapter discusses how to report capital Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-gains and losses from sales, exchanges, and sis any expense of sale such as brokers’ fees,ties, through a broker, you should receive Formother dispositions of investment property on commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and1099–B or equivalent statement from the bro-Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in- option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount inker. Use the Form 1099–B or the equivalentcludes: column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedulestatement to complete Schedule D. D, whichever applies, unless you reported the• How to report short-term gains and losses,Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofnet sales price amount in column (d).• How to report long-term gains and losses,Form 1099–B as the gross sales price in col- For more information about adjustments toumn (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,basis, see chapter 14.• How to figure capital loss carryovers,whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-
Property held for personal use only,• How to figure your tax using the lower taxvises you, in box 2 of Form 1099–B, that gross
rather than for investment, is a capitalrates on a net capital gain, and proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions
asset and you must report a gain fromand option premiums were reported to the IRS,
CAUTION
!
• An illustrated example of how to complete its sale as a capital gain. However, you cannotenter that net sales price in column (d) of eitherSchedule D. deduct a loss from selling personal use property.line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
If the net amount is entered in column (d), do notIf you sell or otherwise dispose of propertyinclude the commissions and option premiumsShort-term gains and losses.Capital gain orused in a trade or business or for the productionin column (e). loss on the sale or trade of investment propertyof income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain orDispositions of Assets, before completing Form 1099 –S transactions.If you sold or loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theSchedule D. traded reportable real estate, you generallyamount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
should receive from the real estate reportingin parentheses.Useful Items person a Form 1099–S showing the gross pro- You combine your share of short-term capitalYou may want to see: ceeds. gains or losses from partnerships, S corpora-
“Reportable real estate” is defined as anytions, and fiduciaries, and any short-term capitalPublication present or future ownership interest in any of theloss carryover, with your other short-term capital
following: gains and losses to figure your net short-term❏ 537 Installment Sales
capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 1) Improved or unimproved land, including air
Assets Long-term gains and losses.A capital gainspace,
or loss on the sale or trade of property held more❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses 2) Inherently permanent structures, includingthan 1 year is a long-term capital gain or loss.any residential, commercial, or industrialYou report it in Part II of Schedule D. If theForm (and Instructions) building, amount in column (f) is a loss, show it in paren-
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains theses.3) A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
and Losses You also report the following in Part II oftures and common elements, including
Schedule D:land, and❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
4) Stock in a cooperative housing corporation1) Undistributed long-term capital gains from❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income
(as defined in section 216 of the Internala regulated investment company (mutual❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations Revenue Code). fund) or real estate investment trust
(REIT),A “real estate reporting person” could include
the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title or2) Your share of long-term capital gains or
escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-losses from partnerships, S corporations,
ker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringSchedule D and fiduciaries,
the biggest interest in the property.
3) All capital gain distributions from mutualReport capital gains and losses on Schedule D Your Form 1099–S will show the gross pro- funds and REITs not reported directly on(Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades of ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Formstocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re- low the instructions for Schedule D to report1040, andquired to be reported on another form) on line 1 these transactions and include them on line 1 or
of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. 8 as appropriate. 4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Page 116 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The result after combining these items with Decedent ’s capital loss.A capital loss
1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and fileyour other long-term capital gains and losses is sustained by a decedent during his or her last
a separate return), oryour net long-term capital gain or loss ( line 16 of tax year (or carried over to that year from an
Schedule D). earlier year) can be deducted only on the final2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17 of
income tax return filed for the decedent. TheSchedule D.28% rate gain or loss.Enter in column (g)
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply inthe amount, if any, from column (f) that is a 28%You can use your total net loss to reducethis situation. The decedent’s estate cannot de-rate gain or loss. Enter any loss in parentheses.your income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000duct any of the loss or carry it over to followingA 28% rate gain or loss is: limit. years.• Any collectibles gain or loss, or
Joint and separate returns.If you and yourCapital loss carryover.If you have a total net• The part of your gain on qualified small spouse once filed separate returns and are nowloss on line 17 of Schedule D that is more thanbusiness stock that is equal to the section filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you1202 exclusion. tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourcan carry over the unused part to the next yearFor more information, see Capital Gain Tax spouse once filed a joint return and are nowand treat it as if you had incurred it in that nextRates, later. filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoveryear. If part of the loss is still unused, you canfrom the joint return can be deducted only on theCapital gain distributions only.You do carry it over to later years until it is completelyreturn of the person who actually had the loss.not have to file Schedule D if all of the followingused up.
are true. When you figure the amount of any capital
loss carryover to the next year, you must take1) The only amounts you would have to re-
the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-Capital Gain Tax Ratesport on Schedule D are capital gain distri-
count, whether or not you claimed it.butions from box 2a of Form 1099–DIV (or
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain aresubstitute statement). When you carry over a loss, it remains longgenerally lower than the tax rates that apply toterm or short term. A long-term capital loss you2) You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, other income. These lower rates are called thecarry over to the next tax year will reduce that2d, or 2e of any Form 1099–DIV (or sub- maximum capital gain rates.year’s long-term capital gains before it reducesstitute statement).
The term “net capital gain” means thethat year’s short-term capital gains.
3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do, the amount by which your net long-term capital gainFiguring your carryover.The amount ofamount on line 4e of that form is not more for the year is more than your net short-termyour capital loss carryover is the amount of yourthan zero. capital loss.total net loss that is more than the lesser of:If all the above statements are true, report your The maximum capital gain rate can be 8%,
capital gain distributions directly on line 13 of 10%, 20%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 17–1 for1) Your allowable capital loss deduction forForm 1040 and check the box on that line. Also, details.the year, oruse the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form The maximum capital gain rate does not ap-2) Your taxable income increased by your al-1040 instructions to figure your tax. ply if it is higher than your regular tax rate.lowable capital loss deduction for the yearYou can report your capital gain distributions
and your deduction for personal exemp-on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form Example. You have a net capital gain fromtions.1040, if both of the following are true. selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would
If your deductions are more than your grossbe 28%. Because you are single and your taxa-1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or substi-
income for the tax year, use your negative taxa-ble income is $25,000, your regular tax rate istute statements) you received have an
ble income in computing the amount in item (2).amount in box 2b, 2c, 2d, or 2e. 15%. All your taxable income will be taxed at the
15% rate. The 28% rate does not apply.Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work-2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for anysheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040) instruc-other capital gains or any capital losses.tions to determine the part of your capital loss forInvestment interest deducted.If you claim a2001 that you can carry over to 2002.Total net gain or loss.To figure your total net deduction for investment interest, you may have
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital to reduce the amount of your net capital gainExample. Bob and Gloria sold securities ingain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.2001. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofcapital gain or loss ( line 16). Enter the result on Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.line 17, Part III of Schedule D. If your losses are you choose to include in investment incomeTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their jointmore than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. when figuring the limit on your investment inter-2001 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and line 39 of est deduction. This is done on lines 21–23 ofused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain Schedule D. For more information about the limitcan be carried over to 2002.Tax Rates, later. on investment interest, see chapter 3 of Publica-If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirtion 550.capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.Capital Losses
They would have no carryover.
8% rate. Beginning in 2001, the 10% capitalIf your capital losses are more than your capitalUse short-term losses first.When you fig- gain rate is lowered to 8% for “qualified 5-yeargains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.ure your capital loss carryover, use yourgain.”Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,short-term capital losses first, even if you in-enclosed in parentheses. Qualified 5-year gain.This is long-termcurred them after a long-term capital loss. If you
have not reached the limit on the capital loss capital gain from the sale of property that youLimit on deduction. Your allowable capital
deduction after using short-term losses, use theheld for more than 5 years and that would other-loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
long-term losses until you reach the limit.lesser of: wise be subject to the 10% capital gain rate.
Page 114 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 117 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair marketTable 17–1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
value at the time of his death was $2,500, which
became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.THEN your
Because she had inherited the stock, her loss ismaximum capital
a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andIF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ...
her father actually held the stock. She enters the
Collectibles gain 28% loss in column (f) of line 8.
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.Gain on qualified small business stock equal to the section stock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of those1202 exclusion 28% shares in 1990, for $1,000. She had bought 100
more shares in 1992 for $2,200, and an addi-Unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
tional 300 shares in 1995 for $1,500. Her total
Other gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300
27.5% or higher 20% ($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
enters in column (f) of line 8. Because she heldOther gain,1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is all 500 shares for more than 5 years, the entirelower than 15% 8%  or 10% 2
gain is qualified 5-year gain.
In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
1 “Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, orfor $4,100. This was qualified small business
unrecaptured stock that she had bought in September 1996.section 1250 gain. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain2 The rate is 8% only for qualified 5– year gain.
which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because
she held the stock more than 5 years, she has a
$1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She enters that
amount in column (g) as a 28% rate gain andCollectibles gain or loss.This is gain or lossUsing Capital Gain Tax Worksheet.If you claims the exclusion on the line below by enter-from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, have capital gain distributions but do not have toing $1,500 as a loss in column (f).antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- file Schedule D (Form 1040), figure your taxShe received a Form 1099–B (not shown)num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- using the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the from her broker for each of these transactions.erage held more than 1 year. instructions for Form 1040A or Form 1040. For
more information, see Capital gain distributionsCapital loss carryover from 2000.EmilyGain on qualified small business stock.If only, earlier. has a capital loss carryover to 2001 of $800, ofyou realized a gain from qualified small business which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500stock that you held more than 5 years, youNew 18% rate beginning in 2006.Beginning is long-term capital loss. She enters thesegenerally can exclude one-half of your gain from in 2006, the 20% maximum capital gain rate willamounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D.income. The taxable part of your gain equal to be lowered to 18% for qualified 5-year gain fromShe kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-your section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. property with a holding period that begins afterover Worksheet in her 2000 Schedule D instruc-See Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock in 2000. See chapter 4 of Publication 550 for moretions (not shown), so she could properly reportchapter 4 of Publication 550. information. her loss carryover for the 2001 tax year without
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.Generally, refiguring it.
this is any part of your capital gain from selling Tax computation. Because Emily hassection 1250 property (real property) that is due gains on both lines 16 and 17 of Schedule D andComprehensiveto depreciation (but not more than your net sec- has taxable income, she goes to Part IV oftion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the Schedule D to figure her tax. But because lineExample28% group. Use the worksheet in the Schedule 15 of Schedule D is more than zero (due to herD instructions to figure your unrecaptured sec- section 1202 gain from selling qualified smallEmily Jones is single and, in addition to wagestion 1250 gain. For more information about sec- business stock), she must use the Schedule Dfrom her job, she has income from stocks andtion 1250 property and section 1231 gain, see Tax Worksheet to figure her tax instead. Sheother securities. For the 2001 tax year, she hadchapter 3 of Publication 544. must also complete the Qualified 5-Year Gainthe following capital gains and losses, which sheUsing Schedule D. You apply these rules by Worksheet (not shown) in her Schedule D in-reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 sheusing Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040) to structions.received showed net sales prices. Her filled-infigure your tax. Use Part IV if both of the follow- After entering the gain from line 17 on line 13Schedule D is shown in this chapter.ing are true. of her Form 1040, she completes the rest of
Capital gains and losses —  Schedule D. Form 1040 through line 39. She enters the1) You have a net capital gain. You have aEmily sold stock in two different companies thatamount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of thenet capital gain if both lines 16 and 17 ofshe held for less than a year. In June, she soldSchedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theSchedule D are gains. ( Line 16 is your net100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadworksheet and the rest of that worksheet, shelong-term capital gain or loss. Line 17 isbought in February. She had an adjusted basisfigures her tax is $4,235. This is less than theyour net long-term capital gain or lossof $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for a$4,876 tax she would have figured without thecombined with any net short-term capitalgain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares ofcapital gain tax rates.gain or loss.) Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.
Reconciliation of Forms 1099 –B. EmilyShe had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,5002) Your taxable income on Form 1040, line makes sure that the total of the amounts re-and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She39, is more than zero. ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched-reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in
ule D is not less than the total of the amountsIf you have any collectibles gain, gain onPart I of Schedule D.
shown on the Forms 1099–B she received fromqualified small business stock, or unrecapturedEmily had three other stock sales that she
her broker. For 2001, the total of each issection 1250 gain, you may have to use thereports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
$23,100.Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60
instructions to figure your tax. See the directionsshares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited
below line 19 of Schedule D.
See the Comprehensive Example, later, for
an example of how to figure your tax on Sched-
ule D using the capital gain rates.
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

Page 118 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
Car Co.
60 sh
INHERITED 2-3-01 2,100
20,200
2,500
500
Trucking Co.
100 sh
2-12-01 6-12-01 900 650
Computer Co.
25 sh
6-29-01 7-30-01 2,000 2,500
2,900
300
Furniture Co.
500 sh
VARIOUS 6-27-01 14,000 4,700 9,300
9,900
250
500()
550()
400()
Toy Co.
20 sh
9-20-96 12-15-01 4,100 1,100 3,000 1,500
1,000
500
Section 1202
exclusion 1,500()
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses” (as defined on page D-6 of the instructions) and up to 50% of
the eligible gain on qualified small business stock (see page D-4 of the instructions).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses— Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 1 and 2 in column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
2000 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f).
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses— Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add lines 8 and 9 in column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1 of the instructions
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 2000 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (g)
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f)
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
16
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)
()
2001
*
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-5 of the
instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-5 of
the instructions)
Page 116 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 119 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4,235
-0-
-0-
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001
Taxable Gain or Deductible Loss
Combine lines 7 and 16 and enter the result. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on
Form 1040, line 13, and complete Form 1040 through line 39
17
17
()18
Part III
Page 2
18
Next:
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of (a) that loss or
(b) ($3,000) (or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)). Then complete Form 1040 through line 37
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain,
if any, from line 17 of the worksheet on
page D-7 of the instructions
22
23
24
25
Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
30
31
34
35
36 Subtract line 35 from line 34
23
24
25
26
27
28
31
30
21
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39 20
● If both lines 16 and 17 are gains and Form 1040, line 39, is more than zero, complete
Part IV below.
Subtract line 23 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the amount from line 24
Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- and go to line 34
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Multiply line 30 by 8% (.08)
Enter the smaller of line 20 or line 23
Enter the amount from line 28 (if line 28 is blank, enter -0-)
19
33
34
35
36
37
● The amount on line 20 or
● $45,200 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$27,050 if single;
$36,250 if head of household; or
$22,600 if married filing separately
37 Multiply line 36 by 20% (.20)
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2001
● Otherwise, skip the rest of Schedule D and complete Form 1040.
Next: ● If the loss on line 17 is more than the loss on line 18 or if Form 1040, line 37, is less
than zero, skip Part IV below and complete the Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
on page D-6 of the instructions before completing the rest of Form 1040.
● Otherwise, skip Part IV below and complete the rest of Form 1040.
19
If line 15 or line 19 is more than zero, complete the worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions to figure the amount to enter on lines
22, 29, and 40 below, and skip all other lines below. Otherwise,
go to line 20.
22
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of
Schedule D
If you are deducting investment interest
expense on Form 4952, enter the amount
from Form 4952, line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-
21
Figure the tax on the amount on line 24. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
/H20854
If line 26 is greater than line 24, go to line 27. Otherwise, skip lines
27 through 33 and go to line 34.
29
29
Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any, from
line 7 of the worksheet on page D-8
32 Subtract line 30 from line 28 32
33 Multiply line 32 by 10% (.10)
38
39
40
Add lines 25, 31, 33, and 37
Figure the tax on the amount on line 20. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 38 or line 39 here
and on Form 1040, line 40
38
39
40
If the amounts on lines 23 and 28 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
9,300
9,350
Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 117

Page 120 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet— Line 40 Keep for Y our Records
Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4.
1.
11.
4.
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39
● The amount on line 1 or
● $45,200 if married filing jointly or
qualifying widow(er);
$27,050 if single;
$36,250 if head of household; or
$22,600 if married filing separately
/H20854
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D2. 2.
3. If you are claiming investment interest expense on Form 4952,
enter the amount from line 4e. Otherwise, enter -0-. Also enter
this amount on Schedule D, line 22 3.
Combine lines 7 and 15 of Schedule D. If zero or less, enter -0-5. 5.
6. Enter the smaller of line 5 above or Schedule D, line 15, but
not less than zero 6.
Add lines 6 and 78. 8.
7. Enter the amount from Schedule D, line 19 7.
9.9. Subtract line 8 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0-
10.10. Subtract line 9 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
12. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 12.
11.
13. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-13.
Enter the larger of line 12 or line 13 /H1707514. 14.
19.19. Multiply line 18 by 8% (.08)
If lines 11 and 12 are the same, skip lines 16 through 21 and go to line 22. Otherwise, go to line 16.
Subtract line 12 from line 11 /H1707516. 16.
17. Enter your qualified 5-year gain, if any , from the worksheet on
page D-8. Also enter this amount on Schedule D, line 2917.
Enter the smaller of line 16 above or line 17 above18. 18.
21.21. Multiply line 20 by 10% (.10)
Subtract line 18 from line 1620. 20.
Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 922. 22.
23. Enter the amount from line 16. If blank, enter -0- 23.
Subtract line 23 from line 22 /H1707524. 24.
25.25. Multiply line 24 by 20% (.20)
If line 7 is zero, skip lines 26 through 31 and go to line 32. Otherwise, go to line 26.
26. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 7 26.
27. Add lines 4 and 14 27.
28. Enter the amount from line 1 above 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 27. If zero or less, enter -0-29.
Subtract line 29 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- /H1707530. 30.
31.31. Multiply line 30 by 25% (.25)
If line 6 is zero, skip lines 32 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 32.
Add lines 14, 16, 24, and 3032. 32.
Subtract line 32 from line 133. 33.
34.34. Multiply line 33 by 28% (.28)
35.35. Add lines 15, 19, 21, 25, 31, and 34
36.36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
37.
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36. Also enter
this amount on Schedule D, line 40, and Form 1040, line 40
15. Figure the tax on the amount on line 14. Use the T ax T able or T ax Rate Schedules, whichever applies/H1707515.
Complete this worksheet only if line 15 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete Part IV of
Schedule D to figure your tax. Exception: Do not use Schedule D, Part IV , or this worksheet to figure your tax if line 16 or
line 17 of Schedule D or Form 1040, line 39, is zero or less; instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 40.
If lines 1 and 11 are the same, skip lines 22 through 34 and go to line 35. Otherwise, go to line 22.
30,000
9,350
-0-
9,350
450
450
-0-
450
8,900
21,100
27,050
21,100
20,650
21,100
3,169
5,950
9,300
5,950
476
8,900
5,950
2,950
590
30,000
-0-
-0-
4,235
4,876
4,235
-0-
-0-
Page 118 Chapter 17 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 121 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss three of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to
you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) —  chapter 18,
• Moving expenses you pay —  chapter 19, and
• Alimony you pay —  chapter 20.
Other adjustments to income are discussed in other parts of this publication
or in other publications and instructions. They are deductions for:
• Interest paid on student loans —  instructions for Form 1040, line 24, or
Form 1040A, line 17,
• Contributions to an Archer MSA—  chapter 23,
• Self-employment tax —  chapter 24,
• Self-employed health insurance —  chapter 23,
• Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans —  Publi-
cation 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business, 
• Penalty on early withdrawal of savings —  chapter 8,
• Amortization of the costs of reforestation —  chapter 9 of Publication 535,
Business Expenses,
• Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18) pension plans
—  Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income,
• Expenses from the rental of personal property —  chapter 13,
• Expenses of fee-basis officials or certain performing artists —  chapter 28,
• Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits
(sub-pay) —  chapter 13, 
• Foreign housing deduction —  chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for
U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens Abroad,
• Jury duty pay given to your employer —  chapter 13,
• Part of the cost of qualified clean-fuel vehicle property —  chapter 12 of
Publication 535, Business Expenses, and
• Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section
403(b) plans—  Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Page 119

Page 122 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• $3,000 (up from $2,000). Rollovers of deferred compensation plans of
state and local governments (section 457
If you are 50 years of age or older in 2002, theplans) into traditional IRAs.Before 2002,
18. most that can be contributed to your traditionalyou could not roll over, tax free, an eligible rol-
IRA for 2002 is the smaller of the followinglover distribution from a governmental deferred
amounts: compensation plan into a traditional IRA.
Beginning with distributions after December• Your compensation that you must includeIndividual 31, 2001, if you participate in an eligible deferredin income for the year, or compensation plan of a state or local govern-
• $3,500 (up from $2,000). ment, you may be able to roll over part of yourRetirement account tax free into an eligible retirement plan
For more information, see How Much Can Be such as a traditional IRA. The most that you can
Contributed? under Traditional IRAs. roll over is the amount that would be taxed if theArrangements
Besides being able to contribute a largerrollover were not an eligible rollover distribution.
amount in 2002, you may be able to deduct aYou cannot roll over any part of the distribution
(IRAs) larger amount. See How Much Can I Deduct? that would not be taxable. The rollover may be
under Traditional IRAs. either direct or indirect.
For more information, see Publication 553,Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri-Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.Important Changes for butions increased.For 2002, if you are cov-
ered by a retirement plan at work, your Rollovers of traditional IRAs into deferred
2001 deduction for contributions to a traditional IRAcompensation plans of state and local gov-
will be reduced (phased out) if your modifiedernments (section 457 plans).Before 2002,
adjusted gross income (AGI) is between: you could not roll over tax free a distribution fromCoverdell education savings accounts (for-
a traditional IRA into a governmental deferredmerly education IRAs).Education IRAs have • $54,000 and $64,000 for a married couplecompensation plan.been renamed Coverdell education savings ac-or a qualifying widow(er) filing a joint re-Beginning with distributions after Decembercounts. Coverdell education savings accountsturn, 31, 2001, if you participate in an eligible deferredare no longer covered in this chapter. They are
• $34,000 and $44,000 for a single individ-compensation plan of a state or local govern-now covered in Publication 970, Tax Benefits for
ual or head of household, or ment, you may be able to roll over a distributionHigher Education.
from your traditional IRA into a deferred com-• $–0– and $10,000 for a married individ-Modified AGI limit for traditional IRAs.For pensation plan of a state or local government.ual filing a separate return.2001, if you are covered by a retirement plan at Qualified plans may, but are not required to,
work, your deduction for contributions to a tradi-For all filing statuses other than married filing aaccept such rollovers.
tional IRA will be reduced (phased out) if yourseparate return, the upper and lower limits of theFor more information, see Publication 553,
modified adjusted gross income (AGI) is be-phaseout range increased by $1,000. See How Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.
tween: Much Can I Deduct? under Traditional IRAs.
Rollovers of traditional IRAs into tax-shel-• $53,000 and $63,000 for a married coupleCredit for IRA contributions.For tax years tered annuities (section 403(b) plans).filing a joint return or a qualifyingbeginning after December 31, 2001, if you areBefore 2002, you could not roll over tax free awidow(er), an eligible individual, you may be able to claim adistribution from a traditional IRA into a tax-shel-
credit for a percentage of your qualified retire-tered annuity.• $33,000 and $43,000 for a single individ-ment savings contributions, such as contribu-Beginning with distributions after Decemberual or head of household, or tions to your traditional or Roth IRA. To be31, 2001, you may be able to roll over distribu-• $–0– and $10,000 for a married individ-eligible, you must be at least 18 years old as oftions tax free from a traditional IRA into aual filing a separate return. the end of the year, and you cannot be a studenttax-sheltered annuity. You cannot roll over any
or an individual for whom someone else claims aamount that would not have been taxable.For all filing statuses other than married filing apersonal exemption. Also, your adjusted grossAlthough a tax-sheltered annuity is allowedseparate return, the upper and lower limits of theincome (AGI) must be below a certain amount.to accept such a rollover, it is not required to dophaseout range increased by $1,000. For more
For more information, see Publication 553,so.information, see How Much Can I Deduct?
Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.under Traditional IRAs. For more information, see Publication 553,
Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.Rollovers from traditional IRAs into qualifiedSimplified rules for minimum required distri-
plans. For distributions after December 31,butions. New rules which became effective in Participants born before 1936.If you were
2001, you can roll over, tax free, a distribution2001 simplify how minimum required distribu- born before 1936, you may be able to use capital
from your IRA into a qualified plan. The part oftions are figured. For most people, the new sim- gain and averaging treatment on certain
the distribution that you can roll over is the partplified rules result in lower minimum required lump-sum distributions from qualified plans, but
that would otherwise be taxable (includible indistributions. For more information, see When you will lose the opportunity to use capital gain
your income). Qualified plans may, but are notMust I Withdraw IRA Assets? (Required Distri- or averaging treatment on distributions from a
required to, accept such rollovers. Rules appli-butions) in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ- qualified plan if you roll over IRA contributions to
cable to other rollovers, such as the 60-day timeual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs). that plan. You can retain such treatment if the
limit, apply. For more information, see Rollovers rollover is from a conduit IRA. For more informa-
under Traditional IRAs. tion on conduit IRAs, see IRA as a holding ac-
count (conduit IRA) for rollovers to other eligibleRollovers of distributions from employer plans in chapter 1 of Publication 590.plans. For distributions after December 31,Important Changes for
2001, you can rollover both the taxable andNo rollovers of hardship distributions into
nontaxable part of a distribution from a qualified2002 IRAs. For distributions made after December
plan into a traditional IRA. If you have both31, 2001, no hardship distribution can be rolled
deductible and nondeductible contributions inover into an IRA. For more information aboutIncreased traditional IRA contribution andyour IRA, you will have to keep track of yourwhat can be rolled over, see Rollover Fromdeduction limit.The most that can be contrib-basis so you will be able to determine the taxa-Employer’s Plan Into an IRA under Traditionaluted to your traditional IRA for 2002 is theble amount once distributions from the IRA be-IRAs.smaller of the following amounts: gin.
• Your compensation that you must include For more information, see Publication 553,Hardship exception to the 60-day rollover
in income for the year, or Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes. rule. Generally, a rollover is tax free only if you
Page 120 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 123 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
make the rollover contribution by the 60th day has little or no compensation. See Spousal IRA
after the day you receive the distribution. Begin-limit under How Much Can Be Contributed? and Traditional IRAsning with distributions after December 31, 2001,under Can I contribute to a Roth IRA for my
the IRS may waive the 60-day requirement spouse? under  Roth IRAs, later. In this chapter the original IRA (sometimeswhere it would be against equity or good con- called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred toEmployer contributions under a SEPscience not to do so. as a “traditional IRA.” Two advantages of a tradi-plan are not counted when figuring theFor more information, see Time Limit for tional IRA are:limits just discussed. SEP plans areCAUTION
!
Making a Rollover Contribution under Tradi- discussed in chapter 3 of Publication 590.tional IRAs. 1) You may be able to deduct some or all of
your contributions to it, depending on yourSpouse covered by employer plan. If youIncreased Roth IRA contribution limit.If circumstances, and,are not covered by an employer retirement plancontributions on your behalf are made only to
and you file a joint return, you may be able to2) Generally, amounts in your IRA, includingRoth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2002 gen-
deduct all of your contributions to a traditionalearnings and gains, are not taxed untilerally is the lesser of:
they are distributed.IRA, even if your spouse is covered by a plan.
• $3,000 (up from $2,000), or See How Much Can I Deduct? under Traditional
IRAs.• Your taxable compensation.
What Is a Traditional IRA?
Distributions for higher education expenses.If you are 50 years of age or older in 2002 and A traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRAYou can take distributions from your traditionalcontributions on your behalf are made only to or a SIMPLE IRA.IRA or Roth IRA for qualified higher educationRoth IRAs, your contribution limit for 2002 gen-
expenses without having to pay the 10% addi-erally is the lesser of:
tional tax on early distributions. For more infor-Who Can Set Up• $3,500 (up from $2,000), or mation, see Publication 590.
a Traditional IRA?• Your taxable compensation. Distributions for first home.You can take
You can set up and make contributions to adistributions of up to $10,000 from your tradi-However, if your modified AGI is above a traditional IRA if:tional or Roth IRA to buy, build, or rebuild a firstcertain amount, your contribution limit may behome without having to pay the 10% additionalreduced. For more information, see How Much 1) You (or, if you file a joint return, yourtax on early distributions. For more information,Can Be Contributed? under Roth IRAs. spouse) received taxable compensationsee Publication 590. during the year, andContributions to both traditional and RothRoth IRA. You cannot claim a deduction for2) You were not age 701/2 by the end of theIRAs for same year.If contributions are madeany contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if youyear.on your behalf to both a Roth IRA and a tradi-satisfy the requirements, all earnings are taxtional IRA, your contribution limit for 2002 is thefree and neither your nondeductible contribu-lesser of: What is compensation? Compensation in-tions nor any earnings on them are taxable when
cludes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,you withdraw them. See Roth IRAs, later.• $3,000 ($3,500 if you are 50 years of age
bonuses, and other amounts you receive foror older in 2002) (up from $2,000) minus
providing personal services. The IRS treats asall contributions (other than employer con-
compensation any amount properly shown intributions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA
box 1 (Wages, tips, other compensation) ofplan) for the year to all IRAs other thanIntroduction Form W –2, Wage and Tax Statement, providedRoth IRAs, or
that amount is reduced by any amount properlyAn individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is a• Your taxable compensation minus all con- shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). Scholar-personal savings plan that offers you tax advan-tributions (other than employer contribu- ship and fellowship payments are compensationtages to set aside money for your retirement.tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for this purpose only if shown in box 1 of FormThis chapter discusses:for the year to all IRAs other than Roth W –2. Compensation also includes commis-
IRAs. sions and taxable alimony and separate mainte-1) The rules for a traditional IRA (those that nance payments.However, if your modified AGI is above a certainare not Roth or SIMPLE IRAs), and
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced. Self-employment income. If you are2) The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-For more information, see How Much Can Be self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner),ible contributions and tax-free distributions.Contributed? under Roth IRAs. compensation is the net earnings from your
Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) andtrade or business (provided your personal ser-
Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employeesvices are a material income-producing factor)
(SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. Forreduced by the total of:
more information on these plans and employ-Important Reminders 1) The deduction for contributions made onees’ SEP-IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part
your behalf to retirement plans, andof these plans, see Publication 590.IRA interest.Although interest earned from
2) The deduction allowed for one-half of youryour IRA is generally not taxed in the year
Useful Items self-employment taxes.earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do not
You may want to see:report this interest on your tax return as tax-ex- Compensation includes earnings from
empt interest. self-employment even if they are not subject toPublication self-employment tax because of your religiousForm 8606. If you make nondeductible contri- beliefs. See Publication 533, Self-Employment❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementsbutions to a traditional IRA and you do not file Tax, for more information.(IRAs)Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs and Coverdell
ESAs, with your tax return, you may have to pay What is not compensation? CompensationForm (and Instructions)a $50 penalty. does not include any of the following items.❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified PlansSpousal IRAs. In the case of a married couple (including IRAs) and Other • Earnings and profits from property, suchfiling a joint return, up to $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000Tax-Favored Accounts as rental income, interest income, and div-for 2002 or $3,500 for 2002 if 50 or older) can be idend income.❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs and Coverdellcontributed to IRAs (other than SIMPLE IRAs)
ESAson behalf of each spouse, even if one spouse • Pension or annuity income.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 121

Page 124 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Deferred compensation received (com- Example 2. John, a college student working• The contributions to your traditional IRApensation payments postponed from a part time, earned $1,500 in 2001. His IRA contri-for the year, orpast year). butions for 2001 are limited to $1,500, the
amount of his compensation. • The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit,• Income from a partnership for which you if it applies).do not provide services that are a materialSpousal IRA limit.If you file a joint return and
income-producing factor. However, if you or your spouse was covered byyour taxable compensation is less than that of
your spouse, the most that can be contributed an employer retirement plan, you may not be• Any amounts you exclude from income, for the year to your IRA is the smaller of theable to deduct this amount. See Limit if Coveredsuch as foreign earned income and hous-following amounts: by Employer Plan, later.ing costs.
1) $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or Trustees’ fees. Trustees’ administrative fees$3,500 for 2002 if you are 50 or older), orthat are billed separately and paid in connectionWhen and How Can a
with your traditional IRA are not deductible as2) The total compensation includible in theTraditional IRA Be Set Up? IRA contributions. However, they may be de-gross income of both you and your spouse
ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deductionfor the year, reduced by the following twoYou can set up a traditional IRA at any time. on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30.amounts.However, the time for making contributions for
any year is limited. See When Can Contributions a) Your spouse’s contribution for the yearBrokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis-Be Made, later. to a traditional IRA. sions are part of your IRA contribution and, asYou can set up different kinds of IRAs with a
such, are deductible subject to the limits.b) Any contribution for the year to a Rothvariety of organizations. You can set up an IRA
IRA on behalf of your spouse.at a bank or other financial institution or with a
Full deduction.If neither you nor your spousemutual fund or life insurance company. You can
This means that the total combined contribu-was covered for any part of the year by analso set up an IRA through your stockbroker.
tions that can be made for the year to your IRAemployer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re-
and your spouse’s IRA can be as much as tion for total contributions to one or more tradi-quirements.
$4,000 for 2001 ($6,000 for 2002, or $6,500 fortional IRAs of up to the lesser of:Kinds of traditional IRAs.Your traditional2002 if only one of you is 50 or older, or $7,000
IRA can be an individual retirement account orfor 2002 if both of you are 50 or older). 1) $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or
annuity. It can be part of either a simplified $3,500 for 2002 if you are 50 or older), or
employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em-When Can Contributions 2) 100% of your compensation.ployee association trust account.
Be Made? This limit is reduced by any contributions made
to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.How Much Can Be As soon as you set up your traditional IRA,
Spousal IRA. In the case of a marriedContributed? contributions can be made to it through your
couple with unequal compensation who file achosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator).
There are limits and other rules that affect the joint return, the deduction for contributions to theContributions to a traditional IRA must be in the
amount that can be contributed and the amount traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-form of money (cash, check, or money order).
you can deduct. These limits and other rules are sation is limited to the lesser of:Property cannot be contributed.
explained below.
Contributions must be made by due date. 1) $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 orCommunity property laws. Except as dis- Contributions can be made to your traditional$3,500 for 2002 if 50 or older), orcussed later under Spousal IRA limit, each IRA for a year at any time during the year or by
2) The total compensation includible in thespouse figures his or her limit separately, usingthe due date for filing your return for that year,
gross income of both spouses for the yearhis or her own compensation. This is the rulenot including extensions. For most people, this
reduced by the following two amounts.even in states with community property laws.means that contributions for 2001 must be made
by April 15, 2002.Brokers’ commissions. Brokers’ commis- a) The IRA deduction for the year of the
sions paid in connection with your traditional IRAAge 701/2 rule.Contributions cannot be made spouse with the greater compensation.
are subject to the contribution limit. to your traditional IRA for the year in which youb) Any contributions for the year to a Rothreach age 701/2 or for any later year.Trustees’ fees. Trustees’ administrative fees IRA on behalf of the spouse with more
are not subject to the contribution limit. compensation.Designating year for which contribution is
made. If an amount is contributed to yourContributions to your traditional IRAs This limit is reduced by any contributions to atraditional IRA between January 1 and April 15,reduce the limit for contributions toyou should tell the sponsor to which year (the 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse withRoth IRAs. (See Roth IRAs, later.)CAUTION
!
current year or the previous year) the contribu-less compensation.
tion is for. If you do not tell the sponsor which
General limit.The most that can be contrib-year it is for, the sponsor can assume, andNote. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
uted to your traditional IRA is the smaller of the report to the IRS, that the contribution is for therated (and did not remarry) before the end of the
following amounts: current year (the year the sponsor received it).year, you cannot deduct any contributions to
your spouse’s IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-1) Your compensation (defined earlier) thatFiling before a contribution is made.You ration, you can deduct only contributions to youryou must include in income for the year, orcan file your return claiming a traditional IRAown IRA and your deductions are subject to thecontribution before the contribution is actually2) $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or rules for single individuals.made. However, the contribution must be made$3,500 for 2002 if you are 50 or older).by the due date of your return, not including
Covered by an employer retirement plan.IfThis is the most that can be contributed regard-extensions.
you or your spouse was covered by an employerless of whether the contributions are to one orContributions not required.You do not have retirement plan at any time during the year formore traditional IRAs or whether all or part of theto contribute to your traditional IRA for every taxwhich contributions were made, your deductioncontributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde- year, even if you can. may be further limited. This is discussed laterductible Contributions, later.)
under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limits
on the amount you can deduct do not affect theExample 1. Betty, who is single, earnedHow Much Can I Deduct?
amount that can be contributed. See Nonde-$24,000 in 2001. Her IRA contributions for 2001
ductible Contributions, later.are limited to $2,000. Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:
Page 122 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 18–1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if Covered by Retirement Plan at Work
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing AND  your modified adjusted gross incomeTHEN  you can take ...
status is ... (modified AGI) is ...
Less than $33,000 A full deduction
At least $33,000Single or A partial deductionbut less than $43,000Head of Household
$43,000 or more No deduction
Less than $53,000 A full deduction
At least $53,000Married Filing Jointly or A partial deductionbut less than $63,000Qualifying Widow(er)
$63,000 or more No deduction
Less than $10,000 A partial deduction
Married Filing Separately2
$10,000 or more No deduction
1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income.
2 If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose (therefore, your IRA
deduction is determined under the “Single” column).
• Did not make a required contribution, orVolunteer firefighters.If the only reason youAre You Covered by an Employer
participate in a plan is because you are a volun-Plan? • Did not perform the minimum service re-teer firefighter, you may not be covered by thequired to accrue a benefit for the year.plan. You are not covered by the plan if both ofThe Form W–2 you receive from your employer
the following conditions are met.has a box used to indicate whether you wereA defined benefit plan is any plan that is not acovered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box defined contribution plan. Types of defined ben-1) The plan you participate in is establishedshould be checked if you were covered. efit plans include pension plans and annuityfor its employees by:Reservists and volunteer firefighters shouldplans.also see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov- a) The United States,ered, later. No vested interest.If you accrue a benefit for
If you are not certain whether you were cov-a plan year, you are covered by that plan even ifb) A state or political subdivision of a
ered by your employer’s retirement plan, youyou have no vested interest in (legal right to) thestate, or
should ask your employer. account or the accrual. c) An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)
Federal judges.For purposes of the IRA de- above.
duction, federal judges are covered by an em-Situations in Which You Are Notployer retirement plan. 2) Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-Covered ginning of the year will not provide more
than $1,800 per year at retirement.Unless you are covered under another employerFor Which Year(s) Are You plan, you are not covered by an employer plan ifCovered? you are in one of the situations described below.
Limit if Covered by Employer PlanSpecial rules apply to determine the tax yearsSocial security or railroad retirement.Cov-
for which you are covered by an employer plan.erage under social security or railroad retire-If either you or your spouse was covered by anThese rules differ depending on whether thement is not coverage under an employer employer retirement plan, you may be entitled toplan is a defined contribution plan or a definedretirement plan. only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-benefit plan. tion at all, depending on your income and yourBenefits from a previous employer’s plan.Tax year. Your tax year is the annual account- filing status.If you receive retirement benefits from a previ-ing period you use to keep records and report Your deduction begins to decrease (phaseous employer’s plan, you are not covered by thatincome and expenses on your income tax re- out) when your income rises above a certainplan.turn. For most people, the tax year is the calen- amount and is eliminated altogether when itdar year. Reservists. If the only reason you participatereaches a higher amount. These amounts vary
in a plan is because you are a member of adepending on your filing status.Defined contribution plan.Generally, you reserve unit of the armed forces, you may not beare covered by a defined contribution plan for a To determine if your deduction is subject tocovered by the plan. You are not covered by thetax year if amounts are contributed or allocated phaseout, you must determine your modifiedplan if both of the following conditions are met.to your account for the plan year that ends with adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
or within that tax year. tus. Then use Table 18–1 or 18–2 to determine1) The plan you participate in is established
A defined contribution plan is a plan that if the phaseout applies.for its employees by:
provides for a separate account for each person
covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu-a) The United States, Social security recipients.Instead of using
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo- Table 18–1 or 18–2, use the worksheets inb) A state or political subdivision of anus plans, and money purchase pension plans. Appendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, allstate, or
of the following apply.Defined benefit plan.If you are eligible to c) An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)participate in your employer’s defined benefit • You received social security benefits.above.plan for the plan year that ends within your tax
• You received taxable compensation.year, you are covered by the plan. This rule2) You did not serve more than 90 days onapplies even if you: • Contributions were made to your tradi-active duty during the year (not counting
• Declined to participate in the plan, duty for training). tional IRA.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 123

Page 126 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 18–2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if NOT Covered by Retirement Plan at Work
If you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing AND  your modified adjusted gross income (modifiedTHEN  you can take ...
status is ... AGI) is ...
Single,
Head of Household, or Any amount A full deduction
Qualifying Widow(er)
Married Filing Jointly or Separately with a spouse Any amount A full deductionwho is not covered by a plan at work
Less than $150,000 A full deduction
At least $150,000Married Filing Jointly with a spouse who is covered A partial deductionbut less than $160,000by a plan at work
$160,000 or more No deduction
Less than $10,000 A partial deductionMarried Filing Separately with a spouse who is
covered by a plan at work2
$10,000 or more No deduction
1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income.
2 You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year.
• You or your spouse was covered by an Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).How curred, any IRA distributions you received in
you figure your modified AGI depends on 2001 may be partly tax free and partly taxable.employer retirement plan.
whether you are filing Form 1040 or FormUse those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc- 1) You received distributions in 2001 from1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA fortion, your nondeductible contribution, and the one or more traditional IRAs.2001 and received a distribution from your IRAtaxable portion, if any, of your social securityin 2001, see Publication 590. 2) You made contributions to a traditional IRAbenefits.
for 2001.Do not assume that your modified AGI
is the same as your compensation.Deduction phaseout. If you were covered by 3) Some of those contributions may be non-Your modified AGI may include incomean employer retirement plan, your IRA deduc-
CAUTION
!
deductible contributions depending onin addition to your compensation (discussedtion may be reduced or eliminated depending on whether your IRA deduction for 2001 isearlier), such as interest, dividends, and incomeyour filing status and modified AGI as shown in reduced.from IRA distributions.Table 18–1. If all three of the above occurred, you must
For 2002, if you are covered by a retire- figure the taxable part of the traditional IRA dis-Form 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure
ment plan at work, your IRA deduction tribution before you can figure your modifiedthe amount on page 1 “adjusted gross income”
will not be reduced (phased out) unless AGI. To do this, you can use Worksheet 1–1,line without taking into account any of the follow-
TIP
your modified AGI is between: ing amounts. Figuring the Taxable Part of Your IRA Distribu-
tion in Publication 590.• $34,000 and $44,000 for a single individ-• IRA deduction. If at least one of the above did not occur,ual (or head of household),
• Student loan interest deduction. figure your modified AGI using Worksheet 18–1
• $54,000 and $64,000 for a married couple in this chapter.• Foreign earned income exclusion.(or a qualifying widow(er)) filing a joint re-
turn, or • Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.How to figure your reduced IRA deduction.
You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for• $–0– (no increase) and $10,000 for a • Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
either Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using themarried individual filing a separate return.est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In-
worksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.terest From Series EE and I U.S. SavingsFor all filing statuses other than married filing a Also, the instructions for Form 1040 and FormBonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers Withseparate return, the upper and lower limits of the 1040A include similar worksheets that you mayQualified Higher Education Expenses).phaseout range will increase by $1,000. be able to use instead.
• Exclusion of employer-paid adoption ex-
If your spouse is covered.If you are not penses shown on Form 8839, Qualified
covered by an employer retirement plan, but Adoption Expenses. Reporting Deductible
your spouse is, and you did not receive any ContributionsThis is your modified AGI.social security benefits, your IRA deduction is
Form 1040A. If you file Form 1040A,reduced or eliminated entirely depending on If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction
refigure the amount on page 1 “adjusted grossyour filing status and modified AGI as shown in on line 23 of that form. If you file Form 1040A,
income” line without taking into account any ofTable 18–2. enter your IRA deduction on line 16. You cannot
the following amounts. deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ.
Filing status.Your filing status depends pri-• IRA deduction.
marily on your marital status. For this purpose, Nondeductible• Student loan interest deduction.you need to know if your filing status is single or
Contributionshead of household, married filing jointly or quali-• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter-
fying widow(er), or married filing separately. Ifest shown on Form 8815. Although your deduction for IRA contributionsyou need more information on filing status, see may be reduced or eliminated, contributions can• Exclusion of employer-paid adoption ex-chapter 2. be made to your IRA up to the general limitpenses shown on Form 8839.
Lived apart from spouse.If you did not live ($2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or $3,500 forThis is your modified AGI.with your spouse at any time during the year and 2002 if 50 or older) or 100% of compensation,
you file a separate return, your filing status, for whichever is less) or the spousal IRA limit (if itBoth contributions for 2001 and distribu-
applies). The difference between your total per-this purpose, is single. tions in 2001.If all three of the following oc-
Page 124 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 127 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 18–1. Figuring Your Modified AGI
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for traditional IRA purposes.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) shown on line 19, Form 1040A, or line 33, Form 1040 figured
without taking into account line 16, Form 1040A, or line 23, Form 1040........................ 1.
2. Enter any Student loan interest deduction from line 17, Form 1040A, or line 24, Form 1040.......... 2.
3. Enter any Foreign earned income exclusion from line 18, Form 2555–EZ, or line 40, Form 2555....... 3.
4. Enter any Foreign housing exclusion from line 34, Form 2555, or Foreign housing deduction from line 48,
Form 2555 ................................................................ 4.
5. Enter any Excluded qualified savings bond interest shown on line 3, Schedule 1, Form 1040A, or line 3,
Schedule B, Form 1040 (from line 14, Form 8815)...................................... 5.
6. Enter any Exclusion of employer-paid adoption expenses shown on line 26, Form 8839............. 6.
7. Add lines 1 through 6. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes................... 7.
mitted contributions and your IRA deduction, if later under Rollover From One IRA Into Another.Inherited IRAsany, is your nondeductible contribution. For information about direct transfers to IRAs
from retirement plans other than IRAs, see Pub-If you inherit a traditional IRA, that IRA becomesExample. Martin Jones is single. In 2001, lication 590.subject to special rules.he was covered by a retirement plan at work. HisIf you inherit a traditional IRA from your de-salary was $52,312. His modified AGI was ceased spouse, you can choose to treat it as$55,000. Martin made a $2,000 IRA contribution Rolloversyour own by making contributions (including rol-for 2001. Because he was covered by a retire-lover contributions) to it. Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution toment plan and his modified AGI was over If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyoneyou of cash or other assets from one retirement$43,000, he cannot deduct his $2,000 IRA con-other than your deceased spouse, you cannotplan that you contribute (roll over) to anothertribution. However, he can choose to designatetreat the inherited IRA as your own. This meansretirement plan. The contribution to the secondthis contribution as a nondeductible contribu-that contributions (including rollover contribu-retirement plan is called a “rollover contribution.”tion, as explained next. tions) cannot be made to the IRA and you can-
not roll over any amounts out of the inheritedNote. The amount you roll over tax free isForm 8606. To designate contributions asIRA. generally taxable when the new plan distributesnondeductible, you must file Form 8606.
If you inherit a traditional IRA from your de-that amount to you or your beneficiary.You do not have to designate a contributionceased spouse, you can generally roll it over intoas nondeductible until you file your tax return. Kinds of rollovers to an IRA.There are twoanother traditional IRA established for you orWhen you file, you can even designate other- kinds of rollover contributions to a traditionalyou can choose to treat the inherited IRA as yourwise deductible contributions as nondeductible. IRA.own.You must file Form 8606 to report nonde- For more information, see the discussion ofductible contributions even if you do not have to 1) You put amounts you receive from oneinherited IRAs under Rollover From One IRAfile a tax return for the year. traditional IRA into the same or anotherInto Another, later. traditional IRA.Failure to report nondeductible contribu-
tions. If you do not report nondeductible con- 2) You put amounts you receive from anCan I Move Retirementtributions, all of the contributions to your employer’s qualified retirement plan for its
traditional IRA will be treated as deductible. AllPlan Assets? employees into a traditional IRA.
distributions from your IRA will be taxed unless Distributions after December 31, 2001, canTraditional IRA rules permit you to transfer, taxyou can show, with satisfactory evidence, that be rolled over into a traditional IRA from:free, assets (money or property) from other re-nondeductible contributions were made.
tirement plans (including traditional IRAs) to a1) A deferred compensation plan of a state orPenalty for overstatement.If you over- traditional IRA. The rules permit the followinglocal government (section 457 plan), orstate the amount of nondeductible contributionskinds of transfers.on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must 2) A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b).pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement,• Transfers from one trustee to another.
For more information, see Publication 553,unless it was due to reasonable cause. • Rollovers. Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes.Penalty for failure to file Form 8606.You • Transfers incident to a divorce.will have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a Treatment of rollovers.You cannot deduct a
required Form 8606, unless you can prove that rollover contribution, but you must report the
the failure was due to reasonable cause. Transfers to Roth IRAs.Under certain condi-rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-
tions, you can move assets from a traditionalcussed later under Reporting rollovers from
Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-IRA to a Roth IRA. See Can I Move Amounts IRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em-
tions. As long as contributions are within theInto a Roth IRA? under Roth IRAs, later. ployer plans.
contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains
Kinds of rollovers from an IRA.For distribu-on those contributions (deductible or nonde-
tions after December 31, 2001, you can roll over,ductible) will be taxed until they are distributed.Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
tax free, a distribution from your IRA into a quali-See When Can I Withdraw or Use IRA Assets,
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from fied plan, including a deferred compensationlater.
one trustee directly to another, either at your plan of a state or local government (section 457
Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in your request or at the trustee’s request, is not a plan) and a tax-sheltered annuity (section
IRA if there are nondeductible contributions.rollover. Because there is no distribution to you, 403(b) plan). The part of the distribution that you
Your cost basis is the sum of the nondeductible the transfer is tax free. Because it is not a rol- can roll over is the part that would otherwise be
contributions to your IRA minus any withdrawals lover, it is not affected by the 1-year waiting taxable (includible in your income). Qualified
or distributions of nondeductible contributions. period required between rollovers, discussed plans may, but are not required to, accept such
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 125

Page 128 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
rollovers. Rules applicable to other rollovers, a) The custodial institution is insolvent, 2) Hardship distributions from 401(k) plans
such as the 60-day time limit, apply. and and certain 403(b) plans, or
b) The receiver is unable to find a buyer 3) Any of a series of substantially equal peri-Time limit for making a rollover contribution. for the institution. odic distributions paid at least once a yearYou, generally, must make the rollover contribu- over:tion by the 60th day after the day you receive the
distribution from your traditional IRA or yourPartial rollovers.If you withdraw assets from a) Your lifetime or life expectancy,
employer’s plan. a traditional IRA, you can roll over part of theb) The lifetimes or life expectancies of youFor distributions made after December 31,withdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. Theand your beneficiary, or2001, the IRS may waive the 60-day require-amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-
ment where the failure to do so would be againstcept for the part that is a return of nondeductiblec) A period of 10 years or more.
equity or good conscience, such as a casualty,contributions) and may be subject to the 10%
disaster, or other event beyond your reasonableadditional tax on early distributions, discussedThe taxable parts of most other distributions
control. later under Early Distributions. are eligible rollover distributions. See Publica-
tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income, for ad-Extension of rollover period.If an amount Required distributions.Amounts that must ditional exceptions.distributed to you from a traditional IRA or abe distributed during a particular year under theFor distributions made after December 31,qualified employer retirement plan is a frozenrequired distribution rules (discussed later) are 2001, no hardship distribution is an eligible rol-deposit at any time during the 60-day periodnot eligible for rollover treatment. lover distribution.allowed for a rollover, special rules extend the
rollover period. For more information, get Publi-Inherited IRAs.If you inherit a traditional IRAMaximum rollover. The most that you can
cation 590. from your spouse, you generally can roll it overroll over is the taxable part of any eligible rollover
into a traditional IRA established for you, or youdistribution (defined earlier). All of the distribu-
can choose to make the inherited IRA your own.tion you receive generally will be taxable unless
For distributions after December 31, 2001,Rollover From One IRA Into you have made nondeductible employee contri-
your rollover options increase. You may still rollbutions to the plan.Another
over your spouse’s IRA into your traditional IRA,
Reporting rollovers from employer plans.You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of thebut to the extent a distribution is taxable, you can
To report a rollover from an employer retirementassets from one traditional IRA if you reinvestroll it over into your qualified plan, your qualified
plan to a traditional IRA, use lines 16a and 16b,them within 60 days in the same or anotheremployee annuity (section 403(a) annuity), your
Form 1040, or lines 12a and 12b, Form 1040A.traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, youtax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b) annuity),
Do not use lines 15a or 15b, Form 1040, or linescannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in anor your deferred compensation plan of your
11a or 11b, Form 1040A.IRA. state or local government (section 457 plan).
Not inherited from spouse.If you inherit aWaiting period between rollovers.If you traditional IRA from someone other than yourMore Information on Rolloversmake a tax-free rollover of any part of a distribu-spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it totion from a traditional IRA, you cannot, within areceive a rollover contribution. You must with-For more information on rollovers, get Publica-1-year period, make a tax-free rollover of anydraw the IRA assets within a certain period. Fortion 590.later distribution from that same IRA. You alsomore information, see Publication 590.cannot make a tax-free rollover of any amount
distributed, within the same 1-year period, fromReporting rollovers from IRAs.Report any Transfers Incident to Divorcethe IRA into which you made the tax-free rol-rollover from one traditional IRA to the same orlover. another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferredThe 1-year period begins on the date youForm 1040 or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.from your spouse or former spouse to you by areceive the IRA distribution, not on the date youEnter the total amount of the distribution ondivorce or separate maintenance decree or aroll it over into an IRA. line 15a, Form 1040 or line 11a, Form 1040A. Ifwritten document related to such a decree, the
the total amount on line 15a, Form 1040 or lineinterest in the IRA, starting from the date of theExample. If you have two traditional IRAs,11a, Form 1040A was rolled over, enter zero ontransfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer isIRA-1 and IRA-2, and you make a tax-free rol-line 15b, Form 1040 or line 11b, Form 1040A.tax free. For detailed information, see Publica-lover of a distribution from IRA-1 into a newOtherwise, enter the taxable portion of the parttion 590.traditional IRA (IRA-3), you can also make athat was not rolled over on line 15b, Form 1040
tax-free rollover of a distribution from IRA-2 intoor line 11b, Form 1040A.
When Can I Withdraw orIRA-3 (or into any other traditional IRA) within 1
year of the distribution from IRA-1. These can Use IRA Assets?both be tax-free rollovers because you have notRollover From Employer’s Plan
received more than one distribution from either There are rules limiting use of your IRA assetsInto an IRAIRA within 1 year. However, you cannot, within and distributions from it. Violation of the rules
the 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover of anyIf you receive an eligible rollover distributiongenerally results in additional taxes in the year of
distribution from IRA-3 into another traditionalfrom your (or your deceased spouse ’s) violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties.
IRA. employer’s qualified pension, profit-sharing or
Age 591/2 rule.Generally, if you are under agestock bonus plan, annuity plan, or tax-shelteredException. There is an exception to the rule 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on theannuity plan (403(b) plan), you can roll over allthat amounts rolled over tax free into an IRA distribution of any assets (money or other prop-or part of it into a traditional IRA.cannot be rolled over tax free again within the erty) from your traditional IRA. DistributionsFor distributions made after December 31,1-year period beginning on the date of the origi- before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-2001, if you receive an eligible rollover distribu-nal distribution. The exception applies to a distri- tions.tion from your (or your deceased spouse’s) gov-bution which meets all three of the following The 10% additional tax applies to the part ofernmental deferred compensation plan (sectionrequirements. the distribution that you have to include in gross457 plan), you can roll over all or part of it into a
income. It is in addition to any regular income taxtraditional IRA.1) It is made from a failed financial institution on that amount.by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-Eligible rollover distribution.Generally,
Exceptions. There are several exceptionstion (FDIC) as receiver for the institution.an eligible rollover distribution is the taxable part
to the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive aof any distribution of all or part of the balance to2) It was not initiated by either the custodial distribution before you are age 591/2, you mayyour credit in a qualified retirement plan except:institution or the depositor. not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you are
3) It was made because: 1) A minimum required distribution, in one of the following situations.
Page 126 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 129 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Early distributions tax.The 10% addi- Are Distributions Taxable?• You have unreimbursed medical ex- tional tax on distributions made before youpenses that are more than 7.5% of yourreach age 591/2 does not apply to these tax-freeIn general, distributions from a traditional IRAadjusted gross income. withdrawals of your contributions. However, theare taxable in the year you receive them.• The distributions are not more than thedistribution of interest or other income must be
cost of your medical insurance. reported on Form 5329 and, unless the distribu-Exceptions. Exceptions to this general rule
tion qualifies as an exception to the age 591/2 are rollovers and tax-free withdrawals of contri-• You are disabled. rule, it will be subject to this tax. butions, discussed earlier, and the return of non-
• You are the beneficiary of a deceased deductible contributions, discussed later under
IRA owner. Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable.When Must I Withdraw IRA
• You are receiving distributions in the form Although a conversion of a traditionalAssets? (Requiredof an annuity. IRA is considered a rollover for Roth
Distributions) IRA purposes, it is not an exception toCAUTION
!
• The distributions are not more than your the general rule for distributions from a tradi-qualified higher education expenses. You cannot keep funds in your traditional IRAtional IRA. Conversion distributions are includ-
indefinitely. Eventually they must  be distributed.• You use the distributions to buy, build, or able in your gross income subject to these rules
If there are no distributions, or if the distributionsrebuild a first home. and the special rules for conversions explained
are not large enough, you may have to pay ain chapter 2 of Publication 590.• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of 50% excise tax on the amount not distributed asthe qualified plan. required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi-Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi-cient Distributions), later. The requirements forMost of these exceptions are explained in Publi- tional IRAs that you include in income are taxedcation 590. distributing IRA funds differ depending onas ordinary income.whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi-
ciary of a decedent’s IRA. No special treatment.In figuring your tax,Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-
you cannot use the 10-year tax option or capitalerly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are notRequired distributions not eligible for rol-gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu-subject to either regular income tax or the 10%lover. Amounts that must be distributed (re-tions from qualified employer plans.additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excessquired distributions) during a particular year arecontributions after the due date of your returnnot eligible for rollover treatment.are also tax free and therefore not subject to the
Distributions Fully or Partly10% additional tax. (See Excess contributionsIRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi-Taxablewithdrawn after due date of return, later.) Thistional IRA, by April 1 of the year following thealso applies to transfers incident to divorce, asyear in which you reach age 701/2, you must Distributions from your traditional IRA may bediscussed earlier. either: fully or partly taxable, depending on whether
Contributions returned before the due date. your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-1) Receive the entire balance in your IRA, orIf you made IRA contributions for 2001, you can tions.
withdraw them tax free by the due date of your2) Start receiving periodic distributions from
Fully taxable.If only deductible contributionsreturn. If you have an extension of time to fileyour IRA.
were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, ifyour return, you can withdraw them tax free byApril 1 of the year following the year in which youyou have more than one), you have no basis inthe extended due date. You can do this if, forreach age 701/2 is referred to as the required your IRA. Because you have no basis in youreach contribution you withdraw, both of the fol-beginning date. IRA, any distributions are fully taxable whenlowing conditions apply.
received. See Reporting taxable distributions onPeriodic distributions.If you do not re-• You did not take a deduction for the contri- your return, later.ceive the entire balance in your traditional IRAbution. by the required beginning date, you must start toPartly taxable.If you made nondeductible• You also withdraw any interest or otherreceive periodic distributions over one of thecontributions to any of your traditional IRAs, youincome earned on the contribution. Youfollowing periods: have a cost basis (investment in the contract)can take into account any loss on the con-
equal to the amount of those contributions.tribution while it was in the IRA when cal-1) Your life, These nondeductible contributions are not taxedculating the amount that must be 2) The lives of you and your designated when they are distributed to you. They are awithdrawn. If there was a loss, the net beneficiary, return of your investment in your IRA.income earned on the contribution may be
Only the part of the distribution that repre-a negative amount. 3) A period that does not extend beyond yoursents nondeductible contributions (your cost ba-life expectancy, or sis) is tax free. If nondeductible contributions
4) A period that does not extend beyond thehave been made, distributions consist partly ofNote. If the trustee of your IRA is unable tojoint life and last survivor expectancy ofnondeductible contributions (basis) and partly ofcalculate the amount you must withdraw, get you and your designated beneficiary. deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (ifIRS Notice 2000–39. The notice explains the
there are any). Until all of your basis has beenIRS-approved method of calculating the amountDistributions after the required beginningdistributed, each distribution is partly nontaxableyou must withdraw. This notice can be found indate. The minimum required distribution forand partly taxable.many libraries and IRS offices. any year after your 701/2 year must be made byYou must include in income any earnings on Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606December 31 of that later year.the contributions you withdraw. Include the and attach it to your return if you receive aearnings in income for the year in which you distribution from a traditional IRA and have everBeneficiaries.If you are the beneficiary of amade the contributions, not in the year in which made nondeductible contributions to any of yourdecedent’s traditional IRA, the requirements foryou withdraw them. traditional IRAs. Using the form, you will figuredistributions from that IRA depend on whether
Generally, except for any part of a with- the nontaxable distributions for 2001 and yourdistributions that satisfy the minimum distribu-
drawal that is a return of nondeductible total IRA basis for 2001 and earlier years.tions requirement have begun.
contributions (basis), any withdrawal ofCAUTION
!
More information. For more information, in-your contributions after the due date (or ex- Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,
cluding how to figure your minimum requiredtended due date) of your return will be treated as but you are not required to file an income tax
distribution each year and how to figure youra taxable distribution. Another exception is the return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to
required distribution if you are a beneficiary of areturn of an excess contribution as discussed the IRS at the time and place you would other-
decedent’s IRA, see Publication 590.under What Acts Result in Penalties, later. wise file an income tax return.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 127

Page 130 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Distributions reported on Form 1099–R. If • Buying property for personal use (present• Your taxable compensation for the year, oryou receive a distribution from your traditional or future) with IRA funds.
• $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 orIRA, you will receive Form 1099–R, Distribu-
$3,500 for 2002 if 50 or older).tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orEffect on an IRA account.Generally, if you orProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-tracts, Etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu- Tax on excess contributions.In general, ifaction in connection with your traditional IRAtions are shown in boxes 1 and 2 of Form the excess contribution for a year and any earn-account at any time during the year, the account1099–R. A number or letter code in box 7 tells ings on it are not withdrawn by the date yourstops being an IRA as of the first day of thatyou what type of distribution you received from return for the year is due (including extensions),year.your IRA. you are subject to a 6% tax. You must pay the
Effect on you or your beneficiary.If you or 6% tax each year on excess amounts that re-Withholding. Federal income tax is withheldyour beneficiary engage in a prohibited transac-main in your traditional IRA at the end of your taxfrom distributions from traditional IRAs unlesstion with your traditional IRA account at any timeyear. The tax cannot be more than 6% of theyou choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-during the year, you (or your beneficiary) mustvalue of your IRA as of the end of your tax year.ter 5. include the fair market value of all of the IRA
assets in your gross income for that year. TheExcess contributions withdrawn by due dateIRA distributions delivered outside the
fair market value is the price at which the IRAof return.You will not have to pay the 6% tax ifUnited States.In general, if you are a U.S.
assets would change hands between a willingyou withdraw an excess contribution made dur-citizen or resident alien and your home address
buyer and a willing seller, when neither has anying a tax year and you also withdraw interest oris outside the United States or its possessions,
need to buy or sell, and both have reasonableother income earned on the excess contribution.you cannot choose exemption from withholding
knowledge of the relevant facts. You must complete your withdrawal by the dateon distributions from your traditional IRA.
You must use the fair market value of theyour tax return for that year is due, including
Reporting taxable distributions on your re-assets as of the first day of the year you en-extensions.
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-gaged in the prohibited transaction. You mayHow to treat withdrawn contributions.Doing early distributions, on line 15b, Form 1040have to pay the 10% additional tax on earlynot include in your gross income an excess(no entry is required on line 15a), or line 11b,distributions, discussed later. contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-Form 1040A. If only part of the distribution is tional IRA before your tax return is due if bothTaxes on prohibited transactions.If some-taxable, enter the total amount on line 15a, Form the following conditions are met.one other than the owner or beneficiary of a1040, or line 11a, Form 1040A, and the taxable
traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac-part on line 15b, Form 1040, or line 11b, Form 1) No deduction was allowed for the excesstion, that person may be liable for certain taxes.1040A. You cannot report distributions on Form contribution.In general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of1040EZ.
2) You withdraw the interest or other incomethe prohibited transaction and a 100% additional
earned on the excess contribution.tax if the transaction is not corrected.What Acts Result in
You can take into account any loss on the contri-More information. For more information onPenalties? bution while it was in the IRA when calculatingprohibited transactions, get Publication 590.the amount that must be withdrawn. If there wasThe tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for a loss, the net income earned on the contributionretirement savings can be offset by additional may be a negative amount.Investment in Collectiblestaxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules.
For example, there are additions to the regular How to treat withdrawn interest or other
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, thetax for using your IRA funds in prohibited trans- income. You must include in your gross in-
amount invested is considered distributed to youactions. There are also additional taxes for the come the interest or other income that was
in the year invested. You may have to pay thefollowing activities. earned on the excess contribution. Report it on
10% additional tax on early distributions, dis-your return for the year in which the excess• Investing in collectibles. cussed later. contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter-
• Making excess contributions. est or other income may be subject to an addi-Collectibles.These include: tional 10% tax on early distributions, discussed• Taking early distributions. later.• Art works,
• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate • Rugs, Excess contributions withdrawn after due(failing to take required distributions).
date of return.In general, you must include all• Antiques,
distributions (withdrawals) from your traditionalThere are penalties for overstating the • Metals, IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow-amount of nondeductible contributions and for
ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excessfailure to file a Form 8606, if required. • Gems,
contributions from your IRA and not include the• Stamps, amount withdrawn in your gross income.
Prohibited Transactions • Coins, 1) Total contributions (other than rollover
• Alcoholic beverages, and contributions) for 2001 to your IRA wereGenerally, a prohibited transaction is any im-
not more than $2,000.proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your• Certain other tangible personal property.
beneficiary, or any disqualified person. 2) You did not take a deduction for the ex-Disqualified persons include your fiduciaryException. Your IRA can invest in one, cess contribution being withdrawn.and members of your family (spouse, ancestor,one-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.The withdrawal can take place at any time, evenlineal descendent, and any spouse of a linealgold coins, or one ounce silver coins minted byafter the due date, including extensions, for filingdescendent). the Treasury Department. It can also invest inyour tax return for the year.The following are examples of prohibitedcertain platinum coins and certain gold, silver,
transactions with a traditional IRA. palladium, and platinum bullion.
• Borrowing money from it.
Excess contribution deducted in an earlier• Selling property to it. Excess Contributions
year. If you deducted an excess contribution in• Receiving unreasonable compensation forGenerally, an excess contribution is the amount an earlier year for which the total contributionsmanaging it. contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year were $2,000 or less, you can still remove the
• Using it as security for a loan. that is more than the smaller of: excess from your traditional IRA and not include
Page 128 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 131 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
it in your gross income. To do this, file Form under Can I Move Retirement Plan Assets, ear- Not filing Form 1040.If you do not have to file
lier. a Form 1040 but do have to pay one of the IRA1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
taxes mentioned earlier, file the completed FormReturn, for that year and do not deduct theAdditional 10% tax. The additional tax on5329 with the IRS at the time and place youexcess contribution on the amended return.early distributions is 10% of the amount of thewould have filed your Form 1040. Be sure toGenerally, you can file an amended return withinearly distribution that you must include in yourinclude your address on page 1 and your signa-3 years after you filed your return, or 2 yearsgross income. This tax is in addition to anyture and date on page 2. Enclose, but do notfrom the time the tax was paid, whichever isregular income tax resulting from including theattach, a check or money order payable to thelater. distribution in income. United States Treasury for the tax you owe, as
shown on Form 5329. Write your social securityExcess due to incorrect rollover information.Nondeductible contributions.The tax on
number and “2001 Form 5329” on your check orIf an excess contribution in your traditional IRA isearly distributions does not apply to the part of a
money order.the result of a rollover and the excess occurreddistribution that represents a return of your non-
because the information the plan was requireddeductible contributions (basis). Form 5329 not required.You do not have toto give you was incorrect, you can withdraw the use Form 5329 if any of the following conditionsMore information. For more information onexcess contribution. The limits mentioned above exist.early distributions, see Publication 590.are increased by the amount of the excess that
• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) isis due to the incorrect information. You will have
shown in box 7 of Form 1099–R. If you doto amend your return for the year in which theExcess Accumulations not owe any other additional tax on a dis-excess occurred to correct the reporting of the
(Insufficient Distributions) tribution, multiply the taxable part of therollover amounts in that year. Do not include in
early distribution by 10% and enter theyour gross income the part of the excess contri-You cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRAresult on line 55 of Form 1040. Write “No ”bution caused by the incorrect information.indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receivingnext to line 55 to indicate that you do not
distributions by April 1 of the year following thehave to file Form 5329. However, if you
year in which you reach age 701/2 (your 701/2 owe this tax and also owe any other addi-Early Distributions year). The minimum required distribution for anytional tax on a distribution, do not enter
year after your 701/2 year must be made byYou must include early distributions of taxable this 10% additional tax directly on your
December 31 of that later year.amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross Form 1040. You must file Form 5329 to
income. Early distributions are also subject to an report your additional taxes.Tax on excess. If distributions are less thanadditional 10% tax. See the discussion of Formthe minimum required distribution for the year,• You qualify for an exception to the addi-5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, toyou may have to pay a 50% excise tax for thattional tax on early distributions. You do notfigure and report the tax. year on the amount not distributed as required.have to report the exception if distribution
code 2, 3, or 4 is shown in box 7 of FormRequest to excuse the tax.If the excess ac-Early distributions defined.Early distribu- 1099–R. However, if one of those codescumulation is due to reasonable error, and youtions are amounts distributed from your tradi- is not shown, or the code shown is incor-have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy thetional IRA account or annuity before you are age rect, you must file Form 5329 to report theinsufficient distribution, you can request that the591/2. exception.tax be excused.
Exceptions. In certain situations, you mayIf you believe you qualify for this relief, do the• You properly rolled over all distributions
not have to pay the 10% additional tax even iffollowing. you received during the year.
amounts are distributed from your IRA before
1) File Form 5329 with your Form 1040.you are age 591/2. These situations are listed
below. 2) Pay any tax you owe on excess accumula-
tions.• You have unreimbursed medical ex- Roth IRAspenses that are more than 7.5% of your3) Attach a letter of explanation.
adjusted gross income. Regardless of your age, you may be able toIf the IRS approves your request, it will re-establish and make nondeductible contributions• The distributions are not more than thefund the excess accumulations tax you paid.to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.cost of your medical insurance.
Exemption from tax. If you are unable to You can make contributions for 2001• You are disabled. make required distributions because you have a by the due date (not including exten-traditional IRA invested in a contract issued by• You are the beneficiary of a deceased sions) for filing your 2001 tax return.
TIP
an insurance company that is in state insurerIRA owner. This means that most people can make contri-delinquency proceedings, the 50% excise taxbutions for 2001 by April 15, 2002.• You are receiving distributions in the formdoes not apply if the conditions and require-of an annuity. ments of Revenue Procedure 92–10 are satis-
Contributions not reported.You do not havefied.• The distributions are not more than your
to report Roth IRA contributions on your return.qualified higher education expenses. More information. For more information on
• You use the distributions to buy, build, orexcess accumulations, see Publication 590.What Is a Roth IRA?rebuild a first home.
• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that,Reporting Additional Taxesthe qualified plan. except as explained in this chapter, is subject to
the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (definedGenerally, you must use Form 5329 to report theMost of these exceptions are explained in Publi- below). It can be either an account or an annuity.tax on excess contributions, early (premature)cation 590. Individual retirement accounts and annuities aredistributions, and excess accumulations. described in Publication 590.
Note. Distributions that are timely and prop- To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuityFiling Form 1040.If you file Form 1040, com-
erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is setplete Form 5329 and attach it to your Form
subject to either regular income tax or the 10% up. Neither a SEP-IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can1040. Enter the total amount of IRA tax due on
additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess be designated as a Roth IRA.line 55, Form 1040.
contributions are also tax free and not subject to Unlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct
the 10% additional tax (as explained earlierNote. If you have to file an individual income contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy
under Excess Contributions). This also appliestax return and Form 5329, you must use Form the requirements, qualified distributions (dis-
to transfers incident to divorce, as discussed1040. cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 129

Page 132 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 18–3.Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of your modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).
IF you have taxable compensation AND  your modified AGI is ... THEN  ...
and your filing status is ...
You can contribute up to $2,000 for 2001
Less than $150,000 ($3,000 for 2002 or $3,500 for 2002 if age 50 or
older).
Married Filing Jointly At least $150,000 The amount you can contributed is reduced as
but less than $160,000 explained under Contribution limit reduced.
$160,000 or more You cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
You can contribute up to $2,000 for 2001
Zero (-0-) ($3,000 for 2002 or $3,500 for 2002 if 50 or
older).Married Filing Separately and you
lived with your spouse at any time More than zero (-0-) The amount you can contribute is reduced asduring the year but less than $10,000 explained under Contribution limit reduced.
$10,000 or more You cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
You can contribute up to $2,000 for 2001Single, Less than $95,000 ($3,000 for 2002 or $3,500 for 2002 if age 50 orHead of Household, older).Qualifying Widow(er), or
At least $95,000 The amount you can contribute is reduced asMarried Filing Separately and you
but less than $110,000 explained under Contribution limit reduced.did not live with your spouse at
any time during the year $110,000 or more You cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2 • $10,000 for married filing separately and• $160,000 for married filing jointly,and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as you lived with your spouse at any time
• $10,000 for married filing separately andlong as you live. during the year, and
you lived with your spouse at any timeTraditional IRA.A traditional IRA is any IRA• $110,000 for single, head of household, during the year, andthat is not a Roth IRA or SIMPLE IRA. qualifying widow(er) or married filing sepa-
• $110,000 for married filing separately andrately and you did not live with your
you did not live with your spouse at anyspouse at any time during the year.Can I Contribute to a Roth time during the year.
IRA? Is there an age limit for contributions?Con-
Compensation. Compensation includestributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-less of your age.you have taxable compensation (defined later) nuses, and other amounts received for providingand your modified AGI (defined later) is less personal services. It also includes commissions,Can I contribute to a Roth IRA for mythan: self-employment income, and taxable alimonyspouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for• $160,000 for married filing jointly, and separate maintenance payments.your spouse provided the contributions satisfy
the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much
Can Be Contributed? under Traditional IRAs)
and your modified AGI is less than:
Worksheet 18–2. Modified Adjusted Gross Income for Roth IRA Purposes
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.
1. Enter your adjusted gross income (Form 1040, line 33 or Form 1040A, line 19)...... 1.
2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA (other than a Roth IRA) to a
Roth IRA ..................................................... 2.
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1.......................................... 3.
4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction (Form 1040, line 23 or Form 1040A, line 16)...... 4.
5. Enter any student loan interest deduction (Form 1040, line 24 or Form 1040A, line 17)5.
6. Enter any foreign earned income exclusion (Form 2555, line 40 or Form 2555–EZ, line
1 8 ) ......................................................... 6.
7. Enter any foreign housing exclusion or deduction (Form 2555, line 34 or 48)........ 7.
8. Enter any exclusion of bond interest (Form 8815, line 14)..................... 8.
9. Enter any exclusion of employer-paid adoption expenses (Form 8839, line 26)....... 9.
10. Add the amounts on line 3 through 9. This is your modified adjusted gross income for
Roth IRA purposes............................................... 10.
Page 130 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 133 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA incentive match plans for employees (SIMPLE)Conversions
purposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI)are discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 590.
You can convert a traditional IRA or a SIMPLEas shown on your return modified as follows.
IRA to a Roth IRA. The conversion is treated asContribution limit reduced.If your modified1) Subtract any income resulting from the a rollover, regardless of the conversion methodAGI is above a certain amount, your contributionconversion of an IRA (other than a Roth used. Most of the rules for rollovers, describedlimit is gradually reduced. Use Table 18–3 toIRA) to a Roth IRA (conversion income). under Rollover From One IRA Into Anotherdetermine if this reduction applies to you.under Traditional IRAs, earlier, apply to these2) Add  the following deductions and exclu-Figuring the reduction.If the amount yourollovers. However, the 1-year waiting periodsions: can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, seedoes not apply.
Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction.a) Traditional IRA deduction,
Conversion methods. You can convertb) Student loan interest deduction, amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in
When Can I Make Contributions?c) Foreign earned income exclusion, any of the following three ways.
d) Foreign housing exclusion or deduc-You can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a1) Rollover. You can receive a distributiontion, year at any time during the year or by the duefrom a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-
date of your return for that year (not includingtribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 dayse) Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-
extensions). after the distribution.terest shown on Form 8815, and
2) Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di-f) Exclusion of employer-paid adoption
rect the trustee of the traditional IRA toexpenses shown on Form 8839. What If I Contribute Too Much? transfer an amount from the traditional IRA
to the trustee of the Roth IRA.You can use Worksheet 18–2 to figure yourA 6% excise tax applies to any excess contri-
modified AGI. bution to a Roth IRA. 3) Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of
the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth
Excess contributions.These are the contri- IRA, you can direct the trustee to transferHow Much Can Be Contributed? butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equalan amount from the traditional IRA to the
the total of: Roth IRA.The contribution limit for Roth IRAs depends on
whether contributions are made only to Roth1) Amounts contributed for the tax year toSame trustee. Conversions made with theIRAs or to both traditional IRAs and Roth IRAs.your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop-same trustee can be made by redesignating the
erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRAtraditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made ing a new account or issuing a new contract.or properly converted from a traditionalonly to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener-
IRA, as described later) that are more thanally is the lesser of:
your contribution limit for the year, plusConverting from any traditional IRA.You
• $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or can convert amounts from a traditional IRA into2) Any excess contributions for the preceding$3,500 for 2002 if you are 50 or older), or a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make theyear, reduced by the total of: withdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of the• Your taxable compensation. following requirements are met.a) Any distributions out of your Roth IRAsHowever, If your modified AGI is above a certainfor the year, plusamount, your contribution limit may be reduced, 1) Your modified AGI (explained earlier) is
b) Your contribution limit for the year mi-as explained later under Contribution limit re- not more than $100,000.
duced. nus your contributions to all your IRAs2) You are not a married individual filing afor the year. separate return. (See Lived apart fromRoth IRAs and traditional IRAs.If contribu- spouse under Filing status, earlier.)tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditionalWithdrawal of excess contributions.ForIRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- Required distributions. Amounts thatpurposes of determining excess contributions,tion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as must be distributed from your traditional IRA forany contribution that is withdrawn on or beforeyour limit would be if contributions were made a particular year (including the calendar year inthe due date (including extensions) for filing youronly to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri- which you reach age 701/2) under the requiredtax return for the year is treated as an amountbutions (other than employer contributions distribution rules (discussed under Traditionalnot contributed. This treatment applies only ifunder a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to IRAs, earlier) cannot be converted.any earnings on the contributions are also with-all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.
drawn and are reported as income earned andInherited IRAs.If you inherited a traditionalThis means that your contribution limit is the
receivable in the year the contribution wasIRA from someone other than your spouse, youlesser of:
made. cannot convert it to a Roth IRA.• $2,000 for 2001 ($3,000 for 2002 or
Income. You must include in your gross in-$3,500 for 2002 if you are 50 or older)Applying excess contributions.If contribu-come distributions from a traditional IRA thatminus all contributions (other than em-tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more thanyou would have to include in income if you hadployer contributions under a SEP or the limit, you can apply the excess contributionnot converted them into a Roth IRA. You do notSIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAsin one year to a later year if the contributions forinclude in gross income any part of a distributionother than Roth IRAs, or that later year are less than the maximum al-from a traditional IRA that is a return of yourlowed for that year.• Your taxable compensation minus all con- basis, as discussed earlier under Traditionaltributions (other than employer contribu- IRAs.tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan)Can I Move Amounts Into a If you must include any amount in your grossfor the year to all IRAs other than Roth income, you may have to make estimated taxRoth IRA?IRAs. payments. See chapter 5.
However, if your modified AGI is above a certainYou may be able to convert amounts from eitherHow to treat 1998 conversions.If you con-amount, your contribution limit may be reduced,a traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Rothverted amounts from a traditional IRA in 1998 toas explained later under Contribution limit re-IRA. You may be able to recharacterize contri-a Roth IRA, any amount you had to include induced. butions made to one IRA as having been madeincome as a result of the distribution is generally
directly to a different IRA. You can roll amountsSimplified employee pensions (SEPs) are dis- included ratably over a 4-year period, beginning
over from one Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.cussed in chapter 3 of Publication 590. Savings with 1998. This means you included one-quarter
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 131

Page 134 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the amount in income in 1998, 1999, 2000,Recharacterizations Are Distributions From Myand must include the final one-quarter in 2001.
You may be able to treat a contribution made toRoth IRA Taxable?Death of Roth IRA owner during 4-year one type of IRA as having been made to aperiod. If a Roth IRA owner who is including You do not include in your gross income quali-different type of IRA. This is called recharacter-
amounts ratably over the 4-year period died in fied distributions or distributions that are aizing the contribution. More detailed information
2001, any amounts not included must generally return of your regular contributions from youris in Publication 590.
be included in the owner’s (decedent’s) gross Roth IRA(s). You also do not include distribu-
income for 2001. tions from your Roth IRA that you roll over taxNo deduction allowed. No deduction is al-
free into another Roth IRA. You may have tolowed for the contribution to the first IRA and any
Note. You may have elected to include the include part of other distributions in your income.net income transferred with the recharacterized
See Ordering rules for distributions, later.entire amount in income in 1998. If you did, thiscontribution is treated as earned in the second
discussion does not apply to you. IRA. What are qualified distributions?A qualified
distribution is any payment or distribution fromHow to recharacterize a contribution.ToConverting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally, your Roth IRA that meets the following require-recharacterize a contribution, you generallyyou can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA ments.must have the contribution transferred from theto a Roth IRA under the same rules explainedfirst IRA (the one to which it was made) to the1) It is made after the 5-taxable-year periodearlier under Converting from any traditionalsecond IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If thebeginning with the first taxable year forIRA. transfer is made by the due date (including ex-which a contribution was made to a Roth However, you cannot convert any amount tensions) for your tax return for the year duringIRA set up for your benefit, andwhich the contribution was made, you can electdistributed from the SIMPLE IRA during the
2) The payment or distribution is:to treat the contribution as having been originally2-year period beginning on the date you first
made to the second IRA instead of to the firstparticipated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained a) Made on or after the date you reachIRA. It will be treated as having been made toby your employer. age 591/2,the second IRA on the same date that it was
actually made to the first IRA. b) Made because you are disabled,More information.For more detailed informa-
Required notifications.To recharacterize c) Made to a beneficiary or to your estatetion on conversions, see Publication 590.
a contribution, you must notify both the trustee ofafter your death, or
the first IRA (the one to which the contributiond) To pay certain qualified first-timewas actually made) and the trustee of the sec-Rollover From a Roth IRA homebuyer amounts discussed in Pub-ond IRA that you have elected to treat, for fed-lication 590.You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of theeral tax purposes, the contribution as having
been made to the second IRA rather than theassets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them
first. You must make the notifications by the datewithin 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the Additional tax on distributions of conversion
of the transfer. Only one notification is required ifrules for rollovers explained under Rollover contributions within 5-year period.If, within
both IRAs are maintained by the same trustee.From One IRA Into Another under Traditional the 5-year period starting with the year in which
The notification(s) must include all of the follow-IRAs, earlier, apply to these rollovers. you made a conversion contribution of an
ing information. amount from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, you
take a distribution from a Roth IRA of an amount• The type and amount of the contribution toFailed Conversions attributable to the portion of the conversion con-the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.tribution that you had to include in income, you
If, when you converted amounts from a tradi-• The date on which the contribution wasgenerally must pay the 10% additional tax on
tional IRA or SIMPLE IRA (including a transfermade to the first IRA and the year forearly distributions. (See Ordering Rules for Dis-
by redesignation) into a Roth IRA, you expected which it was made. tributions, later, to determine the amount, if any,
to have modified AGI of less than $100,000 and of the distribution that is attributable to the con-• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA toa filing status other than married filing sepa- version contribution.) The 5-year period is sepa-transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer therately, but events changed these facts, you have rately determined for each conversionamount of the contribution and any netcontribution.made a failed conversion. income allocable to the contribution to the
trustee of the second IRA. If there was aAdditional tax on other early distributions.loss while the contribution was in the firstAdverse consequences. If the converted The taxable part of other distributions from yourIRA, the net income that must be trans-amount (contribution) is not recharacterized (ex- Roth IRA(s) that are not qualified distributions isferred may be a negative amount.plained later), the contribution will be treated as subject to the additional tax on early distribu-
a regular contribution to the Roth IRA and sub- tions. See Publication 590 for more information.• The name of the trustee of the first IRA
ject to the following tax consequences. and the name of the trustee of the second
Ordering rules for distributions.If you re-IRA.
ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is1) A 6% excise tax per year will apply to any• Any additional information needed to not a qualified distribution, part of it may beexcess contribution not withdrawn from themake the transfer. taxable. There is a set order in which contribu-Roth IRA. tions (including conversion contributions) and
2) The distributions from the traditional IRA earnings are considered to be distributed from
Note. If the trustee of your first IRA is unablemust be included in your gross income. your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are distrib-
to calculate the amount of net income you mustuted first. See Publication 590 for more informa-3) The 10% additional tax on early distribu-transfer, get IRS Notice 2000–39. The notice tion.tions may apply to any distribution. explains the IRS-approved method of calculat-
Am I required to take distributions when Iing the amount you must transfer.How to avoid. You must move the amount reach age 701/2? You are not required to take
converted (including all earnings from the dateReporting a recharacterization.If you electdistributions from your Roth IRA at any age. The
of conversion) into a traditional IRA by the dueto recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as aminimum distribution rules that apply to tradi-
date (including extensions) for your tax return forcontribution to another IRA, you must report thetional IRAs do not apply to Roth IRAs while the
the year during which you made the conversionrecharacterization on your tax return as directedowner is alive. However, after the death of a
to the Roth IRA. You do not have to include thisby Form 8606 and its instructions. You mustRoth IRA owner, certain of the minimum distri-
distribution (withdrawal) in income. See treat the contribution as having been made tobution rules that apply to traditional IRAs also
Recharacterizations, next, for more information. the second IRA. apply to Roth IRAs.
Page 132 Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 135 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information.For more detailed informa-
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.
Chapter 18 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)Page 133

Page 136 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 8822 Change of Address such as a summer beach cottage. Your former
home means your home before you left for your
new job location. Your new home means your
19. home within the area of your new job location.
Who Can Deduct Distance TestMoving Moving Expenses Your move will meet the distance test if your new
main job location is at least 50 miles fartherYou can deduct your allowable moving ex-Expenses from your former home than your old main jobpenses if your move is closely related to the startlocation was from your former home. For exam-of work. You also must meet the distance testple, if your old main job location was 3 milesand the time test. These two tests are discussedfrom your former home, your new main job loca-Important Change later. After you have read the distance and timetion must be at least 53 miles from that formertest rules, you may want to use Figure 19–B to home.help you decide if your move qualifies.Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- The distance between a job location andage rate for moving expenses has been in- your home is the shortest of the more commonlycreased to 12 cents a mile. See Travel by car Related to Start of Work traveled routes between them. The distance testunder Deductible Moving Expenses. considers only the location of your former home.
Your move must be closely related, both in timeIt does not take into account the location of your
and in place, to the start of work at your new jobnew home. See Figure 19–A.
location.
Important Reminder Example. You moved to a new home lessClosely related in time.You can generally than 50 miles from your former home becauseconsider moving expenses incurred within 1you changed main job locations. Your old mainChange of address. If you change your mail-year from the date you first reported to work atjob location was 3 miles from your former home.ing address, be sure to notify the IRS usingthe new location as closely related in time to theYour new main job location is 60 miles from thatForm 8822, Change of Address. Mail it to thestart of work. It is not necessary that you arrangehome. Because your new main job location is 57Internal Revenue Service Center for your oldto work before moving to a new location, as longmiles farther from your former home than theaddress. Addresses for the Service Centers areas you actually do go to work. distance from your former home to your old mainon the back of the form. If you do not move within 1 year of the datejob location, you meet the distance test.you begin work, you ordinarily cannot deduct the
expenses unless you can show that circum-First job or return to full-time work.If you go
stances existed that prevented the move withinto work full time for the first time, your place of
that time. work must be at least 50 miles from your formerIntroduction
home to meet the distance test.This chapter explains the deduction of certainExample. Your family moved more than a If you go back to full-time work after a sub-expenses of moving to a new home because year after you started work at a new location.stantial period of part-time work or unemploy-you changed job locations or started a new job.You delayed the move for 18 months to allowment, your place of work must also be at least 50This includes the following topics. your child to complete high school. You canmiles from your former home.
deduct your allowable moving expenses.• Who can deduct moving expenses. Exception for Armed Forces. If you are in
Closely related in place.You can generally• What moving expenses are deductible. the Armed Forces and you moved because of a
consider your move closely related in place topermanent change of station, you do not have to• What moving expenses are not deductible.the start of work if the distance from your newmeet the distance test. See Members of the
home to the new job location is not more than• How to report moving expenses. Armed Forces, later.
the distance from your former home to the newMain job location.Your main job location isjob location. A move that does not meet thisYou may qualify for the moving expense de- usually the place where you spend most of yourrequirement may qualify if you can show that:duction whether you are self-employed or an working time. If there is no one place where youemployee. However, you must meet the require- spend most of your working time, your main job1) You are required to live at that home as aments explained under Who Can Deduct Mov- location is the place where your work is cen-condition of your employment, oring Expenses. tered, such as where you report for work or are2) You will spend less time or money com-Moves to locations outside the United otherwise required to “base” your work.muting from your new home to your newStates. This chapter does not discuss moves Union members. If you work for several em-job location.outside the United States. If you are a United ployers on a short-term basis and you get workStates citizen or resident alien who moved under a union hall system (such as a construc-Retirees or survivors.You may be able tooutside the United States or its possessions tion or building trades worker), your main jobdeduct the expenses of moving to the Unitedbecause of your job or business, see Publication location is the union hall.States or its possessions even if the move is not521, Moving Expenses, for special rules thatrelated to the start of work at a new job location.apply to your move. More than one job.If you have more than oneYou must have worked outside the United job at any time, your main job location dependsStates or be a survivor of someone who did. Seeon the facts in each case. The more importantUseful Items Retirees or Survivors Who Move to the Unitedfactors to be considered are:You may want to see: States, later.
• The total time you spend at each place,Home defined. Your home means your mainPublication
• The amount of work you do at each place,home (residence). It can be a house, apartment,
❏ 521 Moving Expenses andcondominium, houseboat, house trailer, or simi-
lar dwelling. It does not include other homes• How much money you earn at each place.Form (and Instructions) owned or kept up by you or members of your
family. It also does not include a seasonal home,❏ 3903 Moving Expenses
Page 134 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 137 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 19–A. Illustration of Distance Test
Your new main job location is at
least 50 miles farther from your
former residence than your old
main job location was.
DISTANCE TEST IS MET
Your new main job location is
not at least 50 miles farther from
your former residence than your
old main job location was.
DISTANCE TEST IS NOT MET
New
main job
location
New
main job
location
Old
main job
location
Former
residence
58
miles38
miles
3
miles
Seasonal work. If your work is seasonal, location. For purposes of this test, the followingTime Test three rules apply.you are considered to be working full time during
the off-season only if your work contract orTo deduct your moving expenses, you also must 1) You count any full-time work you do eitheragreement covers an off-season period and thatmeet one of the following two time tests. as an employee or as a self-employed per-period is less than 6 months. For example, ason.1) The time test for employees. school teacher on a 12-month contract who
teaches on a full-time basis for more than 62) You do not have to work for the same2) The time test for self-employed persons.months is considered to have worked full timeemployer or be self-employed in the same
See Table 19–1 for a summary of these tests. trade or business for the 78 weeks.for the entire 12 months.
3) You must work within the same generalTime test for employees.If you are an em-
commuting area for all 78 weeks.Time test for self-employed persons.If youployee, you must work full time for at least 39
are self-employed, you must work full time for atweeks during the first 12 months after you If you were both an employee and self-em-least 39 weeks during the first 12 monthsarrive in the general area of your new job loca- ployed, see Table 19–1 for the requirements.AND for a total of at least 78 weeks during thetion. Full-time employment depends on what is
first 24 months after you arrive in your new jobusual for your type of work in your area.
For purposes of this test, the following four
rules apply. Table 19–1. Satisfying the Time Test for Employees
and Self-Employed Persons1) You count only your full-time work as an
employee, not any work you do as a
self-employed person.
IF you are... THEN you satisfy the time test by
meeting...2) You do not have to work for the same
employer for all 39 weeks.
An employee The 39 –week test for employees.3) You do not have to work 39 weeks in a
row. Self-employed and an employee but The 78 –week test for self-employed
4) You must work full time within the sameunable to satisfy the 39–week test for persons.
general commuting area for all 39 weeks.employees
Temporary absence from work. You are Both self-employed and an employee at The 78–week test for aconsidered to have worked full time during anythe same time self-employed person or theweek you are temporarily absent from work be- 39–week test for an employee basedcause of illness, strikes, lockouts, layoffs, natu- on your principal place of work.ral disasters, or similar causes. You are also
considered to have worked full time during any
Self-employed The 78 –week test for self-employedweek you are absent from work for leave or
persons.vacation provided for in your work contract or
agreement.
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 135

Page 138 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 19–B. Qualifying Moves Within the United States (Non-Military)
1
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
1
Military persons should see Members of the Armed Forces for special rules that apply to them.
Was your move closely related to a
new or changed job location?
2
Is your new main job location at
least 50 miles farther from your
FORMER HOME than your old
main job location was?
Are you an employee? Are you self-employed?
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee for at least 39 weeks in the
first 12 months after you arrived in the
new area?
3, 4
YOUR MOVE DOES QUALIFY.
You may be able to deduct your
moving expenses.
Did you or will you work full time as an
employee or a self-employed person
for at least 78 weeks in the first 24
months (which includes 39 weeks in
the first 12 months) after you arrived
in the new area?
YOUR
MOVE
DOES NOT
QUALIFY
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
2
Your move must be closely related to the start of work at your new job location. See Related to Start of Work.
3
If you deduct expenses and do not meet this test later, you must either file an amended tax return or report your moving expens e deduction as other
income. See Time test not yet met.
4
If you become self-employed during the first 12 months, answer YES if your combined time as a full-time employee and self-emplo yed person equals or will
equal at least 78 weeks in the first 24 months (including 39 weeks in the first twelve months) after you arrived in the new are a.
Start Here
Self-employment. You are self-em- moving expenses but do not meet the time test 3) You are the survivor of a person whose
ployed if you work as the sole owner of an in 2002 or 2003, you must either: main job location at the time of death was
unincorporated business or as a partner in a outside the United States. See Retirees or
partnership carrying on a business. You are not 1) Report your moving expense deduction asSurvivors Who Move to the United States,
considered self-employed if you are semiretired, other income on your Form 1040 for the later.
are a part-time student, or work only a few hours year you cannot meet the test, or4) Your job at the new location ends becauseeach week. 2) Amend your 2001 return. of death or disability.
Full-time work.You can count only those Use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual 5) You are transferred for your employer’sweeks during which you work full time as a weekIncome Tax Return, to amend your return. benefit or laid off for a reason other thanof work. Whether you work full time during any willful misconduct. For this exception, youIf you do not deduct your moving expensesweek depends on what is usual for your type of must have obtained full-time employmenton your 2001 return and you later meet the timework in your area. and you must have expected to meet thetest, you can file an amended return for 2001 toFor more information, see Time test for test at the time you started the job.take the deduction.self-employed persons in Publication 521.
Joint return.If you are married and file a joint
Exceptions to the Time Test Members of the Armed Forcesreturn and both you and your spouse work full
time, either of you can satisfy the full-time workYou do not have to meet the time test if one ofIf you are a member of the Armed Forces ontest. However, you cannot combine the weeksthe following applies. active duty and you move because of a perma-your spouse worked with the weeks you worked
nent change of station, you do not have to meetto satisfy that test. 1) You are in the Armed Forces and you the distance and time tests, discussed earlier.
moved because of a permanent change ofYou can deduct your unreimbursed allowableTime test not yet met.You can deduct your station. See Members of the Armed moving expenses.moving expenses on your 2001 tax return even ifForces, later.you have not yet met the time test by the date A permanent change of station includes:
your 2001 return is due. You can do this if you 2) You moved to the United States because
expect to meet the 39-week test in 2002, or the you retired. See Retirees or Survivors Who1) A move from your home to your first post
78-week test in 2002 or 2003. If you deduct Move to the United States, later. of active duty,
Page 136 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 139 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) A move from one permanent post of duty dent of a person whose main job location at the 2) The standard mileage rate of 12 cents a
to another, and time of death was outside the United States, you mile.
can deduct moving expenses if the following five3) A move from your last post of duty to your Whether you use actual expenses or the stan-requirements are met.home or to a nearer point in the United dard mileage rate to figure your expenses, you
States. The move must occur within 1 year can deduct parking fees and tolls you paid in1) The move is to a home in the Unitedof ending your active duty or within the moving. You cannot deduct any part of generalStates.period allowed under the Joint Travel Reg- repairs, general maintenance, insurance, or de-2)  The move begins within 6 months afterulations. preciation for your car.the decedent’s death. (When a move be-
gins is described later.)Spouse and dependents. If a member of the Member of household. You can deduct mov-
3) The move is from the decedent’s formerArmed Forces dies, is imprisoned, or deserts, a ing expenses you pay for yourself and members
home.permanent change of station for the spouse or of your household. A member of your household
dependent includes a move to: is anyone who has both your former and new4) The decedent’s former home was outside
home as his or her home. It does not include athe United States.• The place of enlistment, tenant or employee, unless you can claim that
5) The decedent’s former home was also• The member’s, spouse’s, or dependent’s person as a dependent.your home.home of record, or
Location of move. There are different rules• A nearer point in the United States.
When a move begins. A move begins when for moving within or to the United States than for
one of the following events occurs. moving outside the United States. This chapterIf the military moves you and your spouse and
only discusses moves within or to the Uniteddependents to or from separate locations, the
1) You contract for your household goodsmoves are treated as a single move to your new States. The rules for moves outside the United
and personal effects to be moved to yourmain job location. States can be found in Publication 521.home in the United States, but only if the
move is completed within a reasonableMore information. For more information on Household Goods andtime.moving expenses for members of the Armed
Forces, and instructions for completing Form Personal Effects2) Your household goods and personal ef-
3903, see Members of the Armed Forces in fects are packed and on the way to your
You can deduct the cost of packing, crating, andPublication 521. home in the United States.
transporting your household goods and per-
3) You leave your former home to travel tosonal effects and those of the members of your
your new home in the United States.Retirees or Survivors Who Move to household from your former home to your new
home. If you use your own car to move yourthe United States
things, see Travel by car, earlier. You can in-
If you are a retiree who was working abroad or a clude the cost of storing and insuring household
survivor of a decedent who was working abroad goods and personal effects within any period ofDeductible Movingand you move to the United States or one of its 30 consecutive days after the day your thingspossessions, you do not have to meet the time are moved from your former home and beforeExpensestest, discussed earlier. However, you must meet they are delivered to your new home.the requirements discussed below under Retir- You can deduct any costs of connecting orIf you meet the requirements discussed earlierees who were working abroad or Survivors of disconnecting utilities required because you areunder Who Can Deduct Moving Expenses, youdecedents who were working abroad. moving your household goods, appliances, orcan deduct the reasonable expenses of:
United States defined.For this section of personal effects.
the chapter, the term “United States” includes 1) Moving your household goods and per- You can deduct the cost of shipping your carthe possessions of the United States. sonal effects (including in-transit orand household pets to your new home.
foreign-move storage expenses), and You can deduct the cost of moving yourRetirees who were working abroad. You
household goods and personal effects from a2) Traveling (including lodging but not meals)can deduct moving expenses for a move to a
to your new home. place other than your former home. Your deduc-new home in the United States when you perma-
tion is limited to the amount it would have cost tonently retire. However, both your former main
You cannot deduct any expenses formove them from your former home.job location and your former home must have
meals.been outside the United States. You cannot deduct the cost of movingCAUTION
!
furniture you buy on the way to yourPermanently retired.You are considered
new home.permanently retired when you cease gainful
CAUTION
!
Reasonable expenses. You can deduct onlyfull-time employment or self-employment. If, at
those expenses that are reasonable for the cir-the time you retire, you intend your retirement to
cumstances of your move. For example, thebe permanent, you will be considered retired Travel Expenses
cost of traveling from your former home to yourthough you later return to work. Your intention to
new one should be by the shortest, most direct You can deduct the cost of transportation andretire permanently may be determined by:
route available by conventional transportation.lodging for yourself and members of your house-
1) Your age and health, If, during your trip to your new home, you stophold while traveling from your former home to
over, or make side trips for sightseeing, theyour new home. This includes expenses for the2) The customary retirement age for peopleadditional expenses for your stopover or sideday you arrive.who do similar work, trips are not deductible as moving expenses.You can include any lodging expenses you3) Whether you are receiving retirement pay- had in the area of your former home within onements from a pension or retirement fund,Travel by car. If you use your car to takeday after you could no longer live in your formerand yourself, members of your household, or yourhome because your furniture had been moved.personal effects to your new home, you can4) The length of time before you return to You can deduct expenses for only one trip tofigure your expenses by deducting either:full-time work. your new home for yourself and members of
your household. However, all of you do not have1) Your actual expenses, such as gas and
to travel together or at the same time. If you useSurvivors of decedents who were working oil for your car, if you keep an accurate
your own car, see Travel by car, earlier.abroad. If you are the spouse or the depen- record of each expense, or
Chapter 19 Moving Expenses Page 137

Page 140 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sidered away from home on business. Gener- expenses. In 2000, you paid for moving your
ally, your work at a single location is consideredfurniture. You deducted these expenses inNondeductible temporary if it is realistically expected to last2000. In January 2001, you paid for travel to the
(and does in fact last) for 1 year or less. Seenew city. You can deduct these additional ex-Expenses Temporary Assignment or Job in chapter 28 forpenses in 2001.
information on deducting your expenses.You cannot deduct the following items as mov-
Reimbursed expenses. If you are reim-ing expenses.
bursed for your expenses, you may be able to• Any part of the purchase price of your new deduct your allowable expenses either in thehome. year you incurred them or in the year you paidHow To Report
them. If you use the cash method of accounting,• Car tags.
you can choose to deduct the expenses in theThe following discussions explain how to report• Driver’s license. year you are reimbursed even though you paidyour moving expenses and any reimbursements
• Expenses of buying or selling a home. the expenses in a different year.or allowances you received for your move.
If you are reimbursed for your expenses in a• Expenses of getting or breaking a lease.Form 3903. Use Form 3903 to report your year after you paid the expenses, you may want
• Home improvements to help sell your moving expenses. to delay taking the deduction until the year you
home. receive the reimbursement. If you do not chooseWhere to deduct. Deduct your moving ex- to delay your deduction until the year you are• Loss on the sale of your home. penses on line 26 of Form 1040. The amount ofreimbursed, you must include the reimburse-moving expenses you can deduct is shown on• Losses from disposing of memberships in ment in your income.line 5 of Form 3903.clubs.
Choosing when to deduct. If you use theYou cannot deduct moving expenses• Meal expenses. cash method of accounting, which is used byon Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A. most individuals, you can choose to deduct• Mortgage penalties. CAUTION
!
moving expenses in the year your employer• Pre-move househunting expenses. reimburses you if:
• Real estate taxes. Reimbursements. If you received a reim-
1) You paid the expenses in a year beforebursement for your allowable moving expenses,• Refitting of carpets and draperies. the year of reimbursement, orhow you report this amount and your expenses
• Security deposits (including any given updepends on whether the reimbursement was 2) You paid the expenses in the year immedi-due to the move). paid to you under an accountable plan or a ately after the year of reimbursement but
nonaccountable plan. by the due date, including extensions, for• Storage charges except those incurred inFor more information on reimbursements, filing your return for the reimbursementtransit and for foreign moves. see Publication 521. year.• Temporary living expenses.
How to make the choice.You can chooseWhen To Deduct Expenses
to deduct moving expenses in the year you re-No double deduction. You cannot take a
ceived reimbursement by taking the deductionmoving expense deduction and a business ex-If you were not reimbursed, deduct your allowa-
on your return, or amended return, for that year.pense deduction for the same expenses. Youble moving expenses either in the year you in-
must decide if your expenses are deductible ascurred them or in the year you paid them. You cannot deduct any moving ex-moving expenses or as business expenses. For penses for which you received a reim-example, expenses you have for travel, meals,Example. In December 2000, your em- bursement that was not included inCAUTION
!
and lodging while temporarily working at a place ployer transferred you to another city in theyour income. (Reimbursements are discussedaway from your regular place of work may be United States, where you still work. You arein Publication 521.)deductible as business expenses if you are con- single and were not reimbursed for your moving
Page 138 Chapter 19 Moving Expenses

Page 141 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
itemize deductions, you can claim all of the realUseful Items
estate taxes and none of the home insurance.You may want to see:
Other payments to a third party.If you20. Publication made other third-party payments, see Publica-
tion 504 to see whether any part of the payments❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
qualifies as alimony.
Alimony
General Rules InstrumentsIntroduction
The following rules apply to alimony regardlessThis chapter discusses the rules that apply if you Executed After 1984of when the divorce or separation instrumentpay or receive alimony. It covers the following
was executed.topics: The following rules for alimony apply to pay-
ments under divorce or separation instrumentsPayments not alimony. Not all payments• What payments are alimony, executed after 1984.under a divorce or separation instrument are• What payments are not alimony, such asalimony. Alimony does not include any of theException for instruments executed beforechild support, following. 1985. There are two situations where the rules
• How to deduct alimony you paid, for instruments executed after 1984 apply to1) Child support. instruments executed before 1985.• How to report alimony income you re- 2) Noncash property settlements.ceived, and 1) A divorce or separation instrument exe-
3) Payments that are your spouse’s part of cuted before 1985 and then modified after• Whether you must recapture the tax bene- community income. (See Community 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rulesfits of alimony. Recapture means adding Property in Publication 504.) will apply.back in your income all or part of a deduc-
tion you took in a prior year. 4) Payments to keep up the payer’s property. 2) A temporary divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-5) Use of property.Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or rated into, or adopted by, a final decreeformer spouse under a divorce or separation executed after 1984 that:Payments to a third party.Cash paymentsinstrument. It does not include voluntary pay-(including checks and money orders) to a thirdments that are not made under a divorce or a) Changes the amount or period of pay-party on behalf of your spouse under the termsseparation instrument. ment, orof your divorce or separation instrument may beAlimony is deductible by the payer and must b) Adds or deletes any contingency oralimony if they otherwise qualify. These includebe included in the spouse’s or former spouse’s condition.payments for your spouse’s medical expenses,income. Although this chapter is generally writ-housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can For the rules for alimony payments underetc. The payments are treated as received byuse the information to determine whether an pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-your spouse and then paid to the third party.amount received is alimony. tions, see Instruments Executed Before 1985 inTo be alimony, a payment must meet certainLife insurance premiums.Alimony includes Publication 504.requirements. Different requirements apply topremiums you must pay under your divorce or
payments under instruments executed afterseparation instrument for insurance on your lifeExample 1. In November 1984, you and1984 and to payments under instruments exe-to the extent your spouse owns the policy.your former spouse executed a written separa-cuted before 1985. This chapter discusses the tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofPayments for jointly-owned home. If yourrules for payments under instruments executed divorce was substituted for the written separa-divorce or separation instrument states that youafter 1984. For the rules for payments under tion agreement. The decree of divorce did notmust pay expenses for a home owned by youpre-1985 instruments, see Publication 504, Di- change the terms for the alimony you pay yourand your spouse or former spouse, some of yourvorced or Separated Individuals. former spouse. The decree of divorce is treatedpayments may be alimony.Use Table 20–1 in this chapter as a guide to as executed before 1985. Alimony paymentsdetermine whether certain payments are con-Mortgage payments. If you must pay all theunder this decree are not subject to the rules forsidered alimony. mortgage payments (principal and interest) on apayments under instruments executed after
jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify,1984.Definitions.The following definitions applyyou can deduct one-half of the total payments as
throughout this chapter. alimony. If you itemize deductions and the homeExample 2. Assume the same facts as in
is a qualified home, you can claim the other halfSpouse or former spouse. Unless other- Example 1 except that the decree of divorce
of the interest in figuring your deductible inter-wise stated in the following discussions about changed the amount of the alimony. In this ex-
est. Your spouse must report one-half of thealimony, the term “spouse” includes former ample, the decree of divorce is not treated as
payments as alimony received. If your spousespouse. executed before 1985. The alimony payments
itemizes deductions and the home is a qualifiedare subject to the rules for payments under in-Divorce or separation instrument.The home, he or she can claim one-half of the inter-struments executed after 1984.term “divorce or separation instrument” means: est on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter-
Alimony requirements.A payment to or for aest.1) A decree of divorce or separate mainte- spouse under a divorce or separation instrument
Taxes and insurance. If you must pay allnance or a written instrument incident to is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
the real estate taxes or insurance on a homethat decree, with each other and all the following require-
held as tenants in common, you can deduct ments are met. 2) A written separation agreement, or one-half of these payments as alimony. Your
3) A decree or any type of court order requir- spouse must report one-half of these payments1) The payment is in cash.
ing a spouse to make payments for the as alimony received. If you and your spouse2) The instrument does not designate thesupport or maintenance of the other itemize deductions, you can each claim one-halfpayment as not alimony.spouse. This includes a temporary decree, of the real estate taxes and none of the home
an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a insurance. 3) The spouses are not members of the
decree of alimony pendente lite (while If your home is held as tenants by the en- same household at the time the payments
awaiting action on the final decree ortirety or joint tenants, none of your payments are made. This requirement applies only if
agreement). for taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you the spouses are legally separated under a
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 139

Page 142 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
example, the liability for continued paymentsTable 20–1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments executed after 1984)
would end under state law.
Payments ARE alimony if all of the Payment are NOT alimony if any of the Example. You must pay your formerfollowing are true: following are true: spouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years.
Your divorce decree states that the paymentsPayments are required by a divorce or Payment is designated as child support. will end upon your former spouse’s death. Youseparation instrument.
must also pay your former spouse or your former
spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year forPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payment is a noncash property settlement.
10 years. The death of your spouse would notreturn.
terminate these payments under state law.
Payment is in cash (including checks or Payments are spouse’s part of community The $10,000 annual payments are alimony.
money orders). income. But because the $20,000 annual payments will
not end upon your former spouse’s death, theyPayment is not designated in the instrument Payments are to keep up the payer’s are not alimony.as not alimony. property.
Substitute payments. If you must make
Spouses legally separated under a decree of Payments are not required by a divorce orany payments in cash or property after your
divorce or separate maintenance are not separation instrument. spouse’s death as a substitute for continuing
members of the same household. otherwise qualifying payments, the otherwise
qualifying payments are not alimony. To the
Payments are not required after death of the extent that your payments begin, accelerate, orrecipient spouse. increase because of the death of your spouse,
otherwise qualifying payments you made mayPayment is not designated as child support. be treated as payments that were not alimony.
Whether or not such payments will be treated asThese payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by thenot alimony depends on all the facts and circum-and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by thestances.recipient.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you
must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.decree of divorce or separate mainte- by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-The payments will stop at the end of 6 years ornance. ration instrument that states the payments are upon your former spouse’s death, if earlier.not deductible as alimony by you and are ex-4) There is no liability to make any payment Your former spouse has custody of your mi-cludable from your spouse’s income. For this(in cash or property) after the death of the nor children. The decree provides that if anypurpose, any instrument (written statement)recipient spouse. child is still a minor at your spouse’s death, yousigned by both of you that makes this designa-must pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the5) The payment is not treated as child sup-tion and that refers to a previous written separa-youngest child reaches the age of majority. Theport. tion agreement is treated as a written separationtrust income and corpus (principal) are to beagreement. If you are subject to temporary sup-Each of these requirements is discussed next. used for your children’s benefit.port orders, the designation must be made in theThese facts indicate that the payments to beoriginal or a later temporary support order.Payment must be in cash. Only cash pay- made after your former spouse’s death are aYour spouse can exclude the payments fromments, including checks and money orders, substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annualincome only if he or she attaches a copy of thequalify as alimony. The following do not qualify payments. $10,000 of each of the $30,000 an-instrument designating them as not alimony toas alimony. nual payments is not alimony.his or her return. The copy must be attached
• Transfers of services or property (includ-each year the designation applies. Example 2. Under your divorce decree, youing a debt instrument of a third party or an must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually.Spouses cannot be members of the sameannuity contract). The payments will stop at the end of 15 years orhousehold. Payments to your spouse while• Execution of a debt instrument by the upon your former spouse’s death, if earlier. Theyou are members of the same household are notpayer. decree provides that if your former spouse diesalimony if you are legally separated under a
before the end of the 15-year period, you mustdecree of divorce or separate maintenance. A• The use of property. pay the estate the difference between $450,000home you formerly shared is considered one
($30,000 × 15) and the total amount paid up tohousehold, even if you physically separate your-Payments to a third party.Cash payments that time. For example, if your spouse dies at theselves in the home.to a third party under the terms of your divorce or end of the tenth year, you must pay the estateYou are not treated as members of the sameseparation instrument can qualify as a cash pay- $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).household if one of you is preparing to leave thement to your spouse. See Payments to a third
These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-household and does leave no later than 1 monthparty under General Rules, earlier.
ment to be made after your former spouse’safter the date of the payment.Also, cash payments made to a third party at
death is a substitute for the full amount of thethe written request of your spouse qualify asException. If you are not legally separated$30,000 annual payments. None of the annualalimony if all the following requirements are met.under a decree of divorce or separate mainte-payments are alimony. The result would be the
nance, a payment under a written separationsame if the payment required at death were to1) The payments are in lieu of payments ofagreement, support decree, or other court orderbe discounted by an appropriate interest factoralimony directly to your spouse. may qualify as alimony even if you are membersto account for the prepayment.2) The written request states that both of the same household when the payment is
spouses intend the payments to be treatedmade. Child support.A payment that is specificallyas alimony. designated as child support or treated as specifi-Liability for payments after death of recipientcally designated as child support under your3) You receive the written request from yourspouse. If you must continue to make pay-divorce or separation instrument is not alimony.spouse before you file your return for thements for any period after your spouse’s death, The designated amount or part may vary fromyear you made the payments. none of the payments made before or after thetime to time. Child support payments are neitherdeath are alimony. deductible by the payer nor taxable to the payee.Payments designated as not alimony.You The divorce or separation instrument does
and your spouse can designate that otherwise not have to expressly state that the paymentsSpecifically designated as child support.
qualifying payments are not alimony. You do this cease upon the death of your spouse if, for A payment will be treated as specifically desig-
Page 140 Chapter 20 Alimony

Page 143 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nated as child support to the extent that the being made under temporary support orders.
payment is reduced either: The second and third years are the next 2 calen-How To Deduct dar years, whether or not payments are made
1) On the happening of a contingency relat- during those years.Alimony Paiding to your child, or The reasons for a reduction or termination of
alimony payments that can require a recapture2) At a time that can be clearly associatedYou can deduct alimony you paid, whether orinclude:with the contingency. not you itemize deductions on your return. You
must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form • A change in your divorce or separationA payment may be treated as specifically desig-1040A or Form 1040EZ. instrument,nated as child support even if other separateEnter the amount of alimony you paid on linepayments are specifically designated as child • A failure to make timely payments,31a of Form 1040. In the space provided on linesupport. 31b, enter your spouse’s social security number.• A reduction in your ability to provide sup-
Contingency relating to your child.A If you paid alimony to more than one person,port, or
contingency relates to your child if it depends onenter the social security number of one of the• A reduction in your spouse’s supportany event relating to that child. It does not matterrecipients. Show the social security number andneeds.whether the event is certain or likely to occur.amount paid to each other recipient on an at-
Events relating to your child include the child’s: tached statement. Enter your total payments on
line 31a. When to apply the recapture rule.You are• Becoming employed,
subject to the recapture rule in the third year ifIf you do not provide your spouse’s• Dying, the alimony you pay in the third year decreasessocial security number, you may haveby more than $15,000 from the second year or• Leaving the household, to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-CAUTION
!
the alimony you pay in the second and thirdtion may be disallowed.• Leaving school, years decreases significantly from the alimony
you pay in the first year.• Marrying, or
When you figure a decrease in alimony, do
• Reaching a specified age or income level. not include the following amounts.
How To ReportClearly associated with a contingency. 1) Payments made under a temporary sup-
Payments are presumed to be reduced at a time port order.Alimony Receivedclearly associated with the happening of a con- 2) Payments required over a period of attingency relating to your child only in the follow-Report alimony you received on line 11 of Form least 3 calendar years of a fixed part ofing situations. 1040. You cannot use Form 1040A or Form your income from a business or property,
1040EZ. or from compensation for employment or1) The payments are to be reduced not more
self-employment.than 6 months before or after the date the You must give the person who paid the
child will reach 18, 21, or local age of ma-alimony your social security number. If3) Payments that decrease because of the
jority. you do not, you may have to pay a $50death of either spouse or the remarriage ofCAUTION
!
penalty. the spouse receiving the payments.2) The payments are to be reduced on two or
more occasions that occur not more than 1
Figuring the recapture.For a blank work-year before or after a different one of your
sheet for you to use to figure recaptured ali-children reaches a certain age from 18 to
mony, see Table 3 in Publication 504.24. This certain age must be the same forRecapture Ruleeach child, but need not be a whole num- Including the recapture in income.If you
ber of years. must include a recapture amount in income,If your alimony payments decrease or terminateshow it on Form 1040, line 11 (“Alimony re-In all other situations, reductions in paymentsduring the first 3 calendar years, you may beceived”). Cross out “received” and print “recap-are not treated as clearly associated with thesubject to the recapture rule. If you are subject toture.” On the dotted line next to the amount,happening of a contingency relating to yourthis rule, you have to include in income in theenter your spouse’s last name and social secur-child. third year part of the alimony payments youity number.Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in
sumption in the two situations above. This isthe third year part of the alimony payments he orDeducting the recapture.If you can deduct a
done by showing that the time at which theshe previously included in income. recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line
payments are to be reduced was determined The 3-year period starts with the first calen-31a (“Alimony paid”). Cross out “paid” and print
independently of any contingencies relating todar year you make a payment qualifying as“recapture.” In the space provided, enter your
your children. For example, if you can show thatalimony under a decree of divorce or separatespouse’s social security number.
the period of alimony payments is customary inmaintenance or a written separation agreement.
the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal toDo not include any time in which payments were
one-half of the duration of the marriage, you can
treat the amount as alimony.
Chapter 20 Alimony Page 141

Page 144 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction,
Itemized and the limit on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross
income exceeds certain amounts. See chapter 21 for the factors to consider
when deciding whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deduc-
Deductions
tions.
Higher Standard Deduction for Age
(65 or Older)Figuring the Amount21. If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledBefore figuring the amount of your standard de-to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65duction, you must determine if you are eligible toor older at the end of the year. You are consid-take it. ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.Standard Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-
duction for 2001 if your 65th birthday was on orPersons not eligible for the standard
Deduction before January 1, 2002.deduction. Your standard deduction is zero
Use Table 21–2 to figure the standard de-and you should itemize any deductions you
duction amount.have if: 
Important Changes 1) You are married and filing a separate re-
Higher Standard Deduction forturn, and your spouse itemizes deductions,Increase in standard deduction.The stan- Blindnessdard deduction for taxpayers who do not itemize2) You are filing a tax return for a short tax
deductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is year because of a change in your annualIf you are blind on the last day of the year andhigher in 2001 than it was in 2000. The amountaccounting period, or you do not itemize deductions, you are entitleddepends on your filing status. 2001 Standard to a higher standard deduction as shown in3) You are a nonresident or dual-status alienDeduction Tables are shown at the end of this Table 21–2. You qualify for this benefit if youduring the year. You are considered achapter. are totally or partly blind.dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-
Itemized deductions.The amount you can dent and resident alien during the year.Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you mustdeduct for itemized deductions is limited if yourNote. If you are a nonresident alien whoget a certified statement from an eye doctor oradjusted gross income is more than $132,950 is married to a U.S. citizen or resident at theregistered optometrist that:($66,475 if you are married filing separately).end of the year, you can choose to beSee chapter 22 for more information.
treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in the
519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you make better eye with glasses or contact lenses,
orthis choice, you can take the standard de-
duction. 2) Your field of vision is not more than 20Introduction
degrees.This chapter discusses: If an exemption for you can be claimed
If your eye condition will never improve be-on another person’s return (such as• How to figure the amount of your standard yond these limits, the statement should includeyour parents’ return), your standardCAUTION
!
deduction, this fact. You must keep the statement in yourdeduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
records.• The standard deduction for dependents,tion for Dependents, later.
and If your vision can be corrected beyond these
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear• Who should itemize deductions. Standard Deduction only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,
you can take the higher standard deduction forMost taxpayers have a choice of either taking
Amount
blindness if you otherwise qualify.a standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-
Generally, the standard deduction amounts aretions. The standard deduction is a dollar amount
that reduces the amount of income on which you adjusted each year for inflation. The standard
Spouse 65 or Older or Blindare taxed. deduction amounts for most taxpayers for 2001
The standard deduction is a benefit that elim-are shown in Table 21–1. You can take the higher standard deduction ifinates the need for many taxpayers to itemize your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:actual deductions, such as medical expenses,Decedent’s final return.The amount of thecharitable contributions, or taxes. The standard 1) You file a joint return, orstandard deduction for a decedent’s final returndeduction is higher for taxpayers who are 65 or
is the same as it would have been had the 2) You file a separate return and can claimolder or blind. If you have a choice, you should
decedent continued to live. However, if the de-an exemption for your spouse becauseuse the method that gives you the lower tax.
cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,your spouse had no gross income and anYou benefit from the standard deduction if
the higher standard deduction for age cannot beexemption for your spouse could not beyour standard deduction is more than the total of
claimed. claimed by another taxpayer.your allowable itemized deductions.
Page 142 Chapter 21 Standard Deduction

Page 145 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot claim the higher standardreturn. He has interest income of $780 andSchedule A (Form 1040), line 28, for more infor-
deduction for an individual other thanwages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.mation on figuring the correct amount of your
yourself and your spouse. Michael uses Table 21–3 to find his standarditemized deductions.CAUTION
!
deduction. He enters $150 (his earned income)
When to itemize. You may benefit fromon line 1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $750
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form(the larger of $400 and $750) on line 5, and
Examples 1040) if you:$4,550 on line 6. The amount of his standard
deduction, on line 7a, is $750 (the smaller ofThe following examples illustrate how to deter- 1) Do not qualify for the standard deduction,$750 and $4,550).mine your standard deduction using Tables or the amount you can claim is limited,21–1 and 21–2. Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-2) Had large uninsured medical and dental
lege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2001 tax expenses during the year,Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, arereturn. Joe is married and files a separate return.filing a joint return for 2001. Neither is blind. 3) Paid interest and taxes on your home,His wife does not itemize deductions on herThey decide not to itemize their deductions.
separate return. 4) Had large unreimbursed employee busi-They use Table 21–1. Their standard deduction
Joe has $1,500 in interest income and ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-is $7,600.
wages of $3,600. He has no itemized deduc- ductions,
tions. Joe finds his standard deduction by usingExample 2. Assume the same facts as in 5) Had large uninsured casualty or theftTable 21–3. He enters his earned income,Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end losses,$3,600, on line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 andof 2001. Larry and Donna use Table 21–2. Their
enters $3,850 on line 3. On line 5 he entersstandard deduction is $8,500. 6) Made large contributions to qualified chari-
$3,850, the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe isties, or
Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a jointmarried filing a separate return, he enters7) Have total itemized deductions that arereturn for 2001. Both are over age 65. Neither is$3,800 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $3,800 asmore than the standard deduction to whichblind. If they do not itemize deductions, they usehis standard deduction because it is smalleryou otherwise are entitled.Table 21 – 2. Their standard deduction is than $3,850, the amount on line 5.
$9,400. These deductions are explained in chapters
Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimed23–30.
on her parents’ 2001 tax return. She is 18 yearsIf you decide to itemize your deductions,
old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form
and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, lineStandard Deduction
ductions. Amy uses Table 21–3 to find her stan-28, on Form 1040, line 36.
dard deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900for Dependents
on line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and entersItemizing for state tax or other purposes.If
$3,150 on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150,The standard deduction for an individual for you choose to itemize even though your item-
the larger of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single,whom an exemption can be claimed on another ized deductions are less than the amount of your
Amy enters $4,550 on line 6. She enters $3,150person’s tax return is generally limited to the standard deduction, write “IE” (itemized elected)
on line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts ongreater of: next to line 36 (Form 1040).
lines 5 and 6. Because she checked one box in
1) $750, or the top part of the worksheet, she enters $1,100Changing your mind. If you do not itemizeon line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines2) The individual’s earned income for the your deductions and later find that you should7a and 7b and enters her standard deduction ofyear plus $250 (but not more than the reg- have itemized —  or if you itemize your deduc-$4,250 on line 7c.ular standard deduction amount, generally tions and later find you should not have —  you
$4,550). can change your return by filing Form 1040X,
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.However, if the individual is 65 or older or See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inblind, the standard deduction may be higher. chapter 1 for more information on amended re-Who Should ItemizeIf an exemption for you can be claimed on turns.someone else’s return, use Table 21–3 to deter-
You should itemize deductions if your total de-mine your standard deduction. Married persons who filed separate re-ductions are more than the standard deductionturns. You can change methods of taking de-Earned income defined.Earned income is amount. Also, you should itemize if you do notductions only if you and your spouse both makesalaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andqualify for the standard deduction, as discussedthe same changes. Both of you must file a con-other amounts received as pay for work youearlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-sent to assessment for any additional tax eitheractually perform. dard deduction. one may owe as a result of the change.For purposes of the standard deduction, You should first figure your itemized deduc-You and your spouse can use the methodearned income also includes any part of ations and compare that amount to your standardthat gives you the lower total tax, even thoughscholarship or fellowship grant that you must deduction to make sure you are using the one of you may pay more tax than you wouldinclude in your gross income. See Scholarship method that gives you the greater benefit.have paid by using the other method. You bothand Fellowship Grants in chapter 13 for more
must use the same method of claiming deduc-You may be subject to a limit on someinformation on what qualifies as a scholarship or
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the otherof your itemized deductions if your ad-fellowship grant.
should itemize because he or she will not qualifyjusted gross income (AGI) is more thanCAUTION
!
for the standard deduction. (See Persons not$132,950 ($66,475 if you are married filing sep-Example 1. Michael is single. His parents
eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.)arately). See chapter 22 and the instructions forclaim an exemption for him on their 2001 tax
Chapter 21 Standard Deduction Page 143

Page 146 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 21–1. Standard Deduction Chart for Most
People*
IF your Filing Status is ...
Your Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint return or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Married filing separate return
Head of household
$4,550
7,600
3,800
6,650
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 21 –2 or 21–3 instead.
Table 21–2. Standard Deduction Chart for People
Age 65 or Older or Blind*
IF your
Filing Status is ...
THEN your
Standard
Deduction is:
Single
Married filing joint
return or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separate return
Head of household
$5,650
6,750
8,500
9,400
10,300
11,200
4,700
5,600
6,500
7,400
7,750
8,850
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 21 –3 instead.
AND the Number
in the Box
Above is ...
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 21–3. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if
claiming spouse’s
exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
2. Additional amount 2.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single, enter $4,550
● Married filing separate return, enter
$3,800
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child, enter
$7,600
● Head of household, enter $6,650
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,100 ($900 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2001.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees,
and other compensation received for personal services you
performed. It also includes any amount received as a scholarship
that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$250
2001 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien,
you cannot take the standard deduction even if you were 65
or older or blind.
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.
4. Minimum amount 4. $750
Page 144 Chapter 21 Standard Deduction

Page 147 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The overall limit on itemized deductions is• Taxes—  line 9. figured after you have applied any other limit on
• Interest—  lines 10, 11, and 12. the allowance of any itemized deduction. These22. other limits include charitable contribution limits• Gifts to charity—  line 18.
(chapter 26), the limit on certain meals and en-
• Job expenses and most other miscellane-tertainment (chapter 28), and the
ous deductions—  line 26.Limit on 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on certain
miscellaneous deductions (chapter 30).• Other miscellaneous deductions—  line
27, excluding gambling and casualty orItemized theft losses. Itemized Deductions Worksheet.After you
have completed Schedule A (Form 1040)Deductions through line 27, you can use the Itemized De-
ductions Worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions for Schedule A to figure your limit. EnterWhich ItemizedIntroduction the result on line 28 of Schedule A. Keep the
worksheet for your records.This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-Deductions
ized deductions. The topics include: You should compare the amount of
Are Not Limited? your standard deduction to the amount• Who is subject to the limit, of your itemized deductions after ap-
TIP
• Which itemized deductions are limited,The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-plying the limit. Use the greater amount when
and tions are not subject to the overall limit on item-completing line 36 of your Form 1040. See chap-
ized deductions. However, they are still subjectter 21 for information on how to figure your• How to figure the limit.
to other applicable limits. standard deduction.
• Medical and dental expenses—  line 4.Useful Items
ExampleYou may want to see: • Investment interest expense—  line 13.
• Casualty and theft losses from personalFor tax year 2001, Bill and Terry Willow are filingForm (and Instructions)
use property—  line 19. a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjusted
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized gross income is $255,250. Their Schedule A• Casualty and theft losses fromDeductions itemized deductions are as follows:income-producing property—  line 27.
• Gambling losses—  line 27.
Taxes— line 9................ $17,900
Interest— lines 10, 11, and 12..... 45,000Are You Subject
Investment interest expense— line 13 41,000How Do You Figureto the Limit?
Gifts to charity— line 18......... 21,000the Limit?You are subject to the limit on certain itemized
deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) Job expenses— line 26.......... 17,240If your itemized deductions are subject to theis more than $132,950 ($66,475 if you are mar-
limit, the total of all your itemized deductions isried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on Total...................... $142,140
line 34 of your Form 1040. reduced by the smaller of:
This limit does not apply to estates or trusts. The Willows’ investment interest expense
1) 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-deduction ($41,000 from line 13 of Schedule A)
ceeds $132,950 ($66,475 if married filingis not subject to the overall limit on itemized
separately), or deductions.
Which Itemized 2) 80% of your itemized deductions that areThe Willows use the Itemized Deductions
affected by the limit. See Which Itemized Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions forDeductions Deductions Are Limited, earlier. Schedule A to figure their overall limit. Their
completed worksheet is shown in Table 22–1.Before you figure the overall limit on itemizedAre Limited?
Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,deductions, you must first complete lines 1
the Willows can deduct only $138,471through 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040), includ-The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-
ing any appropriate forms (such as Form 2106, ($142,140 − $3,669). They enter $138,471 ontions are subject to the overall limit on itemized
Form 4684, etc.). Schedule A, line 28.deductions.
Chapter 22 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 145

Page 148 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1. Itemized Deductions Worksheet (Keep for Your Records)
1. Add the amounts on Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 14, 18, 19, 26, and 27
2. Add the amounts on Schedule A, lines 4, 13, and 19, plus any gambling and casualty or theft losses
included on line 27
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
4. Multiply line 3 above by 80% (.80)
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 34
6. Enter: $132,950 if single, married filing jointly , head of household, or
qualifying widow(er); $66,475 if married filing separately
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
8. Multiply line 7 above by 3% (.03)
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8
10. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 9 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 28
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 27.
1.
2.
3.
9.
10.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
No. Y our deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A,
line 28.
Ye s .Subtract line 2 from line 1
No. Y our deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1
above on Schedule A, line 28.
Ye s .Subtract line 6 from line 5
STOP
STOP
142,140
41,000
101,140
80,912
255,250
132,950
122,300
3,669
3,669
138,471
/H12011
/H12011
Page 146 Chapter 22 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 149 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Each of you should include half the expenses. If
medical expenses are paid out of the separateWhat Expenses Can
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid
23. the medical expenses can include them. If youYou Include This Year?
live in a community property state, are married,
and file a separate return, see Publication 555,You can include only the medical and dental
Community Property.expenses you paid this year, regardless of when
Medical and the services were provided. If you pay medical
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver
the check generally is the date of payment. IfDental Expenses you use a “pay-by-phone” or “on-line” account to Whose Medical
pay your medical expenses, the date reported
on the statement of the financial institutionExpenses
showing when payment was made is the date ofImportant Change payment. You can include medical expensesCan You Include?you charge to your credit card in the year the
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- charge is made. It does not matter when youYou can include medical expenses you pay forage rate allowed for out-of-pocket expenses foractually pay the amount charged. yourself and for the individuals discussed in thisyour car when you use your car for medical section.reasons is now 12 cents a mile. See Transporta- When do you include a decedent’s medical
tion under What Expenses Are Deductible. expenses? Medical expenses for a decedentSpouse. You can include medical expensesthat are paid from his or her estate are treated asyou paid for your spouse. To claim these ex-paid at the time the medical services were pro-penses, you must have been married either atvided if they are paid within the 1-year periodthe time your spouse received the medical ser-beginning with the day after the date of death.Introduction vices or at the time you paid the medical ex-See Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses penses.Can You include, later, for an exception.This chapter will help you determine:
Medical expenses paid before death by theExample 1. Mary received medical treat-• The definition of medical care, decedent are included in figuring any deduction
ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for thefor medical and dental expenses on the• What expenses you can include this year, treatment after they married. Bill can includedecedent’s final income tax return. This includes
these expenses in figuring his medical expense• How much of the expenses you can de- expenses for the decedent’s spouse and depen-
deduction even if Bill and Mary file separateduct, dents as well as for the decedent.
returns.
• Whose medical expenses you can include, If Mary had paid the expenses before she
• What medical expenses are deductible, and Bill married, Bill could not include Mary ’s
expenses in his separate return. Mary wouldHow Much of the• How you treat reimbursements, and include the amounts she paid during the year in
• How to report the deduction on your tax her separate return. If they filed a joint return, theExpenses Can Youreturn. medical expenses both paid during the year
would be used to figure their medical expenseDeduct? deduction.
Useful Items You can deduct only the amount of your medicalExample 2. This year, John paid medicalYou may want to see: and dental expenses that is more than 7.5% of expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.your adjusted gross income (line 34, FormJohn married Belle this year and they file a jointPublication 1040). return. Because John was married to LouiseIn this chapter, the term “7.5% limit”  is used❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses when she incurred the medical expenses, heto refer to 7.5% of your adjusted gross income.
can include those expenses in figuring his medi-The phrase “subject to the 7.5% limit” is alsoForm (and Instructions) cal deduction for this year.used. This phrase means that you must subtract
7.5% (.075) of your adjusted gross income from❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized Dependent. You can include medical ex-your medical expenses to figure your medicalDeductions penses you paid for your dependent. To claimexpense deduction.
these expenses, the person must have been
your dependent either at the time the medicalExample. Your adjusted gross income is
services were provided or at the time you paid$20,000, 7.5% of which is $1,500. You paid
the expenses. A person generally qualifies asmedical expenses of $800. You cannot deduct
your dependent for purposes of the medical ex-What Is the Definitionany of your medical expenses because they are
pense deduction if:not more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross in-
of Medical Care? come.
1) That person lived with you for the entire
year as a member of your household or isMedical care means amounts paid for the diag-Separate returns.If you and your spouse live
related to you,nosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or preventionin a noncommunity property state and file sepa-
of disease, and for treatments affecting any part rate returns, each of you can include only the2) That person was a U.S. citizen or resident,medical expenses each actually paid. Any medi-or function of the body. The medical care ex- or a resident of Canada or Mexico, forcal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-penses must be primarily to alleviate or prevent some part of the calendar year in whichcount in which you and your spouse have thea physical or mental defect or illness. your tax year began, andsame interest are considered to have been paidMedical care expenses include the premi- 3) You provided over half of that person’s to-equally by each of you, unless you can showums you pay for insurance that covers the ex- tal support for the calendar year.otherwise.penses of medical care, and the amounts you
pay for transportation to get medical care. Medi- You can include the medical expenses ofCommunity property states. If you and
cal care expenses also include limited amounts any person who is your dependent even if youyour spouse live in a community property state
paid for any qualified long-term care insurance cannot claim an exemption for him or her onand file separate returns, any medical expenses
contract. your return.paid out of community funds are divided equally.
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 147

Page 150 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. In 2000 your son was your de- You may be able to take a credit orcan include the entire unreimbursed amount you
exclusion for other expenses related topaid for medical expenses.pendent. In 2001 he no longer qualified as your
adoption. See Publication 968, Taxdependent. However, you paid $800 in 2001 for
TIP
Benefits for Adoption, for more information. Example. You and your three brothers eachmedical expenses your son incurred in 2000
provide one-fourth of your mother’s total sup-when he was your dependent. You can include
port. Under a multiple support agreement, youChild of divorced or separated parents.Ifthe $800 in figuring your medical expense de-
claim your mother as a dependent. You paid alleither parent can claim a child as a dependentduction for 2001. You cannot include this
of her medical expenses. Your brothers repaidunder the rules for divorced or separated par-amount on your 2000 tax return.
you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figur-ents, each parent can include the medical ex-
penses he or she pays for the child even if aning your medical expense deduction, you can
Adopted child. You can include medical ex-exemption for the child is claimed by the otherinclude only one-fourth of your mother’s medical
penses that you paid for a child before adoption,parent. expenses. Your brothers cannot include any
if the child qualified as your dependent when the part of the expenses. However, if you and yourSupport claimed under a multiple supportmedical services were provided or when the brothers share the nonmedical support itemsagreement. A multiple support agreement isexpenses were paid. If you pay back an adop- and you separately pay all of your mother’sused when two or more people provide moretion agency or other persons for medical ex- medical expenses, you can include the amountthan half of a person’s support, but no one alonepenses they paid under an agreement with you, you paid for her medical expenses in your medi-provides more than half. If you are considered toyou are treated as having paid those expenses cal expenses.have provided more than half of a person’s sup-provided you clearly substantiate that the pay-port under such an agreement, you can include
ment is directly attributable to the medical caremedical expenses you pay for that person, evenDecedent
of the child. But if you pay back medical ex-if you cannot claim the person as a dependent.
penses incurred and paid before adoption nego- The survivor or personal representative of aAny medical expenses paid by others who
tiations began, you cannot include them as decedent can choose to treat certain expensesjoined you in the agreement cannot be included
medical expenses. as medical expenses by anyone. However, you paid by the decedent’s estate for the decedent’s
Table 23–1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist
You can include: You cannot include:
• Birth control pills prescribed• Oxygen equipment and • Archer MSAs (see Publication• Funeral, burial, or
by your doctor oxygen 969) cremation expenses
• Capital expenses for • Part of life-care fee paid to• Bottled water • Ilegal operation or
equipment or retirement home designated treatment • Cost of nutritional
improvements to your for medical care supplements, vitamins, herbal• Life insurance or income
home needed for medical • Prescription medicines supplements, “natural protection policies, or
care (see Publication 502) (prescribed by a doctor) medicines ”, etc., unless you policies providing payment
• Cost of fertility and insulin can only obtain them legally for loss of life, limb, sight,
enhancement procedures with a physician ’s prescription etc.• Psychiatric care at a
• Cost and care of guide specially equipped medical • Diaper service • Maternity clothes
dogs or other animals center (includes meals and • Expenses for your general • Medical insurance
aiding the blind, deaf, and lodging) health (even if following your included in a car insurance
disabled • Social Security tax, doctor ’s advice) such as— policy covering all persons
• Cost of lead-based paint Medicare tax, FUTA, and — Health club dues injured in or by your car
removal (see Publication state employment tax for — Household help (even if • Medicine you buy without
502) worker providing medical recommended by a doctor) a prescription
care (see Wages for — Social activities, such as• Cost of vasectomy • Nursing care for a healthynursing services, later) dancing or swimming lessons• Expenses of an organ baby— Trip for general health• Special items (artificialdonor • Surgery for purelyimprovementlimbs, false teeth,• Hospital services fees (lab cosmetic reasonseye-glasses, contactwork, therapy, nursing • Toothpaste, toiletries,lenses, hearing aids,services, surgery, etc.) cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.)
• Laser eye surgery— to • Special school or home forpromote the correct mentally or physicallyfunction of the eye disabled persons (see
• Legal abortion Publication 502)
• Legal operation to prevent• Stop-smoking programs
having children • Transportation for needed
• Long-term care contracts, medical care
qualified (see Publication• Treatment at a drug or502) alcohol center (includes
• Meals and lodging provided meals and lodging provided
by a hospital during by the center)
medical treatment • Wages for nursing services
• Medical and hospital (see Publication 502)
insurance premiums
• Medical services fees (from
doctors, dentists, surgeons,
specialists, and other
medical practitioners)
Page 148 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 151 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
medical care as paid by the decedent at the time stated in the insurance contract or given to youHealth Insurance Costs for
in a separate statement.the medical services were provided. The ex- Self-Employed Persons
penses must be paid within the 1-year period
beginning with the day after the date of death. If If you were self-employed and had a net profitEmployer-sponsored health insurance plan.
you are the survivor or personal representative for the year, you may be able to deduct, as anDo not include in your medical and dental ex-
making this choice, you must attach a statement adjustment to income, up to 60% of the amountpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040) any insur-
to the decedent’s Form 1040 (or the decedent’s paid for health insurance on behalf of yourself,ance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored
amended return, Form 1040X) saying that the your spouse, and dependents. If you itemizehealth insurance plan unless the premiums are
expenses have not been and will not be claimed your deductions, include the remaining premi-included in box 1 of your Form W–2. Also, do
on the estate tax return. ums with all other medical care expenses onnot include on Schedule A (Form 1040) any
Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the 7.5%other medical and dental expenses paid by theQualified medical expenses paid limit. See chapter 7 of Publication 535, Businessplan unless the amount paid is included in box 1before death by the decedent are not Expenses, for more information.of your Form W–2.deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-CAUTION
!
bution from any Medicare+Choice MSA or Flexible spending arrangement. Contri-
Meals and LodgingArcher MSA. butions made by your employer to provide cov-
erage for qualified long-term care servicesAmended returns and claims for refund are You can include in medical expenses the cost ofunder a flexible spending or similar arrangementdiscussed in chapter 1. meals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu-must be included in your income. This amount
tion if your main reason for being there is towill be reported as wages in box 1 of your FormWhat if you pay medical expenses of a de- receive medical care. See Nursing home, later.W –2.ceased spouse or dependent? If you paid You may be able to include in medical ex-
medical expenses for your deceased spouse or penses the cost of lodging not provided in aMedicare A. If you are covered under socialdependent, include them as medical expenses hospital or similar institution. You can includesecurity (or if you are a government employeeon your Form 1040 in the year paid, whether the cost of such lodging while away from home ifwho paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled inthey are paid before or after the decedent’s you meet all of the following requirements.Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare Adeath. The expenses can be included if theis not a medical expense. If you are not covered1) The lodging is primarily for and essential toperson was your spouse or dependent either atunder social security (or were not a governmentmedical care.the time the medical services were provided oremployee who paid Medicare tax), you can vol-at the time you paid the expenses. 2) The medical care is provided by a doctoruntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation the
in a licensed hospital or in a medical carepremiums paid for Medicare A can be included
facility related to, or the equivalent of, aas a medical expense on your tax return.
licensed hospital.
What Medical Medicare B. Medicare B is a supplemental 3) The lodging is not lavish or extravagant
medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi-under the circumstances.
Expenses Are care B are a medical expense. If you applied for
4) There is no significant element of personalit at age 65 or after you became disabled, you
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in theDeductible? can deduct the monthly premiums you paid. If
travel away from home.you were over age 65 or disabled when you first
Use Table 23–1 in this chapter as a guide toenrolled, check the information you receivedThe amount you include in medical expenses for
determine which medical and dental expensesfrom the Social Security Administration to findlodging cannot be more than $50 for each night
you can include on Schedule A (Form 1040). out your premium. for each person. Lodging is included for a per-
See Publication 502 for information about other son for whom transportation expenses are a
expenses you can include.                Prepaid insurance premiums. Premiums medical expense because that person is travel-
you pay before you are age 65 for insurance foring with the person receiving the medical care.
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or yourFor example, if a parent is traveling with a sickInsurance Premiums dependents after you reach age 65 are medicalchild, up to $100 per night can be included as a
care expenses in the year paid if they are:medical expense for lodging. Meals are not in-You can include in medical expenses insurance
cluded.premiums you pay for policies that cover medi-1) Payable in equal yearly installments, orcal care. Policies can provide payment for: more often, and Nursing home. You can include in medical
• Hospitalization, surgical fees, X-rays, etc., expenses the cost of medical care in a nursing2) Payable for at least 10 years, or until youhome or home for the aged for yourself, yourreach age 65 (but not for less than 5• Prescription drugs, spouse, or your dependents. This includes theyears).• Replacement of lost or damaged contact cost of meals and lodging in the home if the main
lenses, reason for being there is to get medical care.
Do not include the cost of meals and lodgingUnused sick leave used to pay premiums.• Membership in an association that gives if the reason for being in the home is personal.You must include in gross income cash pay-cooperative or so-called “free-choice” You can, however, include in medical expensesments you receive at the time of retirement formedical service, or group hospitalization the part of the cost that is for medical or nursingunused sick leave. You must also include inand clinical care, or care.gross income the value of unused sick leave
• Qualified long-term care insurance con-that, at your option, your employer applies to the
tracts (subject to additional limitations).cost of your continuing participation in yourTransportationSee Qualified Long-term Care Insuranceemployer’s health plan after you retire. You can
Contracts in Publication 502. include this cost of continuing participation in theYou can include in medical expenses amounts
health plan as a medical expense. paid for transportation primarily for, and essen-You cannot deduct insurance premiums paid If you participate in a health plan where yourtial to, medical care.with pretax dollars. You cannot include the pre-employer automatically applies the value of un-
miums because they are not included in box 1 ofused sick leave to the cost of your continuingYou can include:
your Form W–2. participation in the health plan (and you do not• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-If you have a policy that provides more thanhave the option to receive cash), do not includelance service,one kind of payment, you can include the premi-the value of the unused sick leave in gross
ums for the medical care part of the policy if theincome. You cannot include this cost of continu-• Transportation expenses of a parent who
charge for the medical part is reasonable. Theing participation in that health plan as a medical must go with a child who needs medical
cost of the medical part must be separatelyexpense. care,
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 149

Page 152 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Transportation expenses of a nurse or rather than a medical deduction. You are dis-
other person who can give injections, abled if you have: How Do You Treatmedications, or other treatment required• A physical or mental disability (for exam-by a patient who is traveling to get medical Reimbursements?ple, blindness or deafness) that function-care and is unable to travel alone, and ally limits your being employed, or
You can deduct as medical expenses only those• Transportation expenses for regular visits• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-amounts paid during the taxable year for whichto see a mentally ill dependent, if theseample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatyou received no insurance or other reimburse-visits are recommended as a part of treat-substantially limits one or more of yourment.ment. major life activities, such as performing
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-
Insurance ReimbursementYou cannot include: ing, learning, or working.
• Transportation expenses to and from work You must reduce your total medical expensesYou can deduct impairment-related expenseseven if your condition requires an unusual for the year by all reimbursements for medicalas business expenses if they are:means of transportation, or expenses that you receive from insurance or
• Necessary for you to do your work satis-other sources during the year. This includes• Transportation expenses if, for nonmedicalfactorily, payments from Medicare.reasons only, you choose to travel to an- Generally, you do not reduce medical ex-• For goods or services not required orother city, such as a resort area, for an penses by payments you receive for:used, other than incidentally, in your per-operation or other medical care prescribed
sonal activities, andby your doctor. • Permanent loss or use of a member or
function of the body (loss of limb, sight,• Not specifically covered under other in-
hearing, etc.) or disfigurement that iscome tax laws.Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket
based on the nature of the injury withoutexpenses for your car, such as gas and oil, when
regard to the amount of time lost fromyou use your car for medical reasons. You can-Example. You are blind. You must use a work,not include depreciation, insurance, general re-reader to do your work. You use the reader bothpair, or maintenance expenses. • Loss of earnings, orduring your regular working hours at your place
If you do not want to use your actual ex-of work and outside your regular working hours• Damages for personal injury or sickness.penses, you can use a standard rate of 12 cents away from your place of work. The reader’s
a mile for use of your car for medical reasons.services are only for your work. You can deductYou do not have a medical deduction if youYou can also include the cost of parking fees your expenses for the reader as business ex-are reimbursed for all of your medical expensesand tolls. You can add these fees and tolls topenses. for the year.your medical expenses whether you use actual
expenses or use the standard mileage rate. Excess reimbursement. If you are reim-
bursed more than your medical expenses, youExample. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for
medical reasons during the year. He spent $200
for gas, $5 for oil, and $50 for tolls and parking.
He wants to figure the amount he can include in
medical expenses both ways to see which gives
him the greater deduction.
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds
the $200 for gas, the $5 for oil, and the $50 for
tolls and parking for a total of $255.
He then figures the standard mileage
amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 12
cents a mile for a total of $336. He then adds the
$50 tolls and parking for a total of $386.
Bill includes the $386 of car expenses with
his other medical expenses for the year because
the $386 is more than the $255 he figured using
actual expenses.
Disabled Dependent
Care Expenses
Some disabled dependent care expenses may
qualify as medical expenses or as work-related
expenses for purposes of taking a credit for
dependent care. (See chapter 33.) You can
choose to apply them either way as long as you
do not use the same expenses to claim both a
credit and a medical expense deduction.
Impairment-Related
Work Expenses
(Business or Medical)
If you are disabled and have expenses which
are necessary for you to be able to work
(impairment-related work expenses), you can
take a business deduction for these expenses,
Figure 23–A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Page 150 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 153 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may have to include the excess in income. You wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250) expense that you receive in a later year. How-
may want to use Figure 23–A to help you decide for a personal health insurance policy.ever, if the reimbursement is more than the
if any of your reimbursement will be taxable During the year, you paid medical expensesexpense, see Excess reimbursement, earlier.
income. of $3,600. In the same year, you were reim-
bursed $2,400 under your employer’s policy and Example. Last year, you had medical ex-Premiums paid by you. If you pay the en-$1,600 under your personal policy. penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500tire premium for your medical insurance or all ofYou figure the part of any excess reimburse-because it is less than 7.5% of your adjustedthe costs of a plan similar to medical insurance,ment you receive that is from your employer’s gross income. If, in a later year, you are reim-you generally do not include an excess reim-contribution as follows: bursed for any of the $500 medical expenses,bursement in your gross income.
you do not include that amount in your gross
Step 1.Premiums paid by you and your employer. income.
If both you and your employer contribute to yourReimbursement from employer’s policy $2,400medical insurance plan and your employer’s Settlement of damage suit.If you receive anReimbursement from your policy.... 1,600contributions are not included in your gross in- amount in settlement of a personal injury suit,come, you must include in your gross incomeTotal reimbursement........... $4,000 the part that is for medical expenses deducted inthe part of an excess reimbursement that is from an earlier year is included in income in the laterAmount of medical expenses from youryour employer’s contribution. year if your medical deduction in the earlier yearpolicy [($1,600 ÷ $4,000) × $3,600 totalYou can figure the percentage of the excess reduced your income tax in that year. See Reim-medical expenses].............. $1,440reimbursement you must include in gross in- bursement in a later year, earlier.come using the following formula. Amount of medical expenses from your
employer’s policy [($2,400 ÷ $4,000) × Future medical expenses. If you receive
Amount paid $3,600 total medical expenses]..... 2,160 an amount in settlement of a damage suit forPercent ofby personal injuries that is properly allocable orexcess Total medical expenses......... $3,600employer = determined to be for future medical expenses,reimbursementTotal annual Excess reimbursement from your you must reduce any medical expenses forthat is taxablecost of policy employer’s policy ($2,400 − $2,160) $240 these injuries until the amount you received has
been completely used.
Example. You are covered by your Step 2.
employer’s medical insurance policy. The an-
Because both you and your employernual premium is $2,000. Your employer pays
contributed to the cost of this policy, you must$600 of that amount and the balance of $1,400 How Do You Report thedivide the cost to determine the excessis taken out of your wages. The part of anyreimbursement from your employer’sexcess reimbursement you receive under thecontribution. Deduction on Your Taxpolicy that is from your employer’s contributions
is figured as follows: Employer’s contribution in relation to Return?the annual cost of the policy
$600 ($300 ÷ $1,200)................ 2 5 %= 30% Once you have determined which medical care$2,000
Amount to report as other income on expenses you can include when figuring yourYou must include in your gross income 30%line 21, Form 1040(25% × $240).... $60 deduction, you must report the deduction on(.30) of any excess reimbursement you received your tax return.for medical expenses under the policy.
Reimbursement in a later year.If you arePremiums paid by your employer.If your What Tax Form Do Youreimbursed in a later year for medical expensesemployer or your former employer pays the totalyou deducted in an earlier year, you must reportUse?cost of your medical insurance plan and yourthe reimbursement as income up to the amountemployer’s contributions are not included in youryou previously deducted as medical expenses.You figure your medical expense deduction onincome, you must report all of your excess reim-However, do not report as income the reim-lines 1–4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-bursement as other income. bursement you received up to the amount ofnot claim medical expenses on Form 1040A or
More than one policy.If you are coveredyour medical deductions that did not reduceForm 1040EZ. If you need more information on
under more than one policy, the costs of whichyour tax for the earlier year. For more informa-itemized deductions or you are not sure if you
are paid by both you and your employer, yoution about the recovery of an amount that youcan itemize, see chapters 21 and 22.must first divide the medical expense among theclaimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierEnter the amount you paid for medical andpolicies to figure the excess reimbursementyear, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries in dental care on line 1, Schedule A (Form 1040).from each policy. Then divide the policy costs tochapter 13. This should be your expenses that were notfigure the part of any excess reimbursement that reimbursed by insurance or any other sources.Medical expenses not deducted.If you didis from your employer’s contribution.
You can deduct only the amount of yournot deduct a medical expense in the year you
medical and dental expenses that is more thanExample. You are covered by your paid it because your medical expenses were not
7.5% of your adjusted gross income shown onemployer’s health insurance policy. The annual more than 7.5% of your adjusted gross income,
line 34, Form 1040. For an example, see thepremium is $1,200. Your employer pays $300, or because you did not itemize deductions, do
partial Schedule A at the end of this chapter.and the balance of $900 is deducted from your not include in income the reimbursement for this
Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 151

Page 154 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill and Helen Jones 000 00 0000
3,434
2,475
959
33,000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULES A&B Schedule A—Itemized Deductions
(Form 1040) (Schedule B is on back)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedules A and B (Form 1040).
Attachment
Sequence No. 07
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Caution. Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others.Medical
and 
Dental
Expenses
1Medical and dental expenses (see page A-2)1
22
3Multiply line 2 above by 7.5% (.075)3
Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-4 4
Enter amount from Form 1040, line 34
(99)
2001
Page 152 Chapter 23 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 155 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions) Withheld taxes. Deduct state and local in-
come taxes withheld from your salary in the year❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized they are withheld. For 2001, these taxes will beDeductions24. shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your Form W–2.
❏ Schedule E (Form 1040)Supplemental You may also have state or local income tax
Income and Loss withheld on Form W – 2G (box 14), Form
1099–MISC (box 16), or Form 1099–R (boxesTaxes ❏ Form 1116 Foreign Tax Credit 10 and 13).
Estimated tax payments. Deduct estimated
tax payments you made during the year under aImportant Reminder pay-as-you-go plan of a state or local govern-
Tests To Deduct ment. However, you must have a reasonable
Limit on itemized deductions.If your ad- basis for making the estimated tax payments.
justed gross income is more than $132,950Any Tax Any estimated state or local tax payments you
($66,475 if you are married filing separately), the make that are not reasonably determined in
overall amount of your itemized deductions mayThe following two tests must be met for any taxgood faith at the time of payment are not deduct-
be limited. See chapter 22 for more informationto be deductible by you. ible. For example, you made an estimated state
about this limit. income tax payment. However, the estimate of1) The tax must be imposed on you. your state tax liability shows that you will get a
refund of the full amount of your estimated pay-2) The tax must be paid during your tax year.
ment. You had no reasonable basis to believe
you had any additional liability for state incomeIntroduction The tax must be imposed on you.Generally, taxes and you cannot deduct the estimated taxyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed onThis chapter discusses which taxes you can payment.you.deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
Refund applied to taxes.Deduct any part of(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes youGenerally, you can deduct property taxes
a refund of prior-year state or local income taxescan deduct on other schedules or forms andonly if you are the property owner. If your spouse
that you chose to have credited to your 2001which taxes you cannot deduct. owns property and pays real estate taxes on it,
estimated state or local income taxes.This chapter covers: the taxes are deductible on your spouse’s sepa-
Do not reduce your deduction by either ofrate return or on your joint return.• Income taxes (state, local, or foreign), the following items.
The tax must be paid during your tax year.• Real estate taxes (state, local, or foreign), • Any state or local income tax refund (orIf you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deductcredit) you expect to receive for 2001.• Personal property taxes (state or local),only those taxes actually paid during your taxand year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day you• Any refund of (or credit for) prior year state
mail or deliver the check is generally the date of and local income taxes you actually re-• Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.
payment. If you use a pay-by-phone account, ceived in 2001.
the date reported on the statement of the finan-At the end of the chapter is a section that See Refund (or credit) of state or local incomecial institution showing when payment wasexplains which form you use to deduct the differ- taxes, later.made is the date of payment. If you contest a taxent types of taxes.
liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you canSeparate federal returns.If you and yourTable. Use Table 24–1 as a guide to deter-deduct the tax only in the year it is actually paid.spouse file separate state, local, and federalmine which taxes you can deduct. If you use an accrual method of accounting,income tax returns, you each can deduct on yoursee Publication 538, Accounting Periods andBusiness taxes. You can deduct certain federal return only the amount of your own stateMethods, for more information.taxes only if they are ordinary and necessary and local income tax.expenses of your trade or business or of produc-
Joint state and local returns.If you anding income. For information on these taxes, see
your spouse file joint state and local returns andPublication 535, Business Expenses.
separate federal returns, each of you can deductIncome TaxesState or local taxes.These are taxes im- on your separate federal return part of the stateposed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or and local income taxes. You can deduct only theThis section discusses the deductibility of stateany of their political subdivisions (such as a amount of the total taxes that is proportionate toand local income taxes (including employeecounty or city), or by the District of Columbia. your gross income compared to the combinedcontributions to state benefit funds) and foreigngross income of you and your spouse. However,Indian tribal government.An Indian tribalincome taxes. you cannot deduct more than the amount yougovernment that is recognized by the Secretary
actually paid during the year. You can avoid thisof the Treasury as performing substantial gov-
State and Local Income calculation if you and your spouse are jointly andernment functions will be treated as a state for
individually liable for the full amount of the statethis purpose. Income taxes, real estate taxes,Taxes and local income taxes. If so, you and yourand personal property taxes imposed by that
spouse can deduct on your separate federalIndian tribal government (or by any of its subdivi-You can deduct state and local income taxes.
returns the amount you each actually paid.sions that are treated as political subdivisions of
a state) are deductible. Exception.  You cannot deduct state and localJoint federal return.If you file a joint federal
income taxes you pay on income that is exemptreturn, you can deduct the total of the state andForeign taxes.These are taxes imposed by afrom federal income tax, unless the exempt in-local income taxes both of you paid.foreign country or any of its political subdivi-come is interest income. For example, you can-sions. Contributions to state benefit funds.As annot deduct the part of a state’s income tax that is
employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt from
Useful Items tions to state benefit funds that provide protec-federal income tax.
You may want to see: tion against loss of wages. Mandatory payments
made to the following state benefit funds are
Publication deductible as state income taxes on line 5 ofWhat To Deduct
Schedule A (Form 1040).❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for IndividualsYour deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-• California.❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Time mated tax payments, or other tax payments as
Homeowners follows. • New Jersey.
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 153

Page 156 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben- information, see Special Rules for Cooperativesary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). They
efit Fund. in Publication 530. figure their deduction for taxes on their old home
as follows.• Rhode Island Temporary Disability Benefit
Buyers and sellers of real estate.If youFund. Taxes On Old Homebought or sold real estate during the year, the
• Washington State Supplemental real estate taxes must be divided between the1. Enter the total real estate taxes forWorkmen ’s Compensation Fund. buyer and the seller. the real property tax year..... $620
The buyer and the seller must divide the real2. Enter the number of days in theEmployee contributions to private orestate taxes according to the number of days inreal property tax year that you
voluntary disability plans are not de-the real property tax year (the period to which owned the property......... 1 2 6
ductible. the tax imposed relates) that each owned the3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .345
CAUTION
!
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isproperty. The seller is treated as paying the
your deduction. Enter it on line 6taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale.
Refund (or credit) of state or local income of Schedule A (Form 1040).... $214The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin-
taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-Since the buyers of their old home paid all of thestate or local income taxes in a year after theless of the lien dates under local law. Generally,taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 inyear in which you paid them, you may have tothis information is included on the settlementthe selling price of the old home. (The buyersinclude the refund in income on line 10 of Formstatement provided at the closing. add the $214 to their cost of the home.)1040 in the year you receive it. This includesIf you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes untilrefunds resulting from taxes that were Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-they are paid because you use the cash methodoverwithheld, applied from a prior year return, ing the real property tax year for 243 days (Mayof accounting, and the buyer of your property isnot figured correctly, or figured again because of 3 to December 31, including their date ofpersonally liable for the tax, you are consid-an amended return. If you did not itemize your purchase). They figure their deduction for taxesered to have paid your part of the tax at thedeductions in the previous year, do not include on their new home as follows.time of the sale. This lets you deduct the part ofthe refund in income. If you deducted the taxesthe tax to the date of sale even though you didin the previous year, include all or part of the Taxes On New Home not actually pay it. However, you must also in-refund on line 10, Form 1040, in the year youclude the amount of that tax in the selling price ofreceive the refund. For a discussion of how 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forthe property. The buyer must include the samethe real property tax year..... $732much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 13.amount in his or her cost of the property.2. Enter the number of days in the
real property tax year that youYou figure your deduction for taxes on each
owned the property......... 2 4 3property bought or sold during the real property
3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .666tax year as follows.Foreign Income Taxes 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is
your deduction. Enter it on line 61. Enter the total real estate taxes forGenerally, you can take either a deduction or a of Schedule A (Form 1040).... $488the real property tax year.....credit for income taxes imposed on you by a2. Enter the number of days in the Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes onforeign country or a U.S. possession. However,real property tax year that you the new home, they add $244 ($732 paid lessyou cannot take a deduction or credit for foreignowned the property......... $488 deduction) to their cost of the new home.income taxes paid on income that is exempt3. Divide line 2 by 365.........
(The sellers add this $244 to their selling pricefrom U.S. tax under the foreign earned income4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is
and deduct the $244 as a real estate tax.)exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. Foryour deduction. Enter it on line 6
information on these exclusions, get Publicationof Schedule A (Form 1040).... Dennis and Beth’s real estate tax deduction
54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident for their old and new homes is the sum of $214Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you
Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign taxbought or sold during the real property tax year.and $488, or $702. They will enter this amount
credit, get Publication 514. on line 6 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
Delinquent taxes.Do not divide delinquent
taxes between the buyer and seller if the taxesExample 2. George and Helen Brown
are for any real property tax year before the onebought a new home on May 3, 2001. Their real
in which the property is sold. Even if the buyerproperty tax year for the new home is the calen-Real Estate Taxes agrees to pay the delinquent taxes, the buyerdar year. Real estate taxes for 2000 were as-
cannot deduct them. The buyer must add themsessed in their state on January 1, 2001. TheDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local,to the cost of the property. The seller can deducttaxes became due on May 31, 2001, and Octo-or foreign taxes on real property levied for thethese taxes paid by the buyer. However, theber 31, 2001.general public welfare. The taxes must be basedseller must include them in the selling price.on the assessed value of the real property and The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after
must be charged uniformly against all propertyExamples. The following examples illus-the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2000
under the jurisdiction of the taxing authority.trate how real estate taxes are divided betweenwere $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2001,
buyer and seller. and $340 on October 31, 2001. These taxesDeductible real estate taxes generally do not
were for the 2000 real property tax year. Theinclude taxes charged for local benefits and im-
Example 1. Dennis and Beth White’s realprovements that increase the value of the prop- Browns cannot deduct them since they did not
property tax year for both their old home anderty. They also do not include itemized charges own the property until 2001. Instead, they must
their new home is the calendar year, with pay-for services (such as trash collection) to specific add $680 to the cost of their new home.
ment due August 1. The tax on their old home,property or people, even if the charge is paid to In January 2002, the Browns receive theirsold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newthe taxing authority. For more information about 2001 property tax statement for $752, whichhome, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis andtaxes and charges that are not deductible, see they will pay in 2002. The Browns owned theirBeth are considered to have paid a proportion-Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct, new home during the 2001 real property tax yearate share of the real estate taxes on the oldlater. for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They willhome even though they did not actually pay
figure their 2002 deduction for taxes as follows.them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-they can claim only a proportionate share of theing corporation.Generally, you can deduct 1. Enter the total real estate taxes fortaxes they paid on their new property evenyour share of the real estate taxes the corpora- the real property tax year..... $752though they paid the entire amount.tion paid or incurred on the property. The corpo- 2. Enter the number of days in the
Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-ration should provide you with a statement real property tax year that you
owned the property......... 2 4 3ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-showing you your share of the taxes. For more
Page 154 Chapter 24 Taxes

Page 157 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24–1. Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary
Employee contributions to state funds listed disability plans.
under Contributions to state benefit funds.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions).
Foreign real estate taxes. Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions).
Tenant’s share of real estate taxes paid by Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
cooperative housing corporation. Homeowners association charges.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes.
Taxes
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business Many taxes, such as state and local sales taxes and
or of producing income. federal excise taxes. See Taxes and Fees You
One-half of self-employment tax paid. Cannot Deduct.
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty
income.
Occupational taxes.
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges, such as fees for driver’s licenses or
business or of producing income. charges for water bills. See Taxes and Fees You
Cannot Deduct.
3. Divide line 2 by 365......... .666 total amount placed in escrow. You can deductReal Estate-Related Items4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is only the real estate tax that the third party actu-
your deduction. Claim it on line 6 You Cannot Deductally paid to the taxing authority. If the third party
of Schedule A (Form 1040).... $501 does not notify you of the amount of real estate
Payments for the following items generally aretax that was paid for you, contact the third partyThe remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de- not deductible as real estate taxes.or the taxing authority to find the proper amountduction) of taxes paid in 2002, along with the
to show on your return.$680 paid in 2001, is added to the cost of their • Taxes for local benefits.
new home. • Itemized charges for services (such asTenants by the entirety.If you and yourBecause the taxes up to the date of sale are trash and garbage pickup fees).spouse held property as tenants by the entiretyconsidered paid by the seller on the date of sale,
and you file separate returns, each of you can• Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).the seller is entitled to a 2001 tax deduction of
deduct only the taxes each of you paid on the$931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2000 and • Rent increases due to higher real estateproperty.the $251 for the 122 days the seller owned the taxes.home in 2001. The seller must also include the
$931 in the selling price when he or she figuresDivorced individuals.If your divorce or sepa-• Homeowners ’ association charges.
the gain or loss on the sale. The seller shouldration agreement states that you must pay the
contact the Browns in January 2002 to find outreal estate taxes for a home owned by you andTaxes for local benefits.Deductible real es-how much real estate tax is due for 2001.your spouse, part of your payments may betate taxes generally do not include taxesdeductible as alimony and part as real estateForm 1099 –S. For certain sales or ex- charged for local benefits and improvementstaxes. See Publication 504, Divorced or Sepa-changes of real estate, the person responsible that increase the value of your property. Theserated Individuals, for information.for closing the sale (generally the settlement include assessments for streets, sidewalks,
agent) prepares Form 1099–S, Proceeds From water mains, sewer lines, public parking facili-Minister’s and military personnel housing al-Real Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- ties, and similar improvements. You should in-lowances. If you are a minister or a member ofmation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- crease the basis of your property by the amountthe uniformed services and receive a housingerty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds of the assessment.allowance that you can exclude from income,of the sale and should include the portion of the Local benefit taxes are deductible only if theyyou still can deduct all of the real estate taxesseller’s real estate tax liability that the buyer will are for maintenance, repair, or interest chargesyou pay on your home.pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes related to those benefits. If only a part of thethese taxes in the cost basis of the property, and taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, youthe seller both deducts this amount as a tax paidRefund (or rebate).If you receive a refund ormust be able to show the amount of that part toand includes it in the sales price of the property.rebate in 2001 of real estate taxes you paid inclaim the deduction. If you cannot determine2001, you must reduce your deduction by theFor a real estate transaction that involves a what part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, orhome, any real estate tax the seller paid in amount refunded to you. If you receive a refundinterest, none of it is deductible.advance but that is the liability of the buyeror rebate in 2001 of real estate taxes you de-Taxes for local benefits may be included inappears in box 5 of Form 1099–S. The buyer ducted in an earlier year, you generally mustyour real estate tax bill. If your taxing authoritydeducts this amount as a real estate tax, and theinclude the refund or rebate in income in the(or mortgage lender) does not furnish you a copyseller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc-year you receive it. However, you only need toof your real estate tax bill, ask for it. You shouldtion (or includes it in income) by the sameinclude the amount of the deduction that re-use the rules above to determine if the localamount. See Refund (or rebate), later. duced your tax in the earlier year. For morebenefit tax is deductible.information, see Recoveries in chapter 13.
Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly
If you did not itemize deductions in theItemized charges for services. An itemizedmortgage payment includes an amount placed
year you paid the tax, do not report thecharge for services to specific property or peo-in escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real
refund as income.
TIP
ple is not a tax, even if the charge is paid to theestate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the
Chapter 24 Taxes Page 155

Page 158 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxing authority. For example, you cannot de- • Gift taxes.
1) Charged on personal property,duct the charge as a real estate tax if it is: • License fees. You cannot deduct license
2) Based only on the value of the personal• A unit fee for the delivery of a service fees for personal purposes (such as mar-property, and(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 riage, driver’s, and dog license fees).
gallons of water you use), 3) Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is• Social security. This includes social se-collected more than once a year, or less• A periodic charge for a residential service curity, Medicare, or railroad retirementthan once a year.(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual taxes withheld from your pay.fee charged to each homeowner for trash A tax that meets the above requirements can• Social security and other employmentcollection), or be considered charged on personal property
taxes for household workers. You gen-even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. For• A flat fee charged for a single service pro- erally cannot deduct the social security orexample, a yearly tax based on value qualifiesvided by your government (such as a $30 other employment taxes you pay on theas a personal property tax even if it is called acharge for mowing your lawn because it wages of a household worker. However,registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-was allowed to grow higher than permitted
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-you may be able to include them in medi-under your local ordinance).
ways. cal or child care expenses. For more infor-
mation, see chapters 23 and 33.You must look at your real estate taxExample. Your state charges a yearly mo-
bill to determine if any nondeductibletor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50Many taxes and fees other than those listeditemized charges, such as those justcents per hundredweight. You paid $32 based
CAUTION
!
above are also nondeductible, unless they arelisted, are included in the bill. If your taxingon the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) ofordinary and necessary expenses of a businessauthority (or mortgage lender) does not furnishyour car. You can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as or income producing activity. For other nonde-you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.a personal property tax, since it is based on theductible items, see Real Estate-Related Itemsvalue. The remaining $17 ($.50 × 34), based onYou Cannot Deduct, earlier.Exception. Service charges used to main-the weight, is not deductible.
tain or improve services (such as trash collec-
tion or police and fire protection) are deductible
as real estate taxes if:
Taxes and Fees Where To Deduct1) The fees or charges are imposed at a like
rate against all property in the taxing juris-
You Cannot Deduct You deduct taxes on the following schedules.diction,
2) The funds collected are not earmarked; in-Many federal, state, and local government taxesstead, they are commingled with general State and local income taxes.These taxesare not deductible because they do not fall withinrevenue funds, and are deducted on line 5 of Schedule A (Formthe categories discussed earlier. Other taxes
and fees, such as federal income taxes, are not1040), even if your only source of income is from3) Funds used to maintain or improve ser-
deductible because the tax law specifically pro-business, rents, or royalties.vices are not limited to or determined by
hibits a deduction for them.the amount of these fees or charges col-
Taxes and fees that are generally not de-lected.
Foreign income taxes. Generally, incomeductible include the following items.
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).Transfer • Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-taxes and similar taxes and charges on the salesion taxes. These taxes are generally nottion on line 8 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or as aof a personal home are not deductible. If theydeductible. However, you can deduct theare paid by the seller, they are expenses of the credit against your U.S. income tax on line 43 ofestate tax attributable to income in respectsale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. Form 1040. To claim the credit, you may have toof a decedent if you, as a beneficiary,If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost complete and attach Form 1116. For more infor-must include that income in your grossbasis of the property. mation, see chapter 38 or the instructions forincome. In that case, deduct the estate tax
Form 1040 or get Publication 514.as a miscellaneous deduction that is notRent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-If your landlord increases your rent in the form of
come limit. For more information, see Es-a tax surcharge because of increased real es- Real estate taxes and personal propertytate Tax Deduction in Publication 559,tate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase as
taxes. These taxes are deducted on lines 6Survivors, Executors, and Administrators.taxes.
and 7 of Schedule A (Form 1040), unless they• Federal income taxes. This includesHomeowners ’ association charges.These are paid on property used in your business intaxes withheld from your pay.charges are not deductible because they are which case they are deducted on Schedule Cimposed by the homeowners ’ association, • Fines. You cannot deduct penalties for vi-(Form 1040). Taxes on property that producesrather than the state or local government. olation of any law, including forfeiture ofrent or royalty income are deducted on Sched-
related collateral deposits. ule E (Form 1040).
Personal Property Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half of
your self-employment tax on line 27, Form 1040.
Taxes
Other taxes. All other deductible taxes arePersonal property tax is deductible if it is a state
deducted on line 8 of Schedule A (Form 1040).or local tax that is:
Page 156 Chapter 24 Taxes

Page 159 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You must be legally liable for the loan.Late payment charge on mortgage payment.
You cannot deduct payments you make You can deduct as home mortgage interest a
for someone else if you are not legally late payment charge if it was not for a specific
25. liable to make them. Both you and the service performed in connection with your mort-
lender must intend that the loan be repaid. gage loan.
In addition, there must be a true
Mortgage prepayment penalty.If you pay offdebtor-creditor relationship between you
Interest your home mortgage early, you may have to payand the lender.
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as home
• The mortgage must be a secured debt onmortgage interest provided the penalty is not forExpense a qualified home. (Generally, your mort-a specific service performed or cost incurred in
gage is a secured debt if you put yourconnection with your mortgage loan.
home up as collateral to protect the inter-
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canests of the lender. The term “qualifiedImportant Reminders deduct your home mortgage interest (subject tohome ” means your main home or second
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-home. For details, see Publication 936.)Personal interest.Personal interest is not de- ing, the date of sale.ductible. Examples of personal interest include
interest on a loan to purchase an automobile for Example. John and Peggy Harris sold theirAmount Deductiblepersonal use and credit card and installment home on May 7. Through April 30, they madeinterest incurred for personal expenses. But youIn most cases, you will be able to deduct all ofhome mortgage interest payments of $1,220.may be able to deduct interest you pay on ayour home mortgage interest. Whether you canThe settlement sheet for the sale of the homequalified student loan. For details, see Publica-deduct all of it depends on the date you took outshowed $50 interest for the 6-day period in Maytion 970, Tax Benefits for Higher Education.the mortgage, the amount of the mortgage, andup to, but not including, the date of sale. Their
your use of its proceeds. mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +Limit on itemized deductions.Certain item- $50).ized deductions (including home mortgage inter-Fully deductible interest.If all of your mort-est) are limited if your adjusted gross income is Prepaid interest.If you pay interest in ad-gages fit into one or more of the following threemore than $132,950 ($66,475 if you are married vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofcategories at all times during the year, you canfiling a separate return). For more information, the tax year, you must spread this interest overdeduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (Ifsee chapter 22. the tax years to which it applies. You can deductany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-
in each year only the interest that qualifies asgory, add the debt that fits in each category to
home mortgage interest for that year. However,your other debt in the same category.)
see Points, later.The three categories are:
Introduction Mortgage interest credit.You may be able to1) Mortgages you took out on or before Octo-This chapter discusses interest. Interest is the claim a mortgage interest credit if you wereber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt).amount you pay for the use of borrowed money. issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a
The types of interest you can deduct as item- state or local government. Figure the credit on2) Mortgages you took out after October 13,
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) are: Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take1987, to buy, build, or improve your home
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-(called home acquisition debt), but only if• Home mortgage interest, including certain est deduction by the amount of the credit.throughout 2001 these mortgages plus anypoints, and For more information on the credit, see chap-grandfathered debt totaled $1 million or
• Investment interest. ter 38.less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-
arately).This chapter explains these deductions. It also Ministers’ and military housing allowance.
explains where to deduct other types of interest3) Mortgages you took out after October 13,If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
and lists some types of interest you cannot de-1987, other than to buy, build, or improveformed services and receive a housing allow-
duct. your home (called home equity debt), but ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your
only if throughout 2001 these mortgageshome mortgage interest.Use Table 25–1 to find out where to get moretotaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifinformation on various types of interest, includ- Mortgage assistance payments.If you qual-married filing separately) and totaled noing investment interest. ify for mortgage assistance payments undermore than the fair market value of your
section 235 of the National Housing Act, part orhome reduced by (1) and (2).Useful Items all of the interest on your mortgage may be paid
The dollar limits for the second and thirdYou may want to see: for you. You cannot deduct the interest that is
categories apply to the combined mortgages onpaid for you.
your main home and second home.Publication No other effect on taxes.Do not includeSee Part II of Publication 936 for more de-❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction these mortgage assistance payments in yourtailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-income. Also, do not use these payments tosition, and home equity debt. reduce other deductions, such as real estateYou can use Figure 25–A to check whether taxes.your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
Divorced or separated individuals.If a di-Home Mortgage
Limits on deduction.You cannot fully deductvorce or separation agreement requires you or
interest on a mortgage that does not fit into anyyour spouse or former spouse to pay homeInterest
of the three categories listed above. If this ap-mortgage interest on a home owned by both of
plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 toyou, the payment of interest may be alimony.Generally, home mortgage interest is any inter-
figure the amount of interest you can deduct.See the discussion of Payments forest you pay on a loan secured by your home
jointly-owned home in chapter 20.(main home or a second home). The loan may
be a mortgage to buy your home, a second Redeemable ground rent. If you make an-Special Situationsmortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-You can deduct home mortgage interest onlyThis section describes certain items that can be able ground rent, you can deduct them asif you meet all the following conditions.included as home mortgage interest and others mortgage interest.
• You must file Form 1040 and itemize de- that cannot. It also describes certain special Payments made to end the lease and to buy
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). situations that may affect your deduction. the lessor’s entire interest in the land are not
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 157

Page 160 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 25–A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately)?
Start Here
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home. Answer YES only if the answer
is true at ALL times during the year.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately)?
2
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home ’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
3
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than  the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
1
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
1
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
4
See Table 25-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
Page 158 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 161 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ground rents. You cannot deduct them. For 3) The points paid were not more than the You cannot deduct these amounts as points
more information, see Publication 936. points generally charged in that area. either in the year paid or over the life of the
mortgage. For information about the tax treat-Nonredeemable ground rent. Payments 4) You use the cash method of accounting. ment of these amounts and other settlementon a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort- This means you report income in the yearfees and closing costs, get Publication 530, Taxgage interest. You can deduct them as rent if you receive it and deduct expenses in theInformation for First-Time Homeowners.they are a business expense or if they are for year you pay them. (If you want more in-
rental property. formation about this method, see Account- Points paid by the seller.The term “points”
ing Methods in chapter 1.) includes loan placement fees that the sellerRental payments. If you live in a house before pays to the lender to arrange financing for the5) The points were not paid in place offinal settlement on the purchase, any payments buyer.amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa-you make for that period are rent and not inter-rately on the settlement statement, suchTreatment by seller.The seller cannot de-est. This is true even if the settlement papers callas appraisal fees, inspection fees, titleduct these fees as interest. But they are a sellingthem interest. You cannot deduct these pay- fees, attorney fees, and property taxes.expense that reduces the amount realized byments as home mortgage interest.
the seller. See chapter 16 for information on the6) The funds you provided at or before clos-
Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt sale of your home.ing, plus any points the seller paid, were at
securities.You cannot deduct the home mort- least as much as the points charged. TheTreatment by buyer. The buyer reducesgage interest on grandfathered debt or home funds you provided do not have to havethe basis of the home by the amount of theequity debt if you used the proceeds of the been applied to the points. They can in-seller-paid points and treats the points as if he ormortgage to buy securities or certificates thatclude a down payment, an escrow deposit,she had paid them. If all the tests under theproduce tax-free income. Grandfathered debt earnest money, and other funds you paidException, earlier, are met, the buyer can de-and home equity debt are defined earlier underat or before closing for any purpose. Youduct the points in the year paid. If any of thoseAmount Deductible. cannot have borrowed these funds fromtests is not met, the buyer deducts the points
your lender or mortgage broker. over the life of the loan.Refunds of interest.If you receive a refund of For information about basis, see chapter 14.7) You use your loan to buy or build yourinterest in the same tax year you paid it, you
main home.must reduce your interest expense by the Funds provided are less than points.If youamount refunded to you. If you receive a refund8) The points were computed as a percent-meet all the tests in the Exception, earlier, ex-of interest you deducted in an earlier year, youage of the principal amount of the mort-cept that the funds you provided were less thangenerally must include the refund in income ingage. the points charged to you (test 6), you can de-the year you receive it. However, you need to duct the points in the year paid, up to the amount9) The amount is clearly shown on the settle-include it only up to the amount of the deduction of funds you provided. In addition, you can de-ment statement (such as the Uniform Set-that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is duct any points paid by the seller.tlement Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointstrue whether the interest overcharge was re-
charged for the mortgage. The points mayfunded to you or was used to reduce the out- Example 1. When you took out a $100,000be shown as paid from either your funds orstanding principal on your mortgage. mortgage loan to buy your home in December,the seller’s.If you received a refund of interest you over- you were charged one point ($1,000). You meetpaid in an earlier year, you generally will receive all the tests for deducting points in the year paid,a Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, Note. If you meet all of these tests, you canexcept the only funds you provided were a $750showing the refund in box 3. For informationchoose to either fully deduct the points in thedown payment. Of the $1,000 charged forabout Form 1098, see Mortgage Interest State-year paid, or deduct them over the life of thepoints, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.ment, later. loan. You spread the remaining $250 over the life ofFor more information on how to treat refunds the mortgage.Home improvement loan. You can alsoof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov-
fully deduct in the year paid points paid on a loaneries in chapter 13. Example 2. The facts are the same as into improve your main home, if tests (1) throughExample 1, except that the person who sold you(6) are met. your home also paid one point ($1,000) to helpPoints
Second home.  The Exception does you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you can
not apply to points you pay on loansThe term “points” is used to describe certain deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were
secured by your second home. Youcharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). YouCAUTION
!
can deduct these points only over the life of theto obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be spread the remaining $250 over the life of the
loan.called loan origination fees, maximum loan mortgage. You must reduce the basis of your
charges, loan discount, or discount points. home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.
Exception does not apply.If you do notA borrower is treated as paying any points
Excess points. If you meet all the tests in thequalify under the exception, or choose not tothat a home seller pays for the borrower’s mort-
Exception, earlier, except that the points paiddeduct the full amount of points in the year paid,gage. See Points paid by the seller, later.
were more than are generally paid in your areasee Points in chapter 5 of Publication 535, Busi-
(test 3), you deduct in the year paid only theGeneral rule. You generally cannot deductness Expenses, for the rules on when and how
points that are generally charged. You mustthe full amount of points in the year paid. Be-much you can deduct. However, if the points
spread any additional points over the life of thecause they are prepaid interest, you generallyrelate to refinancing a home mortgage, see Refi-
mortgage.must deduct them over the life (term) of thenancing, later.
mortgage.
Mortgage ending early.If you spread yourAmounts charged for services. AmountsException. You can fully deduct points in deduction for points over the life of the mort-charged by the lender for specific services con-the year paid if you meet all the following tests. gage, you can deduct any remaining balance innected to the loan are not interest. Examples of(You can use Figure 25–B as a quick guide to the year the mortgage ends. However, if youthese charges are:see whether your points are fully deductible in refinance the mortgage with the same lender,
the year paid.) you cannot deduct any remaining balance of1) Appraisal fees,
spread points. Instead, deduct the remaining1) Your loan is secured by your main home.2) Notary fees, balance over the term of the new loan.(Your main home is the one you live in3) Preparation costs for the mortgage note or A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-most of the time.) deed of trust, ment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.
2) Paying points is an established business4) Mortgage insurance premiums, andpractice in the area where the loan was Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1993
made. 5) VA funding fees. that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 159

Page 162 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 25–B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, ear nest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your new home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Page 160 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 163 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the mortgage. He had deducted $1,600 of these receive the statement if you pay interest to aPartners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
points through 2000. person (including a financial institution or a co- To determine your investment interest, combine
Dan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2001. He operative housing corporation) in the course of your share of investment interest from a partner-
can deduct the remaining $1,400 of points in that person’s trade or business. A governmental ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
2001. unit is a person for purposes of furnishing the other investment interest.
statement.Refinancing. Generally, points you pay to You should receive the statement for eachAllocation of Interestrefinance a mortgage are not deductible in full inyear by January 31 of the following year. A copythe year you pay them. This is true even if the Expenseof this form will also be sent to the IRS.new mortgage is secured by your main home. The statement will show the total interest youHowever, if you use part of the refinanced If you borrow money for business or personalpaid during the year. If you purchased a mainmortgage proceeds to improve your main purposes as well as for investment, you musthome during the year, it will also show the de-home and you meet the first six tests listed allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyductible points paid during the year, includingunder Exception, earlier, you can fully deduct the interest expense on the part of the debt usedseller-paid points. However, it should not showthe part of the points related to the improvement for investment purposes is treated as invest-any interest that was paid for you by a govern-in the year you paid them with your own funds. ment interest. The allocation is not affected byment agency.You can deduct the rest of the points over the life the use of property that secures the debt.As a general rule, Form 1098 will includeof the loan. only points that you can fully deduct in the year
paid. However, certain points not included onLimit on DeductionExample 1. In 1991, Bill Fields got a mort-Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in thegage to buy a home. In 2001, Bill refinanced that Generally, your deduction for investment inter-year paid or over the life of the loan. See Points,mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage est expense is limited to the amount of your netearlier, to determine whether you can deductloan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To investment income.points not shown on Form 1098.get the new loan, he had to pay three points You can carry over the amount of investment($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaid interest that you could not deduct because ofPrepaid interest on Form 1098.If you pre-interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged for this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedpaid interest in 2001 that accrued in full by Janu-services, in place of amounts that ordinarily are over is treated as investment interest paid orary 15, 2002, this prepaid interest may bestated separately on the settlement statement. accrued in that next year.included in box 1 of Form 1098. However, youBill paid the points out of his private funds, rather You can carry over disallowed investmentcannot deduct the prepaid amount for Januarythan out of the proceeds of the new loan. The interest to the next tax year even if it is more than2002 in 2001. (See Prepaid interest, earlier.)payment of points is an established practice in your taxable income in the year the interest wasYou will have to figure the interest that accruedthe area, and the points charged are not more paid or accrued.for 2002 and subtract it from the amount in boxthan the amount generally charged there. Bill’s 1. You will include the interest for January 2002first payment on the new loan was due July 1.with the other interest you pay for 2002. SeeHe made six payments on the loan in 2001 andHow To Report, later. Net Investment Incomeis a cash basis taxpayer.
Bill used the funds from the new mortgage to Determine the amount of your net investmentRefunded interest.If you received a refund ofrepay his existing mortgage. Although the new income by subtracting your investment ex-mortgage interest you overpaid in an earliermortgage loan was for Bill’s continued owner- penses (other than interest expense) from youryear, you generally will receive a Form 1098ship of his main home, it was not for the investment income.showing the refund in box 3. See Refunds ofpurchase or improvement of that home. He can-interest, earlier.not deduct all of the points in 2001. He can Investment income. This generally includes
deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of your gross income from property held for invest-
the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷ 180 ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and
months) × 6 payments] of the points in 2001. royalties). Investment income does not include
Investment InterestThe other point ($1,000) was a fee for services Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. 
and is not deductible. Choosing to include net capital gain.In-This section discusses the interest expenses
vestment income generally does not include netyou may be able to deduct as an investor.Example 2. The facts are the same as in capital gain from disposing of investment prop-Example 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of theIf you borrow money to buy property you holderty (including capital gain distributions from mu-loan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000for investment, the interest you pay is invest-tual funds). However, you can choose to includeto repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%ment interest. You can deduct investment inter-all or part of your net capital gain in investment($25,000 ÷ $100,000) of the points ($2,000) inest subject to the limit discussed later. However,income.2001. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 × 25%). you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-You make this choice by completing line 4eBill also deducts the ratable part of the re-duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deductof Form 4952 according to its instructions.maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be interest expenses on straddles. If you choose to include any amount of yourspread over the life of the loan. This is $50Investment interest does not include anynet capital gain in investment income, you must[($1,500 ÷ 180 months) × 6 payments] in 2001.qualified home mortgage interest or any interestreduce your net capital gain that is eligible forThe total amount Bill deducts in 2001 is $550taken into account in computing income or lossthe lower capital gains tax rates by the same($500 + $50). from a passive activity. amount.
Limits on deduction.You cannot fully deduct Before making this choice, considerInvestment Propertypoints on a mortgage unless the mortgage fits the overall effect on your tax liability.into one of the categories listed earlier under Compare your tax if you make this
TIP
Property held for investment includes propertyFully deductible interest. See Publication 936 for choice with your tax if you do not.that produces interest, dividends, annuities, ordetails.
royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a
trade or business. It also includes property thatInvestment income of child reported onMortgage Interest produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi-parent’s return.Investment income includes
nary course of a trade or business) from the sale the part of your child’s interest and dividendStatement
or trade of property producing these types of income that you choose to report on your return.
If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interest income or held for investment (other than an If the child does not have Alaska Permanent
(including certain points) during the year on any interest in a passive activity). Investment prop- Fund dividends or capital gain distributions, this
one mortgage, you generally will receive a Form erty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814, Parents’
1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or a similar ness activity in which you did not materiallyElection To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-
statement from the mortgage holder. You will participate (other than a passive activity).dends.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 161

Page 164 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• FHA mortgage insurance premiums andTable 25–1. Where To Deduct Your Interest
VA funding fees.
• Interest to purchase or carry tax-exemptType of Interest  Where to deduct  Where to find
information securities.
Student loan interest Form 1040, line 24 or Publication 970
Penalties.You cannot deduct fines and pen-Form 1040A, line 17
alties for violations of law, regardless of theirDeductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 nature.points reported on Form 1098 line 10
Deductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936 Personal Interestreported on Form 1098 line 11
Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in-Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936
terest is any interest that is not home mortgagePoints not reported on Form 1098 line 12
interest, investment interest, business interest,
Investment interest (other than interest Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550or other deductible interest. It includes the fol-
incurred to produce rents or royalties) line 13 lowing items.
Business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ Publication 535 • Interest on car loans (unless you use the
(Form 1040) car for business).
Farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535 • Interest on federal, state, or local income
tax.  Interest incurred to produce rents or
royalties Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535 • Finance charges on credit cards, retail in-
stallment contracts, and revolving chargePersonal interest Not Deductible accounts incurred for personal expenses.
• Late payment charges by a public utility.
Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.Form 4952
If part of the amount you report is your child’s You may be able to deduct interest youUse Form 4952, Investment Interest ExpenseAlaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part pay on a qualified student loan. ForDeduction, to figure your deduction for invest-does not count as investment income. To figure details, see Publication 970.
TIP
ment interest.the amount of your child’s income that you can
consider your investment income, start with the
amount on line 6 of Form 8814. Multiply that
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do notamount by a percentage that is equal to thehave to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourAlaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by Allocation of Interestreturn if you meet all of the following tests.the total amount of interest and dividend income
on lines 1a and 2 of Form 8814. Subtract the• Your investment interest expense is notIf you use the proceeds of a loan for more than
result from the amount on line 6 of Form 8814.more than your investment income fromone purpose (for example, personal and busi-
ness), you must allocate the interest on the loaninterest and ordinary dividends.Child’s capital gain distributions.If part
to each use. However, you do not have to allo-of the amount you report is your child’s capital • You have no other deductible investmentcate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti-gain distributions, that part (which is reported onexpenses. ble, regardless of how the funds are used.line 13 of Schedule D or line 13 of Form 1040)
You allocate interest (other than fully deduct-• You have no disallowed investment inter-generally does not count as investment income. ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in theest expense from 2000.However, you can choose to include all or part of same way as the loan itself is allocated. You doit in investment income. See chapter 3 of Publi-If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct allthis by tracing disbursements of the debt pro-cation 550 to figure the amount to include.of your investment interest. ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do
Your investment income also includes the this, see chapter 5 of Publication 535.
More Informationamount on line 6 of Form 8814 (or, if applicable,
the amount figured under Child’s Alaska Perma-
For more information on investment interest,nent Fund dividends, earlier.
see Investment Expenses in chapter 3 of Publi-
How To Reportcation 550.
Investment expenses. Investment expenses
include all income-producing expenses (other You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home
mortgage interest expense on your tax return.than interest expense) relating to investment
Where you deduct your interest expense gener-property that are allowable deductions after ap-
Items You ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds.plying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneous
See Table 25–1 for a summary of where toitemized deductions. Use the smaller of:
Cannot Deduct deduct your interest expense.
1) The investment expenses included on line
Home mortgage interest and points.DeductSome interest payments are not deductible.22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or the home mortgage interest and points reportedCertain expenses similar to interest also are not
2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A. to you on Form 1098 on line 10 of Schedule Adeductible. Nondeductible expenses include the
(Form 1040). If you paid more deductible inter-following items.
est to the financial institution than the amount
Losses from passive activities.Income or • Personal interest (discussed later). shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti-
expenses that you used in computing income or ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex-• Service charges (however, see Other Ex-loss from a passive activity are not included in plaining the difference and print “See attached”penses in chapter 30).determining your investment income or invest- next to line 10.
ment expenses (including investment interest• Annual fees for credit cards. Deduct home mortgage interest that was not
expense). See Publication 925, Passive Activity reported to you on Form 1098 on line 11 of• Loan fees.and At-Risk Rules, for information about passive Schedule A (Form 1040). If you paid home mort-
activities. • Credit investigation fees. gage interest to the person from whom you
Page 162 Chapter 25 Interest Expense

Page 165 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bought your home, show that person’s name, interest that was paid during the year, attach aInvestment interest.Deduct investment in-
address, and taxpayer identification numberstatement to your return explaining this. Showterest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub-
(TIN) on the dotted lines next to line 11. Thehow much of the interest each of you paid, andlication 550, on line 13 of Schedule A (Form
seller must give you this number and you mustgive the name and address of the person who1040).
give the seller your TIN. A Form W–9 can be received the form. Deduct your share of the
used for this purpose. Failure to meet any ofinterest on line 11 of Schedule A (Form 1040),Amortization of bond premium. There are
these requirements may result in a $50 penaltyand print “See attached” next to the line. various ways to treat the premium you pay to
for each failure. The TIN can be either a socialIf you are the payer of record on a mortgage buy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti-
security number, an individual taxpayer identifi-on which there are other borrowers entitled to azation in Publication 550.
cation number (issued by the Internal Revenuededuction for the interest shown on the Form
Service), or an employer identification number.1098 you received, deduct only your share of theIncome-producing rental or royalty interest.See Social Security Number in chapter 1 forinterest on line 10 of Schedule A (Form 1040).Deduct interest on a loan for income-producingmore information about TINs. You should let each of the other borrowers knowrental or royalty property that is not used in yourIf you can take a deduction for points thatwhat his or her share is. business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040).were not reported to you on Form 1098, deduct
those points on line 12 of Schedule A (Form Example. You rent out part of your homeMortgage proceeds used for business or in-1040). and borrow money to make repairs. You canvestment. If your home mortgage interest de-
deduct only the interest payment for the rentedduction is limited but all or part of the mortgageMore than one borrower.If you and at least
part in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deductproceeds were used for business, investment,one other person (other than your spouse if you
the rest of the interest payment on Schedule Aor other deductible activities, see Table 25–1. Itfile a joint return) were liable for and paid interest
(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgageshows where to deduct the part of your excesson a mortgage that was for your home, and the
interest.other person received a Form 1098 showing the interest that is for those activities.
Chapter 25 Interest Expense Page 163

Page 166 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 526 Charitable Contributions Note. Your contribution to this type of
organization is deductible only if it is to be❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated used solely for charitable, religious, scien-Property26. tific, literary, or educational purposes, or for
the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-Form (and Instructions)
mals. 
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)ItemizedContributions 4) Certain nonprofit cemetery companies orDeductions
corporations.❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions Note. Your contribution to this type of
organization is not deductible if it can beImportant Reminders
used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-
leum crypt. Disaster relief.You can deduct contributions
earmarked for flood relief, hurricane relief, orOrganizations That 5) The United States or any state, the District
other disaster relief to a qualified organization of Columbia, a U.S. possession (including(defined later under Organizations That QualifyQualify To Receive Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of aTo Receive Deductible Contributions). How- state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribalever, you cannot deduct contributions Deductible government or any of its subdivisions thatearmarked for relief of a particular individual or perform substantial government functions.family. Contributions Note. To be deductible, your contribution
Written acknowledgment required.You can to this type of organization must be madeYou can deduct your contributions only if youclaim a deduction for a contribution of $250 or solely for public purposes. make them to a qualified organization. To be-more only if you have a written acknowledgmentcome a qualified organization, most organiza-of your contribution from the qualified organiza-tions other than churches and governments, asExamples. Qualified organizations include:tion or if you have certain payroll deduction rec-described below, must apply to the IRS.ords. For more information, see Records To • Churches, a convention or association ofYou can ask any organization whetherKeep, later in this chapter. churches, temples, synagogues,it is a qualified organization, and mostmosques, and other religious organiza-Payment partly for goods or services.A will be able to tell you. Or you can
TIP
tions.qualified organization must give you a writtencheck IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-
statement if you make a payment that is more fied organizations. You may find Publication 78• Most nonprofit charitable organizations
than $75 and is partly a contribution and partlyin your local library’s reference section, or on thesuch as the Red Cross and the United
for goods or services. The statement must tellinternet at www.irs.gov. You can also call the Way.you that you can deduct only the amount of yourTax Exempt/Government Entities Customer • Most nonprofit educational organizations,payment that is more than the value of the goodsService at 1–877–829–5500 to find out if an including the Girl and Boy Scouts ofor services you received. It must also give you aorganization is qualified.
America, colleges, museums, andgood faith estimate of the value of those goods
or services. See Contributions From Which You day-care centers if substantially all the
Benefit, later in this chapter, for more informa- child care provided is to enable individualsTypes of Qualified
tion. (the parents) to be gainfully employed andOrganizations the services are available to the general
public. However, if your contribution is aGenerally, only the five following types of organi-
substitute for tuition or other enrollmentzations can be qualified organizations.
fee, it is not deductible as a charitableIntroduction
contribution, as explained later under Con-1) A community chest, corporation, trust,This chapter explains how to claim a deduction tributions You Cannot Deduct.fund, or foundation organized or createdfor your charitable contributions. It discusses:in or under the laws of the United States,• Nonprofit hospitals and medical research• Organizations that are qualified to receiveany state, the District of Columbia, or anyorganizations.deductible charitable contributions, possession of the United States (including
• Utility company emergency energy pro-Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-• The types of contributions you can deduct, grams, if the utility company is an agenterated only for one or more of the following
• How much you can deduct, purposes. for a charitable organization that assists
individuals with emergency energy needs.• What records to keep, and a) Religious.
• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies.• How to report your charitable contribu- b) Charitable.tions. • Public parks and recreation facilities.c) Educational.
• Civil defense organizations.A charitable contribution is a donation or giftd) Scientific.to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It is
e) Literary.voluntary and is made without getting, or expect- Certain foreign charitable organizations.
ing to get, anything of equal value. Under income tax treaties with Canada, Israel,f) The prevention of cruelty to children or
and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu-animals.Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitable tions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or MexicanCertain organizations that foster nationalcontribution, you must file Form 1040 and item- charitable organizations. The organization mustor international amateur sports competitionize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of meet tests that are essentially the same as thealso qualify.your deduction may be limited if certain rules tests that qualify U.S. organizations to receiveand limits explained in this chapter apply to you.2) War veterans’ organizations, including deductible contributions. For additional informa-
posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations,tion on the deduction of contributions to Cana-
Useful Items organized in the United States or any of itsdian charities, see Publication 597, Information
You may want to see: possessions. on the United States–Canada Income Tax
Treaty. If you need more information on how to3) Domestic fraternal societies, orders, andPublication figure your contribution to Mexican and Israeliassociations operating under the lodge sys-
charities, see Publication 526.❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations tem.
Page 164 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 167 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-Table 26–1. Examples of Charitable Contributions— A Quick Check
bership in an athletic scholarship program main-
tained by a university (a qualified organization).Use the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See
The only benefit of membership is that you havethe rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in a
Deductible As Not Deductible designated area of the stadium at the
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions university’s home football games. You can de-
duct $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contri-Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to: bution.
• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs,
mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of
Example 2. The facts are the same as inorganizations commerce
Example 1 except that your $300 payment in-• Federal, state, and local governments, if• Foreign organizations (except certaincluded the purchase of one season ticket for theyour contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican stated ticket price of $120. You must subtractpurposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300the public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profitpayment. The result is $180. Your deductible
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals • Individuals charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).
• Public parks and recreation facilities• Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
Charity benefit events.If you pay a qualified• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, law changes
organization more than fair market value for theGoodwill Industries, United Way, Boy• Homeowners ’ associations
right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls • IndividualsClubs of America, etc. sporting event, or other benefit event, you can
• Political groups or candidates fordeduct only the amount that is more than the• War veterans groups public office value of the privileges or other benefits you
receive.Costs you pay for a student living with you, Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
sponsored by a qualified organization If there is an established charge for the
event, that charge is the value of your benefit. If
Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve a Dues, fees, or bills paid to country clubs,there is no established charge, your contribution
qualified organization as a volunteer lodges, fraternal orders, or similaris that part of your payment that is more than the
groups reasonable value of the right to attend the event.
Whether you use the tickets or other privileges
Tuition has no effect on the amount you can deduct.
However, if you return the ticket to the qualified
Value of your time or services organization for resale, you can deduct the en-
tire amount you paid for the ticket.
Value of blood given to a blood bank
Even if the ticket or other evidence of
payment indicates that the payment is
a “contribution,” this does not meanIf you pay more than fair market value to a
CAUTION
!
you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticketqualified organization for merchandise, goods,
Contributions shows the price of admission and the amount ofor services, the amount you pay that is more
the contribution, you can deduct the contributionthan the value of the item can be a charitable
You Can Deduct amount.contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,
you must pay it with the intent to make a charita-
Generally, you can deduct your contributions ofble contribution. Example. You pay $40 to see a specialmoney or property that you make to, or for the showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualifieduse of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri-Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to aorganization. Printed on the ticket is “Contribu-bution is “for the use of” a qualified organizationdinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds oftion— $40.” If the regular price for the movie iswhen it is held in a legally enforceable trust forthe function go to the church. The ticket to the$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8the qualified organization or in a similar legaldinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.regular price).arrangement. When you buy your ticket, you know that its
value is less than your payment. To figure theIf you give property to a qualified organiza- Membership fees or dues.You may be ableamount of your charitable contribution, you sub-tion, you generally can deduct the fair market to deduct membership fees or dues you pay to atract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)value of the property at the time of the contribu- qualified organization. However, you can deductfrom your total payment ($65). You can deducttion. See Contributions of Property, later in this only the amount that is more than the value of$40 as a contribution to the church.chapter. the benefits you receive. You cannot deduct
dues, fees, or assessments paid to countryYour deduction for charitable contributions isExample 2. At a fund-raising auction con-clubs and other social organizations. They aregenerally limited to 50% of your adjusted grossducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week’s not qualified organizations.income, but in some cases 20% and 30% limitsstay at a beach house. The amount you pay is
may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later. no more than the fair rental value. You have notCertain membership benefits can be disre-
made a deductible charitable contribution.garded. Both you and the organization canTable 26–1 lists some examples of contribu-
disregard certain membership benefits you gettions you can deduct and some that you cannot
Athletic events.If you make a payment to, orin return for an annual payment of $75 or less todeduct.
for the benefit of, a college or university and, asthe qualified organization. You can pay more
a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to anthan $75 to the organization if the organizationContributions From athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-does not require a larger payment for you to get
lege or university, you can deduct 80% of theWhich You Benefit the benefits. The following benefits are covered
payment as a charitable contribution. under this rule.
If you receive a benefit as a result of making aIf any part of your payment is for tickets
contribution to a qualified organization, you can 1) Any rights or privileges, other than those(rather than the right to buy tickets), that part is
deduct only the amount of your contribution that discussed under Athletic events, earlier,not deductible. In that case, subtract the price of
is more than the value of the benefit you that you can use frequently while you are athe tickets from your payment. 80% of the re-
receive. member, such as:maining amount is a charitable contribution.
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 165

Page 168 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26–2. Volunteers’ Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular,Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $6 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $36 a week for my time?
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to the qualified organization where you are a volunteer. If
you don’t want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents
for each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse’s aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 33.)
a) Free or discounted admission to the a) The type of organization described inhome under a mutual exchange program
(5) under Types of Qualified Organiza-through which your child will live with a family inorganization’s facilities or events,
tions, earlier, or a foreign country.b) Free or discounted parking,
b) Formed only for religious purposes, andc) Preferred access to goods or services, Out-of-Pocket Expenses inthe only benefit you receive is an intan-and gible religious benefit (such as admis-Giving Servicession to a religious ceremony) thatd) Discounts on the purchase of goods
generally is not sold in commercialand services. You may be able to deduct some amounts you
transactions outside the donative con-pay in giving services to a qualified organization.
text.2) Admission, while you are a member, to The amounts must be:
events that are open only to members of • Unreimbursed,2) You receive only items whose value is notthe organization, if the organization rea-
substantial, as described under Tokensonably projects that the cost per person • Directly connected with the services,
items, earlier.(excluding any allocated overhead) is not • Expenses you had only because of themore than $7.60. This amount may be ad-3) You receive only membership benefits thatservices you gave, andjusted annually for inflation. can be disregarded, as described earlier.
• Not personal, living, or family expenses.
Token items. You can deduct your entire pay- Table 26–2 contains questions and answersExpenses Paid for Studentment to a qualified organization as a charitable that apply to some individuals who volunteerLiving With Youcontribution if both of the following are true. their services.
You may be able to deduct some expenses ofConventions. If you are a chosen represen-1) You get a small item or other benefit of
having a student live with you. You can deducttative attending a convention of a qualified or-token value.
qualifying expenses for a foreign or American ganization, you can deduct actual unreimbursed
2) The qualified organization correctly deter-student who: expenses for travel and transportation, including
mines that the value of the item or benefit a reasonable amount for meals and lodging,
you received is not substantial and informs1) Lives in your home under a written agree-while away from home overnight in connection
you that you can deduct your payment in ment between you and a qualified organi-with the convention. However, see Travel, later.
full. zation as part of a program of the You cannot deduct personal expenses for
organization to provide educational oppor-sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or
tunities for the student, nightclubs. You also cannot deduct travel, mealsWritten statement.A qualified organization and lodging, and other expenses for your2) Is not your dependent or relative, andmust give you a written statement if you make a spouse or children.payment to it that is more than $75 and is partly 3) Is a full-time student in the twelfth or anyYou cannot deduct your expenses in attend-a contribution and partly for goods or services.lower grade at a school in the Uniteding a church convention if you go only as aThe statement must tell you that you can deductStates. member of your church rather than as a chosen
only the amount of your payment that is more representative. You can deduct unreimbursedYou can deduct up to $50 a month for eachthan the value of the goods or services you expenses that are directly connected with givingfull calendar month the student lives with you.received. It must also give you a good faith services for your church during the convention.
estimate of the value of those goods or services. Any month when conditions (1)
through (3) above are met for 15 daysThe organization can give you the statement Uniforms. You can deduct the cost and up-
or more counts as a full month.either when it solicits or when it receives the keep of uniforms that are not suitable for every-
TIP
day use and that you must wear whilepayment from you. For additional information, see Expenses performing donated services for a charitable or-Exception. An organization will not have toPaid for Student Living With You in Publicationganization.give you this statement if one of the following is526.
Foster parents.You may be able to deduct astrue.
Mutual exchange program. You cannot de- a charitable contribution some of the costs of
1) The organization is: duct the costs of a foreign student living in your being a foster parent (foster care provider) if you
Page 166 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 169 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have no profit motive in providing the foster careExample 2. You sail from one island to an-• Contributions to individuals who are
and are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualified other and spend 8 hours a day counting whalesneedy or worthy. This includes contribu-
organization must designate the individuals you and other forms of marine life. The project istions to a qualified organization if you indi-
take into your home for foster care. sponsored by a charitable organization. In most cate that your contribution is for a specific
circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex- person. But you can deduct a contributionYou can deduct expenses that meet both of
penses.the following requirements. that you give to a qualified organization
that in turn helps needy or worthy individu-
1) They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex-Example 3. You work for several hours als if you do not indicate that your contri-
penses to feed, clothe, and care for theeach morning on an archaeological dig spon- bution is for a specific person.
foster child. sored by a charitable organization. The rest of• Payments to a member of the clergy thatthe day is free for recreation and sightseeing.2) They must be mainly to benefit the quali- can be spent as he or she wishes, such asYou cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-fied organization. for personal expenses.tion even though you work very hard during
Unreimbursed expenses that you cannot de-those few hours. • Expenses you paid for another person
duct as charitable contributions may be consid- who provided services to a qualified organi-
ered support provided by you in determiningExample 4. You spend the entire day at- zation.
whether you can claim the foster child as atending a charitable organization’s regional Example. Your son does missionary work.dependent. For details see chapter 3. meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve-You pay his expenses. You cannot claim a
ning you go to the theater. You can claim yourdeduction for your son’s unreimbursed ex-Example. You cared for a foster child be-travel expenses as charitable contributions, butpenses related to his contribution of ser-cause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit theyou cannot claim the cost of your evening at thevices.agency that placed her in your home. Your un-theater.
• Payments to a hospital that are for ser-reimbursed expenses are not deductible as Daily allowance (per diem).If you provide vices for a specific patient’s care or forcharitable contributions. services for a charitable organization and re-services for a specific patient. You cannot
ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonable deduct these payments even if the hospi-Car expenses. You can deduct unreimbursedtravel expenses, including meals and lodgingtal is operated by a city, a state, or otherout-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gaswhile away from home overnight, you must in-qualified organization.and oil, that are directly related to the use of yourclude in income the amount of the allowancecar in giving services to a charitable organiza-that is more than your deductible travel ex-tion. You cannot deduct any part of generalpenses. You can deduct your necessary travelContributions Torepair and maintenance expenses, deprecia-expenses that are more than the allowance.tion, registration fees, or the costs of tires or Nonqualifiedinsurance. Deductible travel expenses. These in-
OrganizationsIf you do not want to deduct your actualclude:
expenses, you can use a standard mileage rate
You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-• Air, rail, and bus transportation,of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.
tions that are not qualified to receive tax-deduct-You can deduct parking fees and tolls, • Out-of-pocket expenses for your car, ible contributions, including the following.whether you use your actual expenses or the
• Taxi fares or other costs of transportationstandard mileage rate. 1) Certain state bar associations if:between the airport or station and yourYou must keep reliable written records of hotel,your car expenses. For more information, see a) The state bar is not a political subdivi-
Car expenses under Records To Keep, later. • Lodging costs, and sion of a state,
• The cost of meals. b) The bar has private, as well as public,Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable
purposes, such as promoting the pro-contribution deduction for travel expenses nec-Because these travel expenses are not busi- fessional interests of members, andessarily incurred while you are away from homeness related, they are not subject to the same
performing services for a charitable organizationlimits as business-related expenses. For infor-c) Your contribution is unrestricted and
only if there is no significant element of per-mation on business travel expenses, see Travel can be used for private purposes.
sonal pleasure, recreation, or vacation in theExpenses in chapter 28.
travel. This applies whether you pay the ex- 2) Chambers of commerce and other busi-
penses directly or indirectly. You are paying the ness leagues or organizations.
expenses indirectly if you make a payment to the
3) Civic leagues and associations.charitable organization and the organizationContributionspays for your travel expenses. 4) Communist organizations.
The deduction for travel expenses will not beYou Cannot Deduct 5) Country clubs and other social clubs. denied simply because you enjoy providing ser-
vices to the charitable organization. Even if you 6) Foreign organizations other than:There are some contributions that you cannotenjoy the trip, you can take a charitable contribu-deduct, such as those made to individuals anda) A U.S. organization that transfers fundstion deduction for your travel expenses if you arethose made to nonqualified organizations. (See to a charitable foreign organization ifon duty in a genuine and substantial senseContributions to Individuals and Contributions to the U.S. organization controls the usethroughout the trip. However, if you have onlyNonqualified Organizations, next). There are of the funds or if the foreign organiza-nominal duties, or if for significant parts of theothers that you can deduct only part of, as dis-tion is only an administrative arm of thetrip you do not have any duties, you cannotcussed later under Contributions From Which U.S. organization, ordeduct your travel expenses. You Benefit.
b) Certain Canadian, Israeli, or MexicanExample 1. You are a troop leader for a charitable organizations. See Certaintax-exempt youth group and take the group on aContributions To foreign charitable organizations undercamping trip. You are responsible for oversee- Organizations That Qualify To ReceiveIndividualsing the setup of the camp and for providing the Deductible Contributions, earlier.adult supervision for the other activities duringYou cannot deduct contributions to specific indi-the entire trip. You participate in the activities ofviduals, including the following. 7) Homeowners ’ associations.the group and really enjoy your time with them.
8) Labor unions. But you may be able to You oversee the breaking of camp and you • Contributions to fraternal societies made
transport the group home. You can deduct your deduct union dues as a miscellaneousfor the purpose of paying medical or burial
travel expenses. expenses of deceased members. itemized deduction, subject to the
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 167

Page 170 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit, on tax credit for these expenses, and/or ex-Used clothing and household goods.Gen-
Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 30. erally, the fair market value of used clothing andclude from your gross income adoption ex-
household goods is far less than its original cost.penses paid or reimbursed by your9) Political organizations and candidates. employer. See Adoption Credit in chapter For used clothing, you should claim as the
38 and Publication 968, Tax Benefits forvalue the price that buyers of used items actually
Adoption. pay in used clothing stores, such as consign-Contributions From ment or thrift shops.You also may be able to claim an exemp-
Which You Benefit tion for the child. See Adoption in chapter 3.
Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to a
If you receive or expect to receive a financial or thrift store operated by her church. She paid
economic benefit as a result of making a contri- $300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats inAppraisal Feesbution to a qualified organization, you cannot the thrift store sell for $25. The fair market value
deduct the part of the contribution that repre-Fees that you pay to find the fair market value ofof the coat is therefore $25. Dawn’s donation is
sents the value of the benefit you receive. Thesedonated property are not deductible as contribu-limited to $25.
contributions include the following. tions. You can claim them, subject to the See Household Goods in Publication 561 for
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit, as miscella-information on the valuation of household• Contributions for lobbying. This includes
neous deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).goods, such as furniture, appliances, and linens.amounts that you earmark for use in, or in
See chapter 30.connection with, influencing specific legis-
Cars, boats, and aircraft.If you contribute alation.
car, boat, or aircraft to a charitable organization,• Contributions to a retirement home that you must determine its fair market value.are clearly for room, board, maintenance, Certain commercial firms and trade organi-Contributionsor admittance. Also, if the amount of your zations publish guides, commonly called “bluecontribution depends on the type or size of books,” containing complete dealer sale pricesof Propertyapartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- or dealer average prices for recent model years.table contribution. The guides may be published monthly or sea-If you contribute property to a qualified organiza-
sonally, and for different regions of the country.• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You tion, the amount of your charitable contribution
These guides also provide estimates for adjust-cannot deduct as a charitable contributionis generally the fair market value of the property
ing for unusual equipment, unusual mileage,amounts you pay to buy raffle or lotteryat the time of the contribution. However, if the
and physical condition. The prices are not “offi-tickets or to play bingo or other games ofproperty has increased in value, you may have
cial” and these publications are not consideredchance. For more information on how toto make some adjustments to the amount of
an appraisal of any specific donated property.report gambling winnings and losses, seeyour deduction. See Giving Property That Has
But they do provide clues for making an ap-Gambling Losses Up To the Amount of Increased in Value, later.
praisal and suggest relative prices for compari-Gambling Winnings in chapter 30. For information about the records you mustson with current sales and offerings in your area.keep and the information you must furnish with• Dues to fraternal orders and similar
your return if you donate property, see Recordsgroups. However, see Membership fees or Example. You donate your car to a localTo Keep and How To Report, later.dues, earlier, under Contributions You high school for use by their students studyingCan Deduct. automobile repair. Your credit union told youPartial interest in property.Generally, you that the “blue book” value of the car is $1,600.• Tuition,  or amounts you pay instead ofcannot deduct a charitable contribution (notHowever, your car needs extensive repairs and,tuition, even if you pay them for children tomade by a transfer in trust) of less than yourafter some checking, you find that you could sellattend parochial schools or qualifying non-entire interest in property. A contribution of theit for $750. You can deduct $750, the true fairprofit day-care centers. You also cannotright to use property is a contribution of less thanmarket value of the car, as a charitable contribu-deduct any fixed amount you may be re-your entire interest in that property and is nottion.quired to pay in addition to the tuition feedeductible. For exceptions and more informa-to enroll in a private school, even if it istion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in TrustLarge quantities.If you contribute a largedesignated as a “donation.” in Publication 561. number of the same item, fair market value is the
price at which comparable numbers of the itemFuture interests in tangible personal prop-are being sold.Value of Time or Serviceserty. You can deduct the value of a charitable
contribution of a future interest in tangible per-You cannot deduct the value of your time or Giving Property Thatsonal property only after all intervening interestsservices, including: in and rights to the actual possession or enjoy-Has Decreased in Value• Blood donations to the Red Cross or to ment of the property have either expired or been
blood banks, and turned over to someone other than yourself, a If you contribute property with a fair market value
related person, or a related organization.that is less than your basis in it, your deduction is• The value of income lost while you work
limited to fair market value. You cannot claim aas an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-Future interest.This is any interest that is
deduction for the difference between theganization. to begin at some future time, regardless of
property’s basis and its fair market value.whether it is designated as a future interest
under state law.
Personal Expenses Giving Property That
Determining Has Increased in ValueYou cannot deduct personal, living, or family
expenses, such as: Fair Market Value
If you contribute property with a fair market value
• The cost of meals you eat while you per- that is more than your basis in it, you may haveThis section discusses general guidelines forform services for a qualified organization, to reduce the fair market value by the amount ofdetermining the fair market value of variousunless it is necessary for you to be away appreciation (increase in value) when you figuretypes of donated property. Fair market value isfrom home overnight while performing the your deduction.the price at which property would change handsservices, or Your “basis” in property is generally what youbetween a willing buyer and a willing seller,
paid for it. See chapter 14 if you need moreneither having to buy or sell, and both having• Adoption expenses, including fees paid to
information about basis.reasonable knowledge of all the relevant facts.an adoption agency and the costs of keep-
Publication 561 contains a more complete dis-ing a child in your home before adoption is Different rules apply to figuring your deduc-
cussion.final. However, you may be able to claim a tion, depending on whether the property is:
Page 168 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 171 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is Government Entities Customer Service at the
1) Ordinary income property, or considered delivered on the date you mail it.number listed earlier under Organizations that
Qualify To Receive Deductible Contributions.2) Capital gain property. Credit card. Contributions charged on yourThe following is a partial list of the types ofbank credit card are deductible in the year youorganizations that are 50% limit organizations.make the charge.Ordinary income property.Property is ordi-
nary income property if its sale at fair marketPay-by-phone account.  If you use a 1) Churches, and conventions or associa-value on the date it was contributed would havepay-by-phone account, the date you make a tions of churches.resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-contribution is the date the financial institutiontal gain. Examples of ordinary income property 2) Educational organizations with a regularpays the amount. This date should be shown onare inventory, works of art created by the donor, faculty and curriculum that normally have athe statement the financial institution sends tomanuscripts prepared by the donor, and capital regularly enrolled student body attendingyou.assets held 1 year or less. classes on site.
Stock certificate.A gift to a charity of aThe amount you can deduct for a contribu-
3) Hospitals and certain medical research or-properly endorsed stock certificate is completedtion of ordinary income property is its fair market
ganizations associated with these hospi-on the date of mailing or other delivery to thevalue less the amount that would be ordinary
tals.charity or to the charity’s agent. However, if youincome or short-term capital gain if you sold the
give a stock certificate to your agent or to theproperty for its fair market value. Generally, this 4) Publicly supported charities.
issuing corporation for transfer to the name ofrule limits the deduction to your basis in the
5) Private operating foundations.the charity, your gift is not completed until theproperty.
date the stock is transferred on the books of the6) Private nonoperating foundations that
corporation.Example. You donate stock that you held make qualifying distributions of 100% of
for 5 months to your church. The fair market contributions within 21/2 months followingPromissory note. If you issue and deliver avalue of the stock on the day you donate it is the year they receive the contribution.promissory note to a charitable organization as$1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).a contribution, it is not a contribution until you7) Certain private foundations whose contri-Because the $200 of appreciation would bemake the note payments. butions are pooled in a common fund, theshort-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your
Option.  If you grant an option to buy realincome and principal of which are paid todeduction is limited to $800 (fair market value
property at a bargain price to a charitable organi-less the appreciation). public charities.
zation, you cannot take a deduction until the
Capital gain property.Property is capitalorganization exercises the option.
gain property if its sale at fair market value on 30% LimitBorrowed funds. If you make a contribu-the date of the contribution would have resultedtion with borrowed funds, you can deduct thein long-term capital gain. It includes capital as- This limit applies to the following contributions.contribution in the year you make it, regardlesssets held more than 1 year, as well as certainof when you repay the loan. • Gifts of capital gain property to 50% limitreal property and depreciable property used in
organizations. (For other gifts of capitalyour trade or business and, generally, held more
gain property, see 20% Limit, later.) How-than 1 year.
ever, the 30% limit does not apply when
Amount of deduction —  general rule. you choose to reduce the fair market valueLimits on DeductionsWhen figuring your deduction for a gift of capital of the property by the amount that wouldgain property, you usually can use the fair mar- have been long-term capital gain if youIf your total contributions for the year are 20% orket value of the gift. had sold the property. Instead, only theless of your adjusted gross income, you do not
50% limit applies. For more information,Exceptions. In certain situations, you mustneed to read this section. The limits discussed
reduce the fair market value by any amount that see the rules for electing the 50% limit forhere do not apply to you.
would have been long-term capital gain if you capital gain property under How To FigureThe amount of your deduction may be limited
had sold the property for its fair market value. Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub-to either 20%, 30%, or 50% of your adjusted
Generally, this means reducing the fair market lication 526.gross income, depending on the type of property
value to the property’s cost or other basis. you give and the type of organization you give it• Gifts (other than gifts of capital gain prop-to. These limits are described below. erty as explained under 20% Limit, later)Bargain sales.A bargain sale of property to aIf your contributions are more than any of thefor the use of any organization.qualified organization (a sale or exchange forlimits that apply, see Carryovers under How Toless than the property’s fair market value) is • Gifts (other than capital gain property asFigure Your Deduction When Limits Apply inpartly a charitable contribution and partly a sale explained under 20% Limit, later) to allPublication 526.or exchange. A bargain sale may result in a qualified organizations other than 50%taxable gain. limit organizations. This includes gifts to50% Limit veterans’ organizations, fraternal societ-More information. For more information on
ies, nonprofit cemeteries, and certain pri-donated appreciated property, see Giving Prop- This limit applies to the total of all charitablevate nonoperating foundations.erty That Has Increased in Value in Publicationcontributions you make during the year. This
526. means that your deduction for charitable contri-
butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-20% Limitjusted gross income for the year.
The 50% limit is the only limit that applies toThis limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop-gifts to organizations listed below under 50%When To Deduct erty to or for the use of qualified organizationslimit organizations. But there is one exception. (other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%The 30% limit also applies to such gifts if theyYou can deduct your contributions only in the limit organizations).are gifts of capital gain property for which youyear you actually make them in cash or other
figure your deduction using fair market valueproperty (or in a later carryover year, as ex-
Carryoverswithout reduction for appreciation. (See 30%plained later under Carryovers). This applies
Limit, later.)whether you use the cash or an accrual method You can carry over your contributions that youof accounting.
are not able to deduct in the current year be-50% limit organizations.You can ask any
cause they exceed your adjusted-gross-incomeTime of making contribution.Usually, you organization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-
limits. You can deduct the excess in each of themake a contribution at the time of its uncondi- tion and most will be able to tell you. Or you may
next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyondtional delivery. check IRS Publication 78 or call the Tax Exempt/
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 169

Page 172 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that time. For more information, see Carryovers tion showing the name of the organization, a) The date you file your return for the
in Publication 526. the date of the contribution, and the year you make the contribution, or
amount of the contribution. b) The due date, including extensions, for
3) Other reliable written records that includefiling the return.
the information described in (2). Records
Records To Keep may be considered reliable if they were
made at or near the time of the contribu-Payroll deductions.If you make a contribu-
You must keep records to prove the amount oftion, and were regularly kept by you, or if,tion by payroll deduction, you do not need an
the cash and noncash contributions you make in the case of small donations, you haveacknowledgment from the qualified organiza-
during the year. The kind of records you mustemblems, buttons, or other tokens that aretion. But if your employer deducted $250 or
keep depends on the amount of your contribu-regularly given to persons making smallmore from a single paycheck, you must keep:
tions and whether they are cash or noncash cash contributions.
contributions. 1) A pay stub, Form W–2, or other document
furnished by your employer that proves theCar expenses. If you claim expenses directlyNote. An organization generally must give amount withheld, andrelated to use of your car in giving services to ayou a written statement if it receives a payment
2) A pledge card or other document from thequalified organization, you must keep reliablefrom you that is more than $75 and is partly a
qualified organization that states the or-written records of your expenses. Whether yourcontribution and partly for goods or services.
ganization does not provide goods or ser-records are considered reliable depends on all(See Contributions From Which You Benefit
vices in return for any contribution made tothe facts and circumstances. Generally, theyunder Contributions You Can Deduct, earlier.)
it by payroll deduction.may be considered reliable if you made themKeep the statement for your records. It may
regularly and at or near the time you had thesatisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require-
expenses.ments explained in the following discussions. Out-of-pocket expenses.If you render ser-
Your records must show the name of thevices to a qualified organization and have un-
organization you were serving and the datereimbursed out-of-pocket expenses related toCash Contributions each time you used your car for a charitablethose services, you can satisfy the written ac-
purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate ofCash contributions include those paid by cash, knowledgment requirement just discussed if:
14 cents a mile, your records must show thecheck, credit card, or payroll deduction. They
miles you drove your car for the charitable pur-1) You have adequate records to prove thealso include your out-of-pocket expenses when
pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, youramount of the expenses, anddonating your services.
records must show the costs of operating the carFor a contribution made in cash, the records 2) By the required date, you get an acknowl-that are directly related to a charitable purpose.you must keep depend on whether the contribu- edgment from the qualified organizationSee Car expenses, earlier, undertion is: that contains:Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services, for
1) Less than $250, or the expenses you can deduct. a) A description of the services you pro-
vided,2) $250 or more.
b) A statement of whether or not the or-Contributions of $250 or More
ganization provided you any goods orAmount of contribution.In figuring whether
services to reimburse you for the ex-your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-You can claim a deduction for a contribution of
penses you incurred,bine separate contributions. For example, if you$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg-
gave your church $25 each week, your weeklyment of your contribution from the qualified or-c) A description and a good faith estimatepayments do not have to be combined. Eachganization or certain payroll deduction records.of the value of any goods or servicespayment is a separate contribution. If you made more than one contribution of (other than intangible religious benefits)If contributions are made by payroll deduc-$250 or more, you must have either a separate provided to reimburse you, andtion, the deduction from each paycheck isacknowledgment for each or one acknowledg-
d) A statement of any intangible religioustreated as a separate contribution. ment that shows your total contributions.
benefits provided to you.If you made a payment that is partly for
goods and services, as described earlier underAcknowledgment. The acknowledgment
Contributions From Which You Benefit, your must meet these tests.
contribution is the amount of the payment that is Noncash Contributions
more than the value of the goods and services.1) It must be written.
For a contribution not made in cash, the records2) It must include: you must keep depend on whether your deduc-
Contributions of Less Than $250 tion for the contribution is:a) The amount of cash you contributed,
b) Whether the qualified organization gaveFor each cash contribution that is less than 1) Less than $250,
you any goods or services as a result of$250, you must keep one of the following items.
2) At least $250 but not more than $500,your contribution (other than certain to-
1) A canceled check, or a legible and reada- ken items and membership benefits), 3) Over $500 but not more than $5,000, orble account statement that shows: and
4) Over $5,000.
c) A description and good faith estimate ofa) If payment was by check— the check
the value of any goods or services de-number, amount, date posted, and to
Amount of contribution.In figuring whetherscribed in (b). If the only benefit youwhom paid.
your contribution is $250 or more, do not com-received was an intangible religiousb) If payment was by electronic funds bine separate contributions. If you receivedbenefit (such as admission to a relig-transfer— the amount, date posted, and goods or services in return, as described earlierious ceremony) that generally is notto whom paid. in Contributions From Which You Benefit, re-sold in a commercial transaction
duce your contribution by the value of thoseoutside the donative context, the ac-c) If payment was charged to a credit
goods or services. If you figure your deductionknowledgment must say so and doescard— the amount, transaction date,
by reducing the fair market value of the donatednot need to describe or estimate theand to whom paid.
property by its appreciation, as described earliervalue of the benefit.
in Giving Property That Has Increased in Value,2) A receipt (or a letter or other written com-
3) You must get it on or before the earlier of:your contribution is the reduced amount.munication) from the charitable organiza-
Page 170 Chapter 26 Contributions

Page 173 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub- c) A description and good faith estimate ofDeductions of Less Than $250
lication 526 for information on how to the value of any goods or services de-
If you make any noncash contribution, you mustmake the capital gain property election. scribed in (b). If the only benefit you
get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ- received was an intangible religious6) The amount you claim as a deduction forization showing: benefit (such as admission to a relig-the tax year as a result of the contribution,ious ceremony) that generally is notif you contribute less than your entire inter-1) The name of the charitable organization, sold in a commercial transactionest in the property during the tax year. outside the donative context, the ac-2) The date and location of the charitable Your records must include the amount youcontribution, and knowledgment must say so and doesclaimed as a deduction in any earlier yearsnot need to describe or estimate thefor contributions of other interests in this3) A reasonably detailed description of the value of the benefit.property. They must also include the nameproperty.
and address of each organization to which3) You must get the acknowledgment on oryou contributed the other interests, theA letter or other written communication before the earlier of:place where any such tangible property isfrom the charitable organization ac-
located or kept, and the name of any per-knowledging receipt of the contribution
TIP
a) The date you file your return for theson in possession of the property, otherand containing the information in (1), (2), and (3) year you make the contribution, orthan the organization to which you contrib-will serve as a receipt.
b) The due date, including extensions, foruted.You are not required to have a receipt where filing the return.7) The terms of any conditions attached toit is impractical to get one (for example, if you
the gift of property.leave property at a charity’s unattended drop
site).
Deductions Over $500Additional records.You must also keep reli-
Deductions of At Least $250able written records for each item of donated You are required to give additional information ifproperty. Your written records must include theBut Not More Than $500 you claim a deduction over $500 for noncashfollowing information. 
charitable contributions. See Records To KeepIf you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not
in Publication 526 for more information.1) The name and address of the organizationmore than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-
to which you contributed. bution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
ment of your contribution from the qualified2) The date and location of the contribution. Qualified Conservationorganization. If you made more than one contri-
3) A description of the property in detail rea-bution of $250 or more, you must have either aContribution
sonable under the circumstances. For aseparate acknowledgment for each or one ac-
security, keep the name of the issuer, the If the gift was a “qualified conservation contribu-knowledgment that shows your total contribu-
type of security, and whether it is regularly tion,” your records must also include the fairtion.
traded on a stock exchange or in an market value of the underlying property beforeThe acknowledgment must contain the infor-
over-the-counter market. and after the gift and the conservation purposemation in items (1) through (3) listed under De-
furthered by the gift. See Qualified conservationductions of Less Than $250, earlier, and your4) The fair market value of the property at the contribution in Publication 561 for more informa-written records must include the informationtime of the contribution, and how you fig- tion.listed in that discussion under Additional rec-ured the fair market value. If it was deter-
ords.mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of
The acknowledgment must also meet thesethe appraisal.
tests.5) The cost or other basis of the property if How To Reportyou must reduce its fair market value by1) It must be written.
appreciation. Your records should also in- Enter your cash contributions (including2) It must include:clude the amount of the reduction and how out-of-pocket expenses) on line 15, Schedule Ayou figured it. If you choose the 50% limita) A description (but not necessarily the(Form 1040).instead of the special 30% limit on certainvalue) of any property you contributed,Enter your noncash contributions on line 16capital gain property, you must keep a re-
of Schedule A (Form 1040).cord showing the years for which you b) Whether the qualified organization gave
If your total deduction for all noncash contri-made the choice, contributions for the cur- you any goods or services as a result of
butions for the year is over $500, you must alsorent year to which the choice applies, and your contribution (other than certain to-
file Form 8283. See How To Report in Publica-carryovers from preceding years to which ken items and membership benefits),
the choice applies. See How To Figure and tion 526 for more information.
Chapter 26 Contributions Page 171

Page 174 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Useful Items • Accidentally breaking articles such as
You may want to see: glassware or china under normal condi-
tions.27.
Publication • A family pet.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions • A fire if you willfully set it or pay someoneof Assets else to set it.Nonbusiness
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and • A car accident if your willful negligence orThefts willful act caused it. The same is true if theCasualty and willful act or willful negligence of someone❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft
acting for you caused the accident.Loss Workbook (Personal-Use
Theft Losses Property) • Progressive deterioration (explained next).
Form (and Instructions) Progressive deterioration.Loss of prop-
erty due to progressive deterioration is not de-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)ItemizedImportant Change
ductible as a casualty loss. This is because theDeductions
damage results from a steadily operating causePostponed tax deadlines in disaster areas. ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040)Capital Gains or a normal process, rather than from a suddenThe IRS may postpone for up to 120 days cer- and Losses event. The following are examples of damagetain tax deadlines of taxpayers who are affected due to progressive deterioration.❏ 4684 Casualties and Theftsby a Presidentially declared disaster. The tax
deadlines the IRS may postpone include those • The steady weakening of a building due to
for filing income and employment tax returns, normal wind and weather conditions.
paying income and employment taxes, and • The deterioration and damage to a watermaking contributions to a traditional IRA or Roth heater that bursts. But the rust and waterCasualtyIRA. For more information, see Postponed tax damage to rugs and drapes caused by thedeadlines, later, under Disaster Area Loss. bursting of a water heater does qualify asA casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss of
a casualty.property resulting from an identifiable event that
is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. • Most losses of property caused by
droughts. To be deductible, a drought-re-Introduction • A sudden event is one that is swift, not lated loss generally must be incurred in a
gradual or progressive.This chapter explains the tax treatment of per- trade or business or in a transaction en-
sonal (not business related) casualty losses, tered into for profit.• An unexpected event is one that is ordi-theft losses, and losses on deposits. narily unanticipated and unintended. • Termite or moth damage.The chapter also explains the following top-
• An unusual event is one that is not aics. • The damage or destruction of trees,
day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-• How to figure the amount of your loss. cal of the activity in which you were en-ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.
gaged.• How to treat insurance and other reim- But, a sudden destruction due to an unex-
bursements you receive. pected or unusual infestation of beetles or
other insects may result in a casualty loss.Deductible losses. Deductible casualty• The deduction limits.
losses can result from a number of different• When and how to report a casualty or causes, including the following.theft.
• Car accidents  (but see Nondeductible Theftlosses, next, for exceptions).Forms to file.When you have a casualty or
theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also• Earthquakes. A theft is the taking and removing of money orhave to file one or more of the following forms. property with the intent to deprive the owner of it.• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next, The taking of property must be illegal under the• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc- for exceptions). laws of the state where it occurred and it musttions
• Floods. have been done with criminal intent.• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains Theft includes the taking of money or prop-• Government-ordered demolition or reloca-and Losses erty by the following means.tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-
cause of a disaster as discussed under • Blackmail.Condemnations. For information on condem- Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.nations of property, see Involuntary Conver- • Burglary.
• Hurricanes.sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544. • Embezzlement.
• Mine cave-ins.Workbook for casualties and thefts.Publi- • Extortion.
• Shipwrecks.cation 584 is available to help you make a list of • Kidnapping for ransom.your stolen or damaged personal-use property• Sonic booms.and figure your loss. It includes schedules to • Larceny.
• Storms.help you figure the loss on your home, its con- • Robbery.tents, and your motor vehicles. • Tornadoes. • Threats.
Other sources of information.For informa- • Vandalism. 
tion on a casualty or theft loss of business or The taking of money or property through fraud• Volcanic eruptions.income-producing property, see Publication or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under
547. state or local law.
Nondeductible losses.A casualty loss is notFor information on a condemnation of your
deductible if the damage or destruction ishome, see Involuntary Conversions in chapter 1 Mislaid or lost property.The simple disap-
caused by the following.of Publication 544. pearance of money or property is not a theft.
Page 172 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 175 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, an accidental loss or disappearanceCasualty loss proof.For a casualty loss, your later returned to you. If you recover property
records should show all the following. after you had already taken a theft loss deduc-of property can qualify as a casualty if it results
1) The type of casualty (car accident, fire,tion, you must refigure your loss using thefrom an identifiable event that is sudden, unex-
storm, etc.) and when it occurred. smaller of the property’s adjusted basis (ex-pected, or unusual.
plained earlier) or the decrease in FMV from the2) That the loss was a direct result of the
time it was stolen until the time it was recovered.Example. A car door is accidentally casualty.
Use this amount to refigure your total loss for theslammed on your hand, breaking the setting of3) That you were the owner of the propertyyear in which the loss was deducted.your diamond ring. The diamond falls from theor, if you leased the property from some-If your refigured loss is less than the loss youring and is never found. The loss of the diamondone else, that you were contractually liablededucted, you generally have to report the dif-is a casualty. to the owner for the damage. ference as income in the recovery year. But
report the difference only up to the amount of the
Theft loss proof.For a theft loss, your rec-loss that reduced your tax. For more information
ords should show all the following. on the amount to report, see Recoveries inLoss on Deposits chapter 13.
1) When you discovered that your property
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, creditwas missing.
union, or other financial institution becomes in- Figuring Decrease in FMV—2) That your property was stolen.solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type of Items To Considerloss, you can choose one of the following ways3) That you were the owner of the property.
to deduct the loss. To figure the decrease in FMV because of a
casualty or theft, you generally need a compe-• As a casualty loss.
tent appraisal. But other measures can also be
• As an ordinary loss. used to establish certain decreases.Amount of Loss• As a nonbusiness bad debt. Appraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif-
Figure the amount of your loss using the follow-ference between the FMV of the property imme-
ing steps. Casualty loss or ordinary loss.You can diately before a casualty or theft and
immediately afterward should be made by achoose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu-1) Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-competent appraiser. The appraiser must rec-alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year inerty before the casualty or theft. ognize the effects of any general market declinewhich you can reasonably estimate how much of
2) Determine the decrease in fair marketthat may occur along with the casualty. Thisyour deposits you have lost in an insolvent or
value of the property as a result of theinformation is needed to limit any deduction tobankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen-
casualty or theft. the actual loss resulting from damage to theerally made on the return you file for that year
property.and applies to all your losses on deposits for the3) From the smaller of the amounts you de-Several factors are important in evaluatingyear in that particular financial institution. If youtermined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol-treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, youance or other reimbursement you receivedlowing.cannot treat the same amount of the loss as aor expect to receive.nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomes • The appraiser’s familiarity with your prop-For personal-use property and property used inworthless. Once you make this choice, you can- erty before and after the casualty or theft.performing services as an employee, apply thenot change it without approval of the Internal
deduction limits, discussed later, to determine• The appraiser’s knowledge of sales ofRevenue Service.
the amount of your deductible loss. comparable property in the area.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose • The appraiser’s knowledge of conditions inLeased property.If you are liable for casualtyto deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an the area of the casualty.damage to property you lease, your loss is theordinary loss, you must wait until the actual lossamount you must pay to repair the property • The appraiser’s method of appraisal.is determined before you can deduct the loss asminus any insurance or the reimbursement youa nonbusiness bad debt. receive or expect to receive. Appraisal fee.The appraisal fee is not a
part of the casualty or theft loss. It is an expenseHow to report. The kind of deduction you in determining your tax liability. You can deductAdjusted Basischoose for your loss on deposits determines it as a miscellaneous deduction subject to thehow you report your loss. If you choose: 2%-of-adjusted-gross- income limit on ScheduleAdjusted basis is your basis (usually cost) in-
A (Form 1040). For information about miscella-creased or decreased by various events, such• Casualty loss —  report it on Form 4684
neous deductions, see chapter 30.as improvements and casualty losses. For morefirst and then on Schedule A (Form 1040).
information, see chapter 14.• Ordinary loss —  report it on Schedule A Cost of cleaning up or making repairs.The
(Form 1040). cost of repairing damaged property is not part of
Decrease in a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up• Nonbusiness bad debt —  report it on after a casualty. But you can use the cost ofFair Market ValueSchedule D (Form 1040). cleaning up or making repairs as a measure of
the decrease in FMV if you meet all the followingFair market value (FMV) is the price for which
More information.For more information, see conditions.you could sell your property to a willing buyer
Special Treatment for Losses on Deposits inwhen neither of you have to sell or buy and both• The repairs are actually made.Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions in of you know all the relevant facts.
the instructions for Form 4684. • The repairs are necessary to bring theThe decrease in FMV is the difference be-
property back to its condition before thetween the property’s fair market value immedi-
casualty.ately before and immediately after the casualty
or theft. • The amount spent for repairs is not exces-
Proof of Loss sive.FMV of stolen property.The FMV of property
immediately after a theft is considered to be• The repairs take care of the damage only.To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must bezero, since you no longer have the property.
able to prove that you had a casualty or theft. • The value of the property after the repairs
You must be able to support the amount youRecovered stolen property.Recovered sto- is not, due to the repairs, more than the
claim for the loss as discussed next. len property is your property that was stolen and value of the property before the casualty.
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 173

Page 176 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Landscaping. The cost of restoring land- Photographs showing the condition of the prop-ment from your insurance company was
scaping to its original condition after a casualty erty after it was repaired, restored, or replaced $10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief
may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be may also be helpful. fund for its employees. Employees receiving
able to measure your loss by what you spend on The cost of photographs obtained for this money from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate
the following. purpose is not a part of the loss. You can claim or replace their damaged or destroyed property.
this cost as a miscellaneous itemized deduction You received $4,000 from the fund and spent
• Removing destroyed or damaged trees subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomethe entire amount on repairs to your home. Inand shrubs minus any salvage you re- limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). For informa- figuring your casualty loss, you must reduceceive. tion about miscellaneous deductions, see chap- your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000
• Pruning and other measures taken to pre-ter 30. you received from your employer ’s fund. Your
serve damaged trees and shrubs. casualty loss before applying the deduction lim-
its discussed later is $6,000.Insurance and Other• Replanting necessary to restore the prop-
erty to its approximate value before the Cash gifts. If you receive excludable cashReimbursementscasualty. gifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits
on how you can use the money, you do notIf you receive an insurance payment or other
reduce your casualty loss by these excludabletype of reimbursement, you must subtract theCar value. Books issued by various automo- cash gifts. This applies even if you use thereimbursement when you figure your loss. Youbile organizations that list your car may be useful money to pay for repairs to property damaged indo not have a casualty or theft loss to the extentin figuring the value of your car. You can modify the disaster.you are reimbursed.the book’s retail value by such factors as mile-
If you expect to be reimbursed for part or allage and the condition of your car to figure its Example. Your home was damaged by aof your loss, you must subtract the expectedvalue. The prices are not “official,” but they may hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cashreimbursement when you figure your loss. Yoube useful in determining value and suggesting gifts to you which were excludable from yourmust reduce your loss even if you do not receiverelative prices for comparison with current sales income. You used part of the cash gifts to pay forpayment until a later tax year. See Reimburse-and offerings in your area. If your car is not listed repairs to your home. There were no limits orment Received After Deducting Loss, later.in the books, determine its value from other restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts.sources. A dealer’s offer for your car as a Because it was an excludable gift, the moneyFailure to file a claim for reimbursement.Iftrade-in on a new car is not usually a measure of you received and used to pay for repairs to youryour property is covered by insurance, youits true value. home does not reduce your casualty loss on theshould file a timely insurance claim for reim-
damaged home.bursement of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot
deduct this loss as a casualty or theft loss. How-Figuring Decrease in FMV— Insurance payments for living expenses.ever, this rule does not apply to the portion of theYou do not reduce your casualty loss by insur-Items Not To Consider loss not covered by insurance (for example, aance payments you receive to cover living ex-deductible).The following items are generally not considered penses in either of the following situations.
when establishing the decrease in the FMV ofExample. You have a car insurance policy• You lose the use of your main home be-your property. with a $500 deductible. Because your insurance cause of a casualty.
Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto-did not cover the first $500 of an auto collision,• Government authorities do not allow youlen or destroyed property is not part of a casualtythe $500 would be deductible (subject to theaccess to your main home because of aor theft loss. deduction limits discussed later). This is truecasualty or threat of one.even if you do not file an insurance claim, sinceCost of protection.The cost of protectingyour insurance policy would never have reim-your property against a casualty or theft is not Inclusion in income. If these insurancebursed you for the deductible.part of a casualty or theft loss. For example, you payments are more than the temporary increase
cannot deduct the amount you spend on insur- in your living expenses, you must include theGain from reimbursement. If your reim-ance or to board up your house against a storm. excess in your income. Report this amount onbursement is more than your adjusted basis inIf you make permanent improvements to line 21 of Form 1040.the property, you have a gain. This is true even ifyour property to protect it against a casualty or A temporary increase in your living expensesthe decrease in the FMV of the property is moretheft, add the cost of these improvements to is the difference between the actual living ex-than your adjusted basis. If you have a gain, youyour basis in the property. An example would be penses you and your family incurred during themay have to pay tax on it, or you may be able tothe cost of a dike to prevent flooding. period you could not use your home and yourpostpone reporting the gain. See Publicationnormal living expenses for that period. Actual547 for more information on how to treat a gainRelated expenses. Any incidental expenses living expenses are the reasonable and neces-from a reimbursement for a casualty or theft.you have due to a casualty or theft, such as sary expenses incurred because of the loss ofexpenses for the treatment of personal injuries, your main home. Generally, these expenses in-for temporary housing, or for a rental car, are not clude the amounts you pay for the following.Types of Reimbursementspart of your casualty or theft loss.
• Rent for suitable housing.Sentimental value. Do not consider senti-The most common type of reimbursement is an
mental value when determining your loss. If a • Transportation.insurance payment for your stolen or damaged
family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-property. Other types of reimbursements are• Food.aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base yourdiscussed next. Also see the Instructions for
loss only on its fair market value. • Utilities.Form 4684.
Decline in market value of property.A de- • Miscellaneous services.Employer’s emergency disaster fund.If youcrease in the value of your property because it isreceive money from your employer’s emergency Normal living expenses consist of these samein or near an area that suffered a casualty, ordisaster fund and you must use that money to expenses that you would have incurred but didthat might again suffer a casualty, is not to berehabilitate or replace property on which you are not because of the casualty.taken into consideration. You have a loss onlyclaiming a casualty loss deduction, you mustfor actual casualty damage to your property. Example. As a result of a fire, you vacatedtake that money into consideration in computingHowever, if your home is in a federally declared your apartment for a month and moved to athe casualty loss deduction. Take into consider-disaster area, see Disaster Area Losses in Pub- motel. You normally pay $525 a month rent.ation only the amount you used to replace yourlication 547. None was charged for the month the apartmentdestroyed or damaged property.
Photographs. Photographs taken after a cas- was vacated. Your motel rent for this month was
ualty will be helpful in establishing the conditionExample. Your home was extensively dam- $1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for
and value of the property after it was damaged. aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse- food. Your food expenses for the month you
Page 174 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 177 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chair Rug Tablelived in the motel were $400. You received the loss, you may have to include the extra
$1,100 from your insurance company to cover reimbursement in your income for the year you1) Basis (cost)....... $750 $3,000 $100your living expenses. You determine the pay- receive it. However, if any part of the original
2) FMV before fire..... $500 $2,500 $900ment you must include in income as follows. deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier
3) FMV after fire...... –0–– 0–– 0–year, do not include that part of the reimburse-
4) Decrease in FMV . . . $500 $2,500 $9001) Insurance payment for living ment in your income. You do not refigure your
5) Loss (smaller of (1) or $500 $2,500 $100expenses .................. $1,100 tax for the year you claimed the deduction. For(4)).............2) Actual expenses during the more information, see Recoveries in chapter 13.
month you are unable to use 6) Total loss................. $3,100If the total of all the reimbursementsyour home because of the fire $1,600
you receive is more than your adjusted3) Normal living expenses.... 7 2 5 Real property.In figuring a casualty loss onbasis in the destroyed or stolen prop-4) Temporary increase in living ex- CAUTION
!
personal-use real property, treat the entire prop-erty, you will have a gain on the casualty orpenses: Subtract line 3 from line 2 . . 875
erty (including any improvements, such as build-theft. If you have already taken a deduction for a5) Amount of payment includible in
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure theincome: Subtract line 4 from line 1 . . $225loss and you receive the reimbursement in a
loss using the smaller of the adjusted basis orlater year, you may have to include the gain in
the decrease in FMV of the entire property.Tax year of inclusion.You include the tax-your income for the later year. Include the gain
able part of the insurance payment in income foras ordinary income up to the amount of your
Example. You bought your home a fewthe year you regain the use of your main homededuction that reduced your tax for the earlier
years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for theor, if later, for the year you receive the taxableyear. See Publication 547 for more information
land and $140,000 for the house). You alsopart of the insurance payment. on how to treat a gain from the reimbursement of
spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a firea casualty or theft.
destroyed your home. The fire also damagedExample. Your main home was destroyed
the shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fireby a tornado in August 1999. You regained useActual reimbursement same as expected.If
was your only casualty or theft loss this year.of your home in November 2000. The insuranceyou receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-
Competent appraisers valued the property as apayments you received in 1999 and 2000 werepected, you do not have any amount to include
whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only$1,500 more than the temporary increase inin your income or any loss to deduct.
$30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house-your living expenses during those years. You
hold furnishings is not shown in this example. Itinclude this amount in income on your 2000 Example. Last December, you had a colli-
would be figured separately, as explained earlierForm 1040. If, in 2001, you receive further pay-sion while driving your personal car. Repairs to
under Personal property.) Shortly after the fire,ments to cover the living expenses you had inthe car cost $950. You had $100 deductible
the insurance company paid you $155,000 for1999 and 2000, you must include those pay-collision insurance. Your insurance company
the loss. You figure your casualty loss as fol-ments in income on your 2001 Form 1040. agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-
lows:age. Because you expected a reimbursementDisaster relief.Food, medical supplies, andfrom the insurance company, you did not have aother forms of assistance you receive do not 1) Adjusted basis of the entirecasualty loss deduction last year.reduce your casualty loss unless they are property (land, building, andDue to the $100 rule (discussed later underreplacements for lost or destroyed property. landscaping)............. $162,000Deduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $100These items are not taxable income to you.deductible you paid. When you receive the $8502) FMV of entire property before fire $200,000
from the insurance company this year, do not3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000
4) Decrease in FMV of entire $170,000report it as income.Reimbursement Received After property
Deducting Loss 5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)).... $162,000Single Casualty on
6) Subtract insurance......... 155,000If you figured your casualty or theft loss usingMultiple Properties 7) Amount of loss........... $7,000your expected reimbursement, you may have to
adjust your tax return for the tax year in which
Personal property.If a single casualty or theftyou receive your actual reimbursement. This
involves more than one item of personal prop-section explains the adjustment you may have
erty, you must figure the loss on each itemto make. Deduction Limitsseparately. Then combine the losses to deter-
Actual reimbursement less than expected. mine your total loss from that casualty or theft.
If you later receive less reimbursement than you After you have figured your casualty or theftPersonal property is any property that is not real
expected, include that difference with your other loss, you must figure how much of the loss youproperty.
losses (if any) on your return for the year in can deduct. If the loss was to property for your
which you can reasonably expect no more reim- personal use or your family’s, there are twoExample. A fire in your home destroyed an
bursement. limits on the amount you can deduct for yourupholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an-
casualty or theft loss. tique table. You did not have fire insurance to
Example. Your personal car had an FMV ofcover your loss. (This was the only casualty or1) You must reduce each casualty or theft$2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision withtheft you had during the year.) You paid $750 forloss by $100 ($100 rule).another car last year. The accident was due tothe chair and you established that it had an FMV
the negligence of the other driver. At the end ofof $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,0002) You must further reduce the total of all
the year, there was a reasonable prospect thatand had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.your losses by 10% of your adjusted gross
the owner of the other car would reimburse youYou bought the table at an auction for $100 income (10% rule).
in full. You subtracted the expected reimburse-before discovering it was an antique. It had beenYou make these reductions on Form 4684.ment when you figured your loss. You did notappraised at $900 before the fire. You figureThese rules are explained next and Tablehave a deductible loss last year. your loss on each of these items as follows:27–1 summarizes how to apply the $100 ruleThis January, the court awarded you a judg-
and the 10% rule in various situations. For morement of $2,000. However, in July it became
detailed explanations and examples, see Publi-apparent that you will be unable to collect any
cation 547.amount from the other driver. You can deduct
the loss this year subject to the limits discussed Property used partly for business and partlylater. for personal purposes. When property is
Actual reimbursement more than expected. used partly for personal purposes and partly for
If you later receive more reimbursement than business or income-producing purposes, the
you expected after you claimed a deduction for casualty or theft loss deduction must be figured
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 175

Page 178 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 27–1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits
$100 Rule 10% Rule
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$100 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $100 (the $100 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One Person— Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married Couple—
With Loss From theFiling Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
4) Subtract 10% × $29,500 AGI..... 2,950separately for the personal-use part and for the
5) Theft loss deduction......... –0–business or income-producing part. You must When To Report
figure each loss separately because the $100
You do not have a theft loss deduction be-rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss on Gain or Losscause your loss ($1,900) is less than 10% ofthe personal-use part of the property.
your adjusted gross income ($2,950). If you receive an insurance or other reimburse-
ment that is more than your adjusted basis in the$100 Rule Example 2. In March, you had a car acci-destroyed or stolen property, you have a gain
dent that totally destroyed your car. You did notfrom the casualty or theft. You must include thisAfter you have figured your casualty or theft
have collision insurance on your car, so you didgain in your income in the year you receive theloss, you must reduce that loss by $100. This
not receive any insurance reimbursement. Yourreimbursement, unless you choose to postponereduction applies to each total casualty or theft
the gain as explained in Publication 547.loss on the car was $1,200. In November, a fireloss. It does not matter how many pieces of
If you have a loss, see Table 27–2.property are involved in an event. Only a singledamaged your basement and totally destroyed
$100 reduction applies. the furniture, washer, dryer, and other itemsLoss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on
stored there. Your loss on the basement itemsdeposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financialExample. A hailstorm damages your homeafter reimbursement was $1,700. Your adjustedinstitution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier.and your car. Determine the amount of loss, asgross income is $25,000. You figure your casu-discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since Casualty loss.Generally, you can deduct aalty loss deduction as follows.the losses are due to a single event, you com- casualty loss only in the tax year in which the
bine the losses and reduce the combined casualty occurred. This is true even if you do notCar Basementamount by $100. repair or replace the damaged property until a
1) Loss .............. $1,200 $1,700 later year.2) Subtract $100 per incident 100 100Single event. Generally, events closely re-3) Loss after $100 rule.... $1,100 $1,600 Theft loss.You can generally deduct a theftlated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a loss only in the year you discover your propertysingle casualty when the damage is from two or4) Total loss................. $2,700 was stolen. You must be able to show that there5) Subtract 10% × $25,000 AGI.... 2,500more closely related causes, such as wind and was a theft, but you do not have to know when6) Casualty loss deduction...... $200flood damage caused by the same storm. the theft occurred. However, you should show
when you discovered that your property was
10% Rule missing.Gains and losses.If you had both gains and
losses from casualties or thefts to personal-useYou must reduce the total of all your casualty or
Disaster Area Lossproperty, you must compare your total gains totheft losses by 10% of your adjusted gross in-
come. Apply this rule after you reduce each lossyour total losses. Do this after you have reducedIf you have a casualty loss in a Presidentiallyby $100. If you have both gains and losses fromeach loss by $100. declared disaster area, you can choose to de-casualties or thefts, see Gains and losses, later duct the loss on your tax return for either of theLosses more than gains.If your losses arein this discussion. following years.more than your recognized gains, subtract your
gains from your losses and reduce the result byExample 1. In June, you discovered that 1) The year the casualty occurred.10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest isyour house had been burglarized. Your loss
2) The year immediately preceding the yearyour deductible loss.after insurance reimbursement was $2,000.
the casualty occurred.Your adjusted gross income is $29,500. You firstGains more than losses. If your recog-apply the $100 rule and then the 10% rule.nized gains are more than your losses, subtractPostponed tax deadlines. The IRS mayFigure your theft loss deduction as follows.your losses from your gains. The difference ispostpone for up to 120 days certain tax dead-
treated as capital gain and must be reported onlines of taxpayers who are affected by a Pre-1) Loss after insurance........... $2,000
Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does notsidentially declared disaster. The tax deadlines2) Subtract $100............... 1 0 0
3) Loss after $100 rule........... $1,900 apply to your losses. the IRS may postpone include those for filing
Page 176 Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 179 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More information.For more information, seeTable 27–2. When To Deduct a Loss
Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
IF you have a loss... THEN deduct it in the year...
From a casualty, The loss occurred.
In a Presidentially declared disaster The disaster occurred or the year immediately before theHow To Reportarea, disaster.
Gains and LossesFrom a theft,  The theft was discovered.
On a deposit treated as a: Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible
loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more• Casualty, • A reasonable estimate can be made. than one casualty or theft, use a separate Form
• Bad debt, • Deposits are totally worthless. 4684 to determine your gain or loss for each
event. Combine the gains and losses on one• Ordinary loss, • A reasonable estimate can be made. Form 4684. Follow the form instructions as to
which lines to fill out.
income and employment tax returns, paying in- those records are maintained in a coveredIf you have a: Report it on:come and employment taxes, and making con- disaster area. The main home or principal
Gain .......... Schedule D (Formtributions to a traditional IRA or Roth IRA.place of business does not have to be
1040)If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS willlocated in the covered disaster area. Loss .......... Schedule A (Formpublicize the postponement in your area by pub-
• Any estate or trust that has tax records 1040)lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenuenecessary to meet a postponed tax dead-procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-line, provided those records are main-dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB). Adjustments to basis.If you have a casualtytained in a covered disaster area.
or theft loss, you must decrease your basis inWho is eligible.If the IRS postpones a tax• The spouse on a joint return with a tax-the property by any deductible loss and anydeadline, the following taxpayers are eligible forpayer who is eligible for postponements.insurance or other reimbursement. Amountsthe postponement.
you spend to restore your property after a casu-• Any other person determined by the IRS• Any individual whose main home is lo- alty increase your adjusted basis. See Adjustedto be affected by a Presidentially declaredcated in a covered disaster area (defined Basis in chapter 14 for more information.disaster.later).
Net operating loss (NOL).If your casualty or• Any business entity or sole proprietor Covered disaster area.This is an area of a
theft loss deduction is more than your income,whose principal place of business is lo-Presidentially declared disaster area in which
you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL tocated in a covered disaster area. the IRS has decided to postpone tax deadlines
lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you tofor up to 120 days.• Any relief worker affiliated with a recog- get a refund for tax you have already paid. Or,nized government or philanthropic organi- you can use it to lower your tax in a later year.Abatement of interest.In addition to post-zation who is assisting in a covered You do not have to be in business to have anponing the tax deadlines, the IRS may grant andisaster area. NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For moreextension to file income tax returns and pay
information, see Publication 536, Net Operatingincome tax. In this case, the IRS will abate the• Any individual, business entity, or sole
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, andinterest for the length of the extension periodproprietor whose records are needed to
Trusts.and for the length of any postponement.meet a postponed deadline, provided
Chapter 27 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 177

Page 180 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
22 and the instructions for Schedule A (Form❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss
1040). From Business
❏ Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit28.
From Business
❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or LossIntroduction From FarmingCar Expenses You may be able to deduct the ordinary and ❏ Form 2106 Employee Businessnecessary business-related expenses you have Expensesfor:and Other
❏ Form 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee
• Travel, Business Expenses
Employee • Entertainment,
• Gifts, or
Business • Transportation.
Travel Expenses
An ordinary expense is one that is commonExpenses and accepted in your field of trade, business, orIf you temporarily travel away from your tax
profession. A necessary expense is one that ishome, you can use this section to determine if
helpful and appropriate for your business. Anyou have deductible travel expenses. This sec-
expense does not have to be indispensable toImportant Change tion defines “travel expenses,” “tax home,” “tem-
be considered necessary. porary assignment,” and the “standard meal
allowance.” It also discusses the rules for travelStandard mileage rate.The standard mile- This chapter explains:
inside and outside the United States and de-age rate for the cost of operating your car in
• What expenses are deductible, ductible convention expenses.2001 is 341/2 cents a mile for all business miles.
Car expenses and use of the standard mile-• What records you need to prove your ex-Travel expenses defined.For tax purposes,age rate are explained under Transportation Ex- penses, travel expenses are the ordinary and necessarypenses, later. expenses (defined earlier) of traveling away• How to treat any expense reimbursementsfrom home for your business, profession, or job.you may receive, and You will find examples of deductible travel
• How to report your expenses on your re-expenses in Table 28–1.
turn.Important Reminders Traveling away from home. You are travel-
ing away from home if:
Standard meal allowance. The standard Who does not need to use this publication.
meal allowance (also referred to as the limit on 1) Your duties require you to be away fromIf you are an employee, you will not need to read
meals and incidental expenses (M&IE rate)) for the general area of your tax home (definedthis chapter if all of the following are true.
most small localities in the United States is $30. later) substantially longer than an ordinary
However, the standard meal allowance is higher day ’s work, and1) You fully accounted to your employer for
for most major cities and many other localities inyour work-related expenses. 2) You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-the continental United States. See Publication mands of your work while away from2) You received full reimbursement for your1542, Per Diem Rates . These rates (al- home.expenses.lowances/limits) are also listed in Appendix A of
This rest requirement is not satisfied by merelyChapter 41, Part 301 of the Code of Federal3) Your employer required you to return any
napping in your car. You do not have to be awayRegulations. If you have a computer, you canexcess reimbursement and you did so.
from your tax home for a whole day or from duskfind them on the Internet at 4) Box 12 of your Form W–2, Wage and Tax to dawn as long as your relief from duty is longwww.policyworks.gov/perdiem. Click on “Do- Statement, shows no amount with a code enough to get necessary sleep or rest.mestic per diem rates.” Use of the standard meal L.allowance is explained under What Travel Ex-
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor.penses Are Deductible, later. If you meet these four conditions, there is no
You leave your home terminal on a regularlyneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of scheduled round-trip run between two cities andments on your return. See Reimbursements,
service” limits.Generally, you can deduct return home 16 hours later. During the run, youlater, if you would like more information on reim-
only 50% of your business-related meal ex- have 6 hours off at your turnaround point wherebursements and accounting to your employer.
penses while traveling away from your tax home you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getIf you meet these conditions and yourfor business purposes. You can deduct a higher necessary sleep before starting the return trip.employer included reimbursements onpercentage if the meals take place during or You are considered to be away from home.your Form W–2 in error, ask your em-incident to any period subject to the Department
TIP
ployer for a corrected Form W–2.of Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. Example 2. You are a truck driver. You
(These limits apply to certain workers who are leave your terminal and return to it later the
under certain federal regulations.) The percent- same day. You get an hour off at your turn-Useful Itemsage is 60% for 2001. See Exceptions to the 50% around point to eat. Because you are not off toYou may want to see:limit under 50% Limit, later. get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not
an adequate rest period, you are not travelingLimits that apply to employee deductions. Publication away from home. You cannot deduct travel ex-If you are an employee, deduct your work-re- penses.❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carlated expenses discussed in this chapter as a Expensesmiscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a
A (Form 1040). Generally, the amount of miscel- member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-❏ 535 Business Expenses
laneous itemized deductions you can deduct is nent duty assignment overseas, you are not❏ 1542 Per Diem Rateslimited to the amount that is more than 2% of traveling away from home. You cannot deduct
your adjusted gross income. It may be further your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-Form (and Instructions)limited if your adjusted gross income is more not deduct these expenses even if you have to
than $132,950 ($66,475 if you are married filing❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized maintain a home in the United States for your
separately). For more information, see chapter Deductions family members who are not allowed to accom-
Page 178 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Whether your income from each place isTable 28–1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
significant or insignificant.This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from
home for business purposes.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where you
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andIF you have
earn $25,000. You work the other 4 months inexpenses for: THEN you can deduct the costs of:
Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.
Transportation Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home andCincinnati is your main place of work because
your business destination. If you were provided with a ticket oryou spend most of your time there and earn
you are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similarmost of your income there.
program, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury
No main place of business or work. YouWater Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in
may have a tax home even if you do not have aPublication 463 for additional rules and limits.
regular or main place of work. Your tax home
Taxi, commuter Fares for these and other types of transportation that take youmay be the home where you regularly live.
bus, and airport between: Factors used to determine tax home.Iflimousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and you do not have a regular or main place of
business or work, use the following three factors• The hotel and the work location of your customers or
to determine where your tax home is. clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary
work location. 1) You perform part of your business in the
area of your main home and use thatBaggage and Sending baggage and sample or display material between
home for lodging while doing business inshipping your regular and temporary work locations.
the area.
Car Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from2) You have living expenses at your mainhome on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the home that you duplicate because yourstandard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls andbusiness requires you to be away fromparking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,that home.you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
3) You have not abandoned the area in which
Lodging and meals Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight orboth your historical place of lodging and
long enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properlyyour claimed main home are located; you
perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food,have a member or members of your family
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals for additional living at your main home; or you often use
rules and limits. that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax homeCleaning Dry cleaning and laundry.
is the home where you regularly live. If you
Telephone Business calls while on your business trip. This includessatisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
business communication by fax machine or other home depending on all the facts and circum-
communication devices. stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are a
transient; your tax home is wherever you workTips Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. and you cannot deduct travel expenses.
Other Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
Example. You are single and live in Bostonbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportationin an apartment you rent. You have worked forto or from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, your employer in Boston for a number of years.computer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a houseYour employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu-trailer. tive training program. You do not expect to re-
turn to work in Boston after you complete your
training.
pany you overseas. If you are transferred from If you do not have a regular or a main placeDuring your training, you do not do any work
one permanent duty station to another, you mayof business because of the nature of your work,in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and
have deductible moving expenses, which arethen your tax home may be the place where youon-the-job training throughout the United States.
explained in chapter 19. regularly live. See No main place of business orYou keep your apartment in Boston and return to
work, later.A naval officer assigned to permanent duty it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living your personal business. You also keep up yourIf you do not have a regular place of business
facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel community contacts in Boston. When you com-or post of duty and there is no place where you
expense purposes. plete your training, you are transferred to Losregularly live, you are considered a transient
Angeles.(an itinerant) and your tax home is wherever
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you didyou work. As a transient, you cannot claim a
Tax Home not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-travel expense deduction because you are
cause you had duplicate living expenses. Younever considered to be traveling away fromTo determine whether you are traveling away
also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-home.from home, you must first determine the location
don your apartment in Boston as your mainof your tax home.
home, you kept your community contacts, andMain place of business or work.If you haveGenerally, your tax home is your regular you frequently returned to live in your apartment.more than one place of work, consider the fol-place of business or post of duty, regardless of You have a tax home in Boston.lowing when determining which one is your mainwhere you maintain your family home. It in-
place of business or work. cludes the entire city or general area in which Travel to family home.If you (and your fam-
your business or work is located. ily) do not live at your tax home, you cannot1) The total time you ordinarily spend in eachIf you have more than one regular place of deduct the cost of traveling between your taxplace.business, your tax home is your main place of home and your family home. You also cannot
2) The level of your business activity in eachbusiness. See Main place of business or work, deduct the cost of meals and lodging while at
place.later. your tax home. See Example 1 that follows.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are working temporarily in the same prosecution, you are not subject to the one-year When you travel away from home on
city where you and your family live, you may be business, you should keep records ofrule. This means you may be able to deduct
considered as traveling away from home. See all the expenses you have and anytravel expenses even if you are away from yourRECORDS
Example 2, below. advances you receive from your employer. Youtax home for more than one year.
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherFor you to qualify, the Attorney General must
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you written record to keep track of your expenses.certify that you are traveling:
and your family live in Tucson. You are em- The types of expenses you need to record,
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in along with supporting documentation, are de-1) For the federal government,
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return scribed in Table 28–2.2) In a temporary duty status, andto your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one
night there before returning home. You cannot3) To investigate or prosecute, or provideSeparating costs.If you have one expensededuct any expenses you have for meals and support services for the investigation orthat includes the costs of meals, entertainment,lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling fromprosecution of, a federal crime. and other services (such as lodging or transpor-Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is tation), you must allocate that expense betweenYou can deduct your otherwise allowable travelyour tax home. the cost of meals and entertainment and the costexpenses throughout the period of certification.of other services. You must have a reasonableExample 2. Your family home is in Pitts- basis for making this allocation. For example,Determining temporary or indefinite.Youburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-must determine whether your assignment isrest of the year you work for the same employer cludes one or more meals in its room charge.temporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifin Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the you expect an assignment or job to last for oneTravel expenses for another individual.If asame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-year or less, it is temporary unless there arespouse, dependent, or other individual goes withmore. facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.you (or your employee) on a business trip or to aBecause you spend most of your workingAn assignment or job that is initially temporarybusiness convention, you generally cannot de-time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,may become indefinite due to changed circum-duct his or her travel expenses.that city is your tax home. You cannot deductstances. A series of assignments to the same
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-any expenses you have for meals and lodginglocation, all for short periods but that togetherpenses of someone who goes with you if thatthere. However, when you return to work incover a long period, may be considered an in-person:Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax homedefinite assignment.
even though you stay at your family home. You
1) Is your employee,can deduct the cost of your round trip betweenGoing home on days off. If you go back toBaltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct 2) Has a bona fide business purpose for theyour tax home from a temporary assignment onyour part of your family’s living expenses for travel, andyour days off, you are not considered away frommeals and lodging while you are living and work-home while you are in your hometown. You 3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct theing in Pittsburgh. cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-travel expenses.
ing there. However, you can deduct your travel
Temporary Assignment expenses, including meals and lodging, whileBusiness associate.If a business associ-
traveling between your temporary place of workate travels with you and meets the conditions inor Job
and your tax home. You can claim these ex-(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel
penses up to the amount it would have cost you expenses you have for that person. A businessYou may regularly work at your tax home and
associate is someone with whom you could rea-to stay at your temporary place of work.another location. It may not be practical to return
sonably expect to actively conduct business. Ahome from this other location at the end of eachIf you keep your hotel room during your visit
business associate can be a current or prospec-work day. home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-penses of returning home up to the amount youment. If your assignment or job away from sor.would have spent for meals had you stayed atyour main place of work is temporary, your tax your temporary place of work. Bona fide business purpose.A bona fidehome does not change. You are considered to
business purpose exists if you can prove a realbe away from home for the whole period you are
Probationary work period.If you take a jobbusiness purpose for the individual’s presence.away from your main place of work. You can
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-that requires you to move, with the understand-deduct your travel expenses, if they otherwise
sisting in entertaining customers, are noting that you will keep the job if your work isqualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary
enough to make the expenses deductible.satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobassignment in a single location is one that is
is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourrealistically expected to last (and does in fact
Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-last) for one year or less.
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda isbationary period.However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
not Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally typesnite, the location of the assignment or job be-
notes, performs similar services, and accompa-comes your new tax home and you cannot What Travel Expenses Are nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-deduct your travel expenses while there. An
formance of these services does not establishDeductible?assignment or job in a single location is consid-
that her presence on the trip is necessary to theered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last
Once you have determined that you are travel-conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses arefor more than one year, whether or not it actually
not deductible.ing away from your tax home, you can determinelasts for more than one year.
what travel expenses are deductible. Jerry pays $115 a day for a double room. AIf your assignment is indefinite, you must
single room costs $90 a day. He can deduct theYou can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-include in your income any amounts you receive
total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,penses you have when you travel away fromfrom your employer for living expenses, even if
but only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he useshome on business. The type of expense you canthey are called travel allowances and you ac-
public transportation, he can deduct only hisdeduct depends on the facts and your circum-count to your employer for them. You may be
fare.stances.able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new
tax home as a moving expense. See chapter 19Table 28–1 summarizes travel expenses youfor more information. may be able to deduct. You may have otherMeals
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredException for federal crime investigations or
there, depending on the facts and your circum-prosecutions. If you are a federal employee You can deduct the cost of meals in either of the
stances.participating in a federal crime investigation or following two situations.
Page 180 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Federal employees should refer to thestop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
1) It is necessary for you to stop for substan-federal travel regulations at tation industry, however, see Special rate for
tial sleep or rest to properly perform your www.policyworks.gov/ftr  for transportation workers, later.CAUTION
!
duties while traveling away from home onchanges affecting their claims for reimburse-Standard meal allowance for areas outsidebusiness. ment of these expenses. the continental United States.The standard
2) The meal is business-related entertain- meal allowance rates do not apply to travel in50% limit may apply. If you use thisment. Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsidemethod for meal expenses and you are not reim-the continental United States. The federal perBusiness-related entertainment is discussedbursed or you are reimbursed under a nonac-diem rates for these locations are publishedunder Entertainment Expenses, later. The fol-countable plan, you can generally deduct onlymonthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al-lowing discussion deals only with meals that are50% of the standard meal allowance. If you arelowances for Foreign Areas.not business-related entertainment. reimbursed under an accountable plan and you
are deducting amounts that are more than your Your employer may have these ratesLavish or extravagant.You cannot deduct reimbursements, you can deduct only 50% of available, or you can purchase theexpenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-the excess amount. The 50% limit is explained publication from the:gant. An expense is not considered lavish orlater under Entertainment Expenses. Accounta- Superintendent of Documentsextravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsble and nonaccountable plans are discussed U.S. Government Printing Officeand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-later under Reimbursements. P.O. Box 371954lowed merely because they are more than a Pittsburgh, PA 15250–7954There is no optional standard lodgingfixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-
amount similar to the standard mealtaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. You can also order it by calling theallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-CAUTION
!
Government Printing Office at50% limit on meals.You can figure your mealpense deduction is your actual cost. 1 – 202 – 512 – 1800 (not a toll-freeexpenses using either of the following two meth- number).ods. Who can use the standard meal allow-
ance? You can use the standard meal allow- Per diem rates are also available on1) Actual cost. ance whether you are an employee or the Internet. If you have a computerself-employed, and whether or not you are reim-2) The standard meal allowance. and a modem, you can access foreignbursed for your traveling expenses. per diem rates at:Both of these methods are explained below. But,
Who cannot use the standard meal allow- www.state.govregardless of the method you use, you generally
ance. You cannot use the standard meal al-can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost You can access domestic per diem rates at:lowance if you are related to your employer asof your meals. www.policyworks.gov/perdiemdefined next.If you are reimbursed for the cost of your
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onRelated to employer. You are related to Special rate for transportation workers.whether your employer’s reimbursement plan your employer if: You can use a special standard meal allowancewas accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
if you work in the transportation industry. Younot reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether1) Your employer is your brother or sister,
are in the transportation industry if your work:the unreimbursed meal expense is for businesshalf brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
travel or business entertainment. The 50% limittor, or lineal descendant, 1) Directly involves moving people or goodsis explained later under Entertainment Ex- 2) Your employer is a corporation in which by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orpenses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans you own, directly or indirectly, more than truck, andare discussed later under Reimbursements. 10% in value of the outstanding stock, or2) Regularly requires you to travel away from
Actual cost.You can use the actual cost of3) Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- home and, during any single trip, usually
your meals to figure the amount of your expenseduciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, involves travel to areas eligible for different
before reimbursement and application of the a trust, and your employer. standard meal allowance rates.
50% deduction limit. If you use this method, you
You may be considered to indirectly own stock, If this applies to you, you can claim a $38 a daymust keep records of your actual cost.
for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a standard meal allowance ($42 for travel outside
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that the continental United States).Standard meal allowance. Generally, you
owns the stock or if a member of your family orUsing the special rate for transportationcan use the “standard meal allowance” method
your partner owns the stock. workers eliminates the need for you to deter-as an alternative to the actual cost method. It
mine the standard meal allowance for everyallows you to use a set amount for your dailyUse of the standard meal allowance for otherarea where you stop for sleep or rest. If youmeals and incidental expenses (M&IE), in- travel.You can use the standard meal allow-choose to use the special rate for any trip, youstead of keeping records of your actual costs.ance to figure your meal expenses when youmust use the special rate (and not use the regu-The set amount varies depending on where andtravel in connection with investment and otherlar standard meal allowance rates) for all tripswhen you travel. In this chapter, “standard meal income-producing property. You can also use ityou take that year.allowance” refers to the federal rate for M&IE,to figure your meal expenses when you travel fordiscussed later under Amount of standard meal Travel for days you depart and return.Forqualifying educational purposes. You cannotallowance. If you use the standard meal allow- both the day you depart for and the day youuse the standard meal allowance to figure theance, you still must keep records to prove the return from a business trip, you must prorate thecost of your meals when you travel for medicaltime, place, and business purpose of your travel. standard meal allowance (figure a reducedor charitable purposes.See Recordkeeping, later. amount for each day). You can do so by one of
Amount of standard meal allowance. TheIncidental expenses.These include, but two methods.
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IEare not limited to, your costs for the following
rate. For travel in 2001, the rate is $30 a day for 1) Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-items.
most small localities in the United States. Mostdard meal allowance, or
major cities and many other localities in the1) Laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing. 2) Method 2: You can prorate using anyUnited States are designated as high-cost ar-2) Fees and tips for persons who provide ser- method that you consistently apply andeas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-vices, such as porters and baggage carri- that is in accordance with reasonable busi-lowances. Locations qualifying for rates of $34,ers. ness practice.$38, $42, or $46 a day are listed in Publication
Incidental expenses do not include taxicab1542.
fares, lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams or If you travel to more than one location in oneExample. Jen is employed in New Orleans
telephone calls. day, use the rate in effect for the area where you as a convention planner. In March, her employer
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to destination that are directly related to your busi-Travel Entirely for Business
attend a planning seminar. She left her home inness. or Considered EntirelyNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be afor Businessarrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. Aftervacation even if the promoter advertises that it is
spending two nights there, she flew back to Newprimarily for business. The scheduling of inci-You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-
Orleans on Friday and arrived back home atdental business activities during a trip, such asting to and from your business destination if your8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amountviewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingtrip is entirely for business or considered entirelyto cover her expenses and included it with herwith general subjects, will not change what isfor business.wages. really a vacation into a business trip.
Under Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days of Travel entirely for business.If you travelthe standard meal allowance for Washington, outside the United States and you spend theDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andPart of Trip Outside entire time on business activities, you can de-Friday (the days she departed and returned),the United States duct all of your travel expenses.and the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anyIf part of your trip is outside the United States,Travel considered entirely for business.method that she applies consistently and that isuse the rules described later under Travel Even if you did not spend your entire time onin accordance with reasonable business prac-Outside the United States for that part of the trip.business activities, your trip is considered en-tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of theFor the part of your trip that is inside the Unitedtirely for business if you meet at least one of thestandard meal allowance even though a federalStates, use the rules for travel in the Unitedfollowing four exceptions.employee would have to use method 1 and beStates. Travel outside the United States does
limited to only 21/2 days. not include travel from one point in the UnitedException 1 – No substantial control.
States to another point in the United States. TheYour trip is considered entirely for business if
following discussion can help you determineyou did not have substantial control over arrang-
whether your trip was entirely within the Uniteding the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
States. your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have
Travel in the substantial control over arranging your trip.
Public transportation.If you travel by publicYou do not have substantial control overUnited States transportation, any place in the United Statesyour trip if you:where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aThe following discussion applies to travel in the
point in the United States. Once the vehicleUnited States. For this purpose, the United 1) Are an employee who was reimbursed or
leaves the last scheduled stop in the UnitedStates includes the 50 states and the District of paid a travel expense allowance,
States on its way to a point outside the UnitedColumbia. The treatment of your travel ex- 2) Are not related to your employer, andStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outsidepenses depends on how much of your trip was
the United States.business related and on how much of your trip 3) Are not a managing executive.
occurred within the United States. See Part of “Related to your employer” was defined ear-Example. You fly from New York to PuertoTrip Outside the United States, later. lier in this chapter under Who cannot use theRico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return
standard meal allowance?to New York nonstop. The flight from New York
A “managing executive” is an employee whoto Miami is in the United States, so only the flightTrip Primarily for Business
has the authority and responsibility, without be-from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide onYou can deduct all your travel expenses if your States. Because there are no scheduled stops
the need for the business travel.trip was entirely business related. If your trip was between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
primarily for business and, while at your busi- return trip is outside the United States.A self-employed person generally has sub-
ness destination, you extended your stay for a stantial control over arranging business trips.
Private car.Travel by private car in the Unitedvacation, made a personal side trip, or had other Exception 2 – Outside United States noStates is travel between points in the Unitedpersonal activities, you can deduct your
more than a week. Your trip is consideredStates, even when you are on your way to abusiness-related travel expenses. These ex-
entirely for business if you were outside thedestination outside the United States.penses include the travel costs of getting to and
United States for a week or less, combiningfrom your business destination and any
business and nonbusiness activities. One weekExample. You travel by car from Denver tobusiness-related expenses at your business
means seven consecutive days. In counting theMexico City and return. Your travel from Denverdestination.
days, do not count the day you leave the Unitedto the border and from the border back to Den-
States, but do count the day you return to thever is travel in the United States, and the rules inExample. You work in Atlanta and take a
United States.this section apply. The rules under Travelbusiness trip to New Orleans. On your way
Outside the United States apply to your trip fromhome, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents. Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time onthe border to Mexico City and back to the border.You spend $630 for the 9 days you are away personal activities.Your trip is consideredfrom home for travel, meals, lodging, and other entirely for business if:travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-Travel Outsidebile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and 1) You were outside the United States forthe United Statesyour total cost would have been $580. You can more than a week, and
deduct $580 for your trip, including the
If any part of your business travel is outside the2) You spent less than 25% of the total timeround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-
United States, some of your deductions for theyou were outside the United States onans. The deduction for your meals is subject to
cost of getting to and from your destination maynonbusiness activities.the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.
be limited. For this purpose, the United StatesFor this purpose, count both the day your tripincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum-began and the day it ended.bia.Trip Primarily for
How much of your travel expenses you canException 4 – Vacation not a major con-Personal Reasons deduct depends in part upon how much of yoursideration.Your trip is considered entirely for
trip outside the United States was business re-business if you can establish that a personalIf your trip was primarily for personal reasons,
lated. vacation was not a major consideration, even ifsuch as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a
you have substantial control over arranging theSee chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-nondeductible personal expense. However, you
tion on luxury water travel. trip.can deduct any expenses you have while at your
Page 182 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough
if the agenda is so related to your position that it
shows your attendance was for business pur-
poses.
Conventions held outside the North Ameri-
can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for
information on conventions held outside the
North American area.
Entertainment
Expenses
You may be able to deduct business-related
entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
ing a client, customer, or employee.
You can deduct entertainment expenses
only if they are both ordinary and necessary
(defined earlier) and meet one of the following
two tests.
1) Directly-related test.
2) Associated test.
Both of these tests are explained in Publication
463.
The amount you can deduct for enter-
tainment expenses may be limited.
Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!
your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.
Club dues and membership fees. You can-
not deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
membership in any club organized for:
1) Business,
2) Pleasure,
3) Recreation, or
4) Other social purpose.
Figure 28–A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W –2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099 –MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
This rule applies to any membership organiza-education program, you can deduct your regis-Travel Primarily for Business tion if one of its principal purposes is either:tration fees and other expenses you have that
If you travel outside the United States primarilyare directly related to your business. 1) To conduct entertainment activities for
for business but spend some of your time on members or their guests, or
nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de-Conventions 2) To provide members or their guests withduct all of your travel expenses. You can only access to entertainment facilities.deduct the business portion of your cost of get-You can deduct your travel expenses when youting to and from your destination. You must The purposes and activities of a club, not itsattend a convention if you can show that yourmake an allocation between your business and name, will determine whether or not you canattendance benefits your trade or business. Younonbusiness activities to determine your de- deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paidcannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-ductible amount. These travel allocation rules to:ily.are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463.If the convention is for investment, political,1) Country clubs,social, or other nonbusiness purposes, you can-You do not have to allocate your travel
2) Golf and athletic clubs,not deduct the expenses.expense deduction if you meet one of
the four exceptions listed earlier under
TIP
3) Airline clubs,Your appointment or election as a dele-Travel considered entirely for business. In those gate does not, in itself, determine4) Hotel clubs, andcases, you can deduct the total cost of getting towhether you can deduct travel ex-CAUTION
!
and from your destination. 5) Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-penses. You can deduct your travel expenses
cumstances generally considered to beonly if your attendance is connected to your own
conducive to business discussions.trade or business.
Travel Primarily for Personal
Convention agenda. The convention agenda Entertainment. Entertainment includes anyReasons
or program generally shows the purpose of the activity generally considered to provide enter-
If you travel outside the United States primarily convention. You can show your attendance at tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
for vacation or for investment purposes, the the convention benefits your trade or business include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-
entire cost of the trip is a nondeductible per- by comparing the agenda with the official duties cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at
sonal expense. If you spend some time attend- and responsibilities of your position. The agenda sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-
ing brief professional seminars or a continuing does not have to deal specifically with your offi- ing, vacation, and similar trips. You cannot de-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
duct expenses for entertainment that are lavish value of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction50% Limit cannot be more than $60 (.50 × $120).or extravagant. If you buy a ticket to an enter-
tainment event for a client, you generally cannotIn general, you can deduct only 50% of your
deduct more than the face value of the ticket,business-related meal and entertainment ex-
Exceptions to the 50% Limiteven if you paid a higher price. penses. (If you are subject to the Department of
Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, youGift or entertainment.Any item that might Generally, business-related meal and entertain-can deduct a higher percentage. See Individualsbe considered either a gift or entertainment gen- ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)erally will be considered entertainment. How- Figure 28–A can help you determine if the 50%The 50% limit applies to employees or theirever, if you give a customer packaged food or limit applies to you.employers, and to self-employed persons (in-beverages that you intend the customer to use Your meal or entertainment expense is notcluding independent contractors) or their clients,at a later date, treat it as a gift. subject to the 50% limit if the expense meetsdepending on whether the expenses are reim-either of the following exceptions.If you give a customer tickets to a theaterbursed.performance or sporting event and you do not goFigure 28–A summarizes the general rulesEmployee ’s reimbursed expenses. If youwith the customer to the performance or event,explained in this section. are an employee, you are not subject to the 50%you have a choice. You can treat the cost of theThe 50% limit applies to business meals orlimit on the amount of expenses for which yourtickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-entertainment expenses you have while: employer reimburses you under an accountablement expense, whichever is to your advantage. plan. Accountable plans are discussed laterYou can change your treatment of the tickets1) Traveling away from home (whether eatingunder Reimbursements.at a later date by filing an amended return.alone or with others) on business,
Generally, an amended return must be filed Individuals subject to “hours of service”2) Entertaining customers at your place ofwithin 3 years from the date the original return limits.You can deduct a higher percentage ofbusiness, a restaurant, or other location, orwas filed or within 2 years from the time the tax your meal expenses if the meals take place
was paid, whichever is later. 3) Attending a business convention or recep-during or incident to any period subject to the
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-Department of Transportation’s “hours of ser-If you go with the customer to the event, you
eon at a club. vice” limits. The percentage is 60% for 2001,must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
and it gradually increases to 80% by the yearment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
2008.to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.Included expenses. Expenses subject to the Individuals subject to the Department of50% limit include:Separating costs.If you have one expense Transportation’s “hours of service” limits includethat includes the costs of entertainment, and• Taxes and tips relating to a business mealthe following persons. other services (such as lodging or transporta-or entertainment activity,
tion), you must allocate that expense between 1) Certain air transportation workers (such as• Cover charges for admission to a night-the cost of entertainment and the cost of other pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andclub,services. You must have a reasonable basis for control tower operators) who are under
making this allocation. For example, you must Federal Aviation Administration regula-• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter- tions.dinner or cocktail party, and
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your 2) Interstate truck operators and bus drivers• Amounts paid for parking at a sportsroom charge. who are under Department of Transporta-arena.
A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter- tion regulations.However, the cost of transportation to and fromtainment includes the cost of a meal you provide 3) Certain railroad employees (such as engi-a business meal or a business-related entertain-to a customer or client, whether the meal is a neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal ers, and control operations personnel) whoexpense includes the cost of food, beverages, are under Federal Railroad AdministrationApplication of 50% limit.The 50% limit ontaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an regulations.meal and entertainment expenses applies if theentertainment-related meal, you or your em-expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-4) Certain merchant mariners who are underployee must be present when the food or bever-ered by one of the exceptions discussed later inCoast Guard regulations.ages are provided. this section.
You cannot claim the cost of your mealThe 50% limit also applies to certain meal
both as an entertainment expense andand entertainment expenses that are not
as a travel expense. business-related. It applies to meal and enter-
CAUTION
!
tainment expenses incurred for the production ofGift Expenses
income, including rental or royalty income. ItTaking turns paying for meals or entertain-
also applies to the cost of meals included inment. If a group of business acquaintances If you give gifts in the course of your trade or
deductible educational expenses.take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter- business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
tainment checks without regard to whether any This section explains the limits and rules for
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply thebusiness purposes are served, no member of deducting the costs of gifts.
50% limit after determining the amount thatthe group can deduct any part of the expense.
$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
Trade association meetings.You can de- for business gifts you give directly or indirectly todetermine the amount of meal and entertain-
duct expenses for entertainment that are directly any one person during your tax year. A gift to ament expenses that would be deductible under
related to, and necessary for, attending busi- company that is intended for the eventual per-the other rules discussed in this chapter.
ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a
organizations if the expenses of your attend- limited class of people will be considered anExample 1. You spend $100 for a
ance are related to your active trade or busi- indirect gift to that particular person or to thebusiness-related meal. If $40 of that amount is
ness. These organizations include business individuals within that class of people who re-not allowable because it is lavish and extrava-
leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate ceive the gift.gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%
boards, trade associations, and professional as- If you give a gift to a member of a customer’slimit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30
sociations. family, the gift is generally considered to be an(.50 × $60).
indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
Additional information.For more information Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
on entertainment expenses, including discus-concert and give them to a client. You pur- ness connection with that family member and
sions of the directly-related and associatedchased the tickets through a ticket agent. You the gift is not intended for the customer’s even-
tests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463. paid $150 for the two tickets, which had a face tual use.
Page 184 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 187 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
You can change your treatment of the tickets
at a later date by filing an amended return.
Generally, an amended return must be filed
within 3 years from the date the original return
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax
was paid, whichever is later.
If you go with the customer to the event, you
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.
Transportation
Expenses
This section discusses expenses you can de-
duct for business transportation when you are
not traveling away from home as defined earlier.
These expenses include the cost of transporta-
tion by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the cost of
driving and maintaining your car.
Transportation expenses include the ordi-
nary and necessary costs of all of the following.
• Getting from one workplace to another in
the course of your business or profession
when you are traveling within your tax
home. (Tax home is defined earlier under
Travel Expenses.)
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from
your regular workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These temporary
workplaces can be either within the area
of your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses do not include ex-
penses you have while traveling away from
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
penses, which are discussed earlier. However, if
you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to
Figure 28–B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home .)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex-
penses, later.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
1) An item that costs $4 or less and:you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not Illustration of transportation expenses.Fig-
matter whether you have separate businesses, ure 28–B illustrates the rules for when you cana) Has your name clearly and perma-are separately employed, or whether each of deduct transportation expenses when you havenently imprinted on the gift, andyou has an independent connection with the a regular or main job away from your home. You
b) Is one of a number of identical itemsmay want to refer to it when deciding whetherrecipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
you widely distribute. you can deduct your transportation expenses.ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer. Examples include pens, desk sets, andTemporary work location.If you have one orplastic bags and cases. more regular places of business away from yourIncidental costs.Incidental costs, such as
2) Signs, display racks, or other promotionalhome and you commute to a temporary workengraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
material to be used on the business prem-location in the same trade or business, you canand mailing, are generally not included in deter-
ises of the recipient. deduct the expenses of the daily round-tripmining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
transportation between your home and the tem-limit.
porary location.Gift or entertainment.Any item that might beA cost is incidental only if it does not add
If your employment at a work location isconsidered either a gift or entertainment gener-substantial value to the gift. For example, the
realistically expected to last (and does in factally will be considered entertainment. However,cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
last) for one year or less, the employment isif you give a customer packaged food or bever-ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
temporary unless there are facts and circum-ages that you intend the customer to use at apackaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
stances that would indicate otherwise.later date, treat it as a gift.value of the basket is substantial compared to
If you give a customer tickets to a theater If your employment at a work location isthe value of the fruit.
performance or sporting event and you do not go realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
Exceptions. The following items are not con-with the customer to the performance or event, or if there is no realistic expectation that the
sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Page 188 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ployment is not temporary, regardless of your home is from your regular place of work. each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.You cannot deduct commuting expenses even ifround-trip transportation between your home
If employment at a work location initially isyou work during the commuting trip. and the training location.
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-Example. You had a telephone installed inExample 2. Your principal place of business
cally expected to last more than 1 year, thatyour car. You sometimes use that telephone tois in your home. You can deduct the cost of
employment will be treated as temporary (un-make business calls while commuting to andround-trip transportation between your qualify-
less there are facts and circumstances thatfrom work. Sometimes business associates rideing home office and your client’s or customer’s
would indicate otherwise) until your expectationwith you to and from work, and you have aplace of business.
changes. It will not be treated as temporary afterbusiness discussion in the car. These activities
the date you determine it will last more than 1do not change the trip from personal to busi-Example 3. You have no regular office, and
year. ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-you do not have an office in your home. In this
If the temporary work location is beyond thepenses. case, the location of your first business contact
general area of your regular place of work and is considered your office. Transportation ex-Parking fees.Fees you pay to park your caryou stay overnight, you are traveling away from penses between your home and this first contactat your place of business are nondeductiblehome. You may have deductible travel ex- are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-commuting expenses. You can, however, de-penses as discussed earlier in this chapter. portation expenses between your last businessduct business-related parking fees when visiting
contact and your home are also nondeductibleNo regular place of work.If you have no a customer or client.
commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-regular place of work but ordinarily work in theAdvertising display on car.Putting displayduct the costs of these first and last trips, youmetropolitan area where you live, you can de-material that advertises your business on yourcan deduct the costs of going from one client orduct daily transportation costs between homecar does not change the use of your car fromcustomer to another.and a temporary work site outside that metro- personal use to business use. If you use this carpolitan area. for commuting or other personal uses, you stillGenerally, a metropolitan area includes the Car Expensescannot deduct your expenses for those uses.area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost ofIf you use your car for business purposes, youYou cannot deduct daily transportation costsusing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do notmay be able to deduct car expenses. You gener-between your home and temporary work sitesinclude payments you receive from the passen-ally can use one of two methods to figure yourwithin your metropolitan area. These are non-gers in your income. These payments are con-deductible expenses: actual expenses or thedeductible commuting costs. sidered reimbursements of your expenses. standard mileage rate.
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,Two places of work.If you work at two places If you use actual expenses to figure youryou must include payments from passengers inin one day, whether or not for the same em- deduction for a car you lease, there are rulesyour income. You can then deduct your carployer, you can deduct the expense of getting that affect the amount of your lease paymentsexpenses (using the rules in this chapter).from one workplace to the other. However, if for that you can deduct. See Leasing a car under
some personal reason you do not go directlyHauling tools or instruments. Hauling Actual Car Expenses, later.
from one location to the other, you cannot de-tools or instruments in your car while commutingIn this chapter, “car” includes a van, pickup,
duct more than the amount it would have costto and from work does not make your car ex-or panel truck.you to go directly from the first location to thepenses deductible. However, you can deduct
You may be entitled to a tax credit forsecond. any additional costs you have for hauling tools or
an electric vehicle (see chapter 38) or aTransportation expenses you have in goinginstruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow
deduction from gross income for a partbetween home and a part-time job on a day off
TIP
with your car).
of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle that you placefrom your main job are commuting expenses. Union members ’ trips from a union hall.If in service during the year. The vehicle mustYou cannot deduct them. you get your work assignments at a union hallmeet certain requirements, and you do not haveArmed Forces reservists.A meeting of an and then go to your place of work, the costs ofto use it in your business to qualify for the creditArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place ofgetting from the union hall to your place of workor the deduction. For more information, seebusiness if the meeting is held on a day on whichare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-chapter 12 of Publication 535.you work at your regular job. You can deduct thethough you need the union to get your work
expense of getting from one workplace to theassignments, you are employed where you
other as just discussed under Two places of Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailwork, not where the union hall is located.
work. carrier, you may be able to treat the amount of
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the qualified reimbursement you received as theOffice in the home.If you have an office in
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you amount of your allowable expense. Because theyour home that qualifies as a principal place of
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your qualified reimbursement is treated as paid underbusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta-
transportation generally is considered a nonde- an accountable plan, your employer should nottion costs between your home and another work
ductible commuting cost. However, you can de- include the amount of reimbursement in yourlocation in the same trade or business. (See
duct your transportation expenses if the locationchapter 30 for information on determining if your income. And, since the reimbursement equals
of the meeting is temporary and you have one orhome office qualifies as a principal place ofthe expense, you have no deduction to report on
more regular places of work. business.) your tax return.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-If your home office does not qualify as aA “qualified reimbursement” is the amount ofitan area but not at any specific location and theprincipal place of business, follow the rules forreimbursement you receive that meets both ofreserve meeting is held at a temporary locationcommuting and other transportation expensesthe following conditions. outside that metropolitan area, you can deductexplained earlier.your transportation expenses. 1) It is given as an equipment maintenanceIf you travel away from home overnight to allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.Examples of deductible transportation ex-attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can Postal Service.penses. The following examples show whendeduct your travel expenses. These expensesyou can deduct transportation expenses based2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses. on the location of your work and your home. lective bargaining agreement. Any laterCommuting expenses. You cannot deduct agreement cannot increase the qualifiedExample 1. You regularly work in an officethe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, reimbursement amount by more than thein the city where you live. Your employer sendsor of driving a car between your home and your rate of inflation.you to a one-week training session at a differentmain or regular place of work. These costs are
See your employer for information on your reim-office in the same city. You travel directly frompersonal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
your home to the training location and returnbursement.duct commuting expenses no matter how far
Page 186 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 189 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you are a rural mail carrier and re-able to deduct your actual expenses for operat-Taxes paid on your car.If you are an em-
ceived a qualified reimbursement, youing each of the cars in your business. See Actual ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes
cannot use the standard mileage rate. Car Expenses in chapter 4 of Publication 463 for paid on your car if you itemize deductions. EnterCAUTION
!
information on how to figure your deduction. the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form
1040). (See chapter 24 for more information onYou are not using two or more cars for busi-
taxes.) If you are not an employee, see yourness at the same time if you alternate using (useStandard Mileage Rate form instructions for information on how to de-at different times) the cars for business.
duct personal property taxes paid on your car.You may be able to use the standard mileage You cannot deduct luxury or sales taxes,Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns arate to figure the deductible costs of operating even if you use your car 100% for business.car and a van that she alternates using for call-your car for business purposes. For 2001, the Luxury and sales taxes are part of your car’sing on her customers. She can use the standardstandard mileage rate is 341/2 cents a mile for all basis and are recovered through depreciation,mileage rate for the business mileage of the carbusiness miles. discussed later.and the van.
If you use the standard mileage rate for
Fines and collateral.You cannot deduct finesa year, you cannot deduct your actual Example 2. Maureen owns a car and a vanand collateral you pay for traffic violations.car expenses for that year. that are both used in her housecleaning busi-CAUTION
!
ness. Her employees use the van and she usesDepreciation and section 179 deductions.You generally can use the standard mileagethe car to travel to the various customers. Mau-Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax,rate regardless of whether you are reimbursedreen cannot use the standard mileage rate forluxury tax, and improvements, is a capital ex-and whether any reimbursement is more or lessthe car or the van. This is because both vehiclespense. Because the benefits last longer thanthan the amount figured using the standard mile-are used in Maureen’s business at the same one year, you generally cannot deduct a capitalage rate. See Reimbursements under How To time. She must use actual expenses for bothexpense. However, you can recover this cost byReport, later. vehicles. claiming a section 179 deduction (the deduction
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you allowed by section 179 of the Internal RevenueParking fees and tolls.In addition to usingwant to use the standard mileage rate for a car Code) and/or a depreciation deduction. By usingthe standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyyou own, you must choose to use it in the first depreciation, you recover the cost over morebusiness-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingyear the car is available for use in your business. than one year by deducting part of it each year.fees that you pay to park your car at your placeThen in later years, you can choose to use either The section 179 deduction and the depreciationof work are nondeductible commuting ex-the standard mileage rate or actual expenses. deduction are discussed in more detail in chap-penses.)If you want to use the standard mileage rate ter 4 of Publication 463.
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire Generally, there are limits on both of these
lease period. For leases that began on or before deductions. Special rules apply if you use your
December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateActual Car Expenses car 50% or less in your work or business.
must be used for the entire portion of the lease
If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youperiod (including renewals) that is after that Leasing a car.If you lease a car that you use
may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.date. in your business, you can use the standard mile-
If you choose to use the standard mileage age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-If you qualify to use both methods, you
rate, you are considered to have chosen not to ductible car expense.may want to figure your deduction both
use the depreciation methods under the Modi- ways to see which gives you a larger
TIP
Deductible payments. If you choose to usefied Accelerated Cost Recovery System deduction. actual expenses, you can deduct the part of(MACRS). This is because the standard mileage each lease payment that is for the use of the carrate includes an allowance for depreciation that in your business. You cannot deduct any part ofActual car expenses include the costs of:is not expressed in terms of years. If you change a lease payment that is for personal use of theto the actual expenses method in a later year, car, such as commuting.Depreciation Lease Registrationbut before your car is fully depreciated, you have You must spread any advance paymentspayments feesto estimate the remaining useful life of the car over the entire lease period. You cannot deductGarage rent Licenses Repairsand use straight line depreciation. For more in-Gas Oil Tires any payments you make to buy a car, even if theformation about depreciation included in theInsurance Parking fees Tolls payments are called lease payments.standard mileage rate, see the exception in If you lease a car for 30 days or more, youMethods of depreciation under Depreciation De- may have to reduce your lease payment deduc-duction in chapter 4 of Publication 463. Business and personal use.If you use yourtion by an “inclusion amount.” For information oncar for both business and personal purposes,Standard mileage rate not allowed. You reporting lease inclusion amounts, see Leasingyou must divide your expenses between busi-cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: a Car in chapter 4 of Publication 463.ness and personal use. You can divide your
expense based on the miles driven for each1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
Sale, Trade-in, orpurpose.2) Use two or more cars at the same time (as
Other Dispositionin fleet operations), Example. You are a contractor and drive
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,0003) Claimed a depreciation deduction for the If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-car using ACRS or MACRS depreciation in car, you may have a taxable gain or a deductible
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷an earlier year, loss. This is true whether you used the standard
20,000) of the cost of operating your car as amileage rate or actual car expenses to deduct4) Claimed a section 179 deduction on thebusiness expense. the business use of your car. Chapter 15 hascar, information on sales of property. For details on
Interest on car loans.If you are an employee,5) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 how to report the disposition, see Publication
you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carfor a car you leased, or 544.
loan. This interest is treated as personal interest6) Are a rural mail carrier who received aand is not deductible. However, if you arequalified reimbursement. (See Rural mail self-employed and use your car in that business,carriers, earlier.) see chapter 5 of Publication 535. Recordkeeping
Two or more cars. If you own two or more If you use a home equity loan to
cars that are used for business at the same time,purchase your car, you may be able toIf you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
you cannot use the standard mileage rate for thededuct the interest. See chapter 25 forportation expenses, you must be able to prove
TIP
business use of any car. However, you may bemore information. (substantiate) certain elements of the expense.
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Page 190 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This section discusses the records you need to 3) Separate amounts for charges such asWhat If I Have Incomplete
keep to prove these expenses. lodging, meals, and telephone calls. Records?
If you keep timely and accurate rec-A restaurant receipt is enough to prove anIf you do not have complete records to prove anords, you will have support to show theexpense for a business meal if it has all of theelement of an expense, then you must prove theIRS if your tax return is ever examined.following information.
RECORDS
element with: You will also have proof of expenses that your
employer may require if you are reimbursed1) The name and location of the restaurant.1) Your own written or oral statement, con-under an accountable plan. These plans are taining specific information about the ele-2) The number of people served.discussed later under Reimbursements. ment, and
3) The date and amount of the expense. 2) Other supporting evidence that is sufficient
If a charge is made for items other than food andto establish the element.How To Prove Expenses
beverages, the receipt must show that this is the
case.Table 28–2 is a summary of records you need to Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a
prove each expense discussed in this chapter. receipt because of reasons beyond your control,Canceled check. A canceled check, to-You must be able to prove the elements listed you can prove a deduction by reconstructinggether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-across the top portion of the chart. You prove your records or expenses. Reasons beyondtablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkthem by having the information and receipts your control include fire, flood, and other casu-by itself does not prove a business expense(where needed) for the expenses listed in the alty.without other evidence to show that it was for afirst column.
business purpose.
You cannot deduct amounts that you
Separating and Combiningapproximate or estimate.
Duplicate information.You do not have to ExpensesCAUTION
!
record information in your account book or other
This section explains when expenses must beYou should keep adequate records to proverecord that duplicates information shown on a
kept separate and when expenses can be com-your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatreceipt as long as your records and receipts
bined.will support your own statement. You must gen-complement each other in an orderly manner.
erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-You do not have to record amounts yourSeparating expenses. Each separate pay-ered adequate. This is because written evidenceemployer pays directly for any ticket or otherment is generally considered a separate ex-is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How- pense. For example, if you entertain a customertravel item. However, if you charge these itemsever, if you prepare a record in a computer or client at dinner and then go to the theater, theto your employer, through a credit card or other-memory device with the aid of a logging pro- dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-wise, you must keep a record of the amountsgram, it is considered an adequate record. ets are two separate expenses. You must recordyou spend.
them separately in your records.
What Are Adequate Records? Combining items. You can make one dailyTimely-kept records.You should record the
entry in your record for reasonable categories ofelements of an expense or of a business use atYou should keep the proof you need in an ac- expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneor near the time of the expense or use andcount book, diary, statement of expense, or sim- calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealssupport it with sufficient documentary evidence.ilar record. You should also keep documentary should be in a separate category. You can in-A timely-kept record has more value than aevidence that, together with your records, will clude tips for meal-related services with thestatement prepared later when generally there issupport each element of an expense. costs of the meals.a lack of accurate recall. Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-Documentary evidence. You generally must You do not need to write down the elementsing the course of a single event are considered ahave documentary evidence, such as receipts,of every expense on the day of the expense. Ifsingle expense. For example, if during entertain-canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-you maintain a log on a weekly basis whichment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forpenses. accounts for use during the week, the log iseach serving of refreshments, the total expense
considered a timely-kept record.Exception. Documentary evidence is not for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-
needed if any of the following conditions apply. pense.If you give your employer, client, or customer
an expense account statement, it can also beAllocating total cost.If you can prove the1) You have meals or lodging expenses whileconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true iftotal cost of travel or entertainment but you can-traveling away from home for which youyou copy it from your account book, diary, state-not prove how much it cost for each person whoaccount to your employer under an ac-ment of expense, or similar record. participated in the event, you may have to allo-countable plan and you use a per diem
cate the total cost among you and your guestsallowance method that includes meals
on a pro rata basis. An allocation would beand/or lodging. (Accountable plans andProving business purpose.You must gener-
needed, for example, if you did not have a busi-per diem allowances are discussed laterally provide a written statement of the business
ness relationship with all of your guests.under Reimbursements.) purpose of an expense. However, the degree of
proof varies according to the circumstances in2) Your expense, other than lodging, is less If your return is examined.If your return is
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-than $75. examined, you may have to provide additional
pense is clear from the surrounding circum-information to the IRS. This information could be3) You have a transportation expense forstances, then you do not need to give a writtenneeded to clarify or to establish the accuracy orwhich a receipt is not readily available.explanation. reliability of information contained in your rec-
ords, statements, testimony, or documentaryAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- evidence before a deduction is allowed.dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itConfidential information.You do not need to
shows the amount, date, place, and essentialput confidential information relating to an ele-
character of the expense. How Long To Keepment of a deductible expense (such as the
For example, a hotel receipt is enough toplace, business purpose, or business relation-Records and Receiptssupport expenses for business travel if it has allship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
of the following information. cord. However, you do have to record the You must keep records as long as they may be
information elsewhere at or near the time of theneeded for the administration of any provision of1) The name and location of the hotel. expense and have it available to fully prove thatthe Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
element of the expense.2) The dates you stayed there. means you must keep your records that support
Page 188 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 191 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 28–2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.IF you have
expenses for: Place or Business Purpose and Business
Amount Time Description Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, daily meals for business.
traveler, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may beBusiness Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis.Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both the
business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee wasGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of thepresent if the entertainment was agift. business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
your deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years See the next section, How To Report, for a your tax return. You can also find information in
discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac- Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or infrom the date you file the income tax return on
counting, and nonaccountable plans. Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide, if you arewhich the deduction is claimed. A return filed
a farmer.early is considered filed on the due date. For a
Additional information.Chapter 5 of Publi-more complete explanation, get Publication 583,cation 463 has more information on recordkeep-Both self-employed and an employee. IfStarting a Business and Keeping Records. ing, including examples. you are both self-employed and an employee,
you must keep separate records for each busi-
Reimbursed for expenses. Employees who ness activity. Report your business expenses for
self-employment on Schedule C, C–EZ, or Fgive their records and documentation to their
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report youremployers and are reimbursed for their ex-How To Report business expenses for your work as an em-penses generally do not have to keep copies of
ployee on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, as discussedthis information. However, you may have toThis section explains where and how to reportnext.prove your expenses if any of the following con-the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
ditions apply. cusses reimbursements and how to treat themEmployee. If you are an employee, you gen-under accountable and nonaccountable plans. Iterally must complete Form 2106 to deduct youralso explains rules for fee-basis officials, certain1) You claim deductions for expenses that travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-performing artists, and certain disabled employ-are more than reimbursements. penses. However, you can use the shorter Formees. This section ends with an illustration of how2106–EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet both2) Your expenses are reimbursed under a to report travel, entertainment, gift, and car ex-of the following conditions.nonaccountable plan. penses on Form 2106–EZ.
3) Your employer does not use adequate ac- 1) You are an employee deducting expensesSelf-employed. You must report your incomecounting procedures to verify expense ac- attributable to your job.and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ (Formcounts. 1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- 2) You were not reimbursed by your em-
4) You are related to your employer, as de-ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
fined earlier under Who cannot use the use Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. See your form cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are not
standard meal allowance. instructions for information on how to complete considered reimbursements).
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

Page 192 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) If you are claiming car expenses, you use business expenses. Arrangements include perIf your employer included reimburse-
the standard mileage rate. ments in box 1 of your Form W–2 anddiem and car allowances.
you meet all three rules for accounta-
TIP
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofFor more information on how to report your ble plans, ask your employer for a correcteddaily reimbursement your employer gives youexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, see Form W –2.for your lodging, meal, and incidental expensesCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later.
when you are away from home on business.Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-(The term “incidental expenses” is defined ear-Accountable plan rules not met. Evenments (or the reimbursements were all includedlier under Meals.) A car allowance is an amountthough you are reimbursed under an accounta-in box 1 of your Form W–2), the only businessyour employer gives you for the business use ofble plan, some of your expenses may not meetexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and theyour car. all three rules. Those expenses that fail to meetrules for certain individuals (such as performing
all three rules for accountable plans are treatedYour employer should tell you what methodartists), discussed later under Special Rules, do
as having been reimbursed under a nonac-not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 orof reimbursement is used and what records you
countable plan (discussed later).2106–EZ. Instead, claim the amount of yourmust provide.
deductible gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-(Form 1040). penses. You may be reimbursed under yourAccountable PlansStatutory employees. If you received a employer’s accountable plan for expenses re-
Form W –2 and the “Statutory employee” box in lated to that employer’s business, some of whichTo be an accountable plan, your employer’sbox 13 was checked, you report your income are deductible as employee business expensesreimbursement or allowance arrangement mustand expenses related to that income on Sched- and some of which are not deductible. The reim-include all three of the following rules.ule C or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete bursements you receive for the nondeductible
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable1) Your expenses must have a business con-Statutory employees include full-time life in- plans, and they are treated as paid under anection —  that is, you must have paid orsurance salespersons, certain agent or commis- nonaccountable plan.incurred deductible expenses while per-sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certainforming services as an employee of yourhomeworkers. Example. Your employer’s plan reimbursesemployer. you for travel expenses while away from homeIf you are entitled to a reimbursement
2) You must adequately account to your em-on business and also for meals when you workfrom your employer but you do not
ployer for these expenses within a reason-late at the office, even though you are not awayclaim it, you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
able period of time. from home. The part of the arrangement thatfor the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-
bursement applies. reimburses you for the nondeductible meals3) You must return any excess reimburse-
when you work late at the office is treated asment or allowance within a reasonable pe-
paid under a nonaccountable plan.Reimbursement for personal expenses. If riod of time.
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct- The employer makes the decisionSee Adequate Accounting and Returningible personal expenses, such as for vacation whether to reimburse employeesExcess Reimbursements, later.trips, your employer must report the reimburse- under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
An excess reimbursement or allowance isment as wage income in box 1 of your Form countable plan. If you are an employee whoW –2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.any amount you are paid that is more than thereceives payments under a nonaccountablebusiness-related expenses that you adequatelyplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-accounted for to your employer.Reimbursements ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily
The definition of reasonable period of timeaccounting to your employer for the expenses
This section explains what to do when you re-depends on the facts and circumstances of yourand voluntarily returning excess reimburse-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofsituation. However, regardless of the facts andments to the employer.
the employee business expenses discussed incircumstances of your situation, actions that
this chapter. take place within the times specified in the fol-
If you received an advance, allowance, orlowing list will be treated as taking place within aAdequate Accountingreimbursement for your expenses, how you re-reasonable period of time.port this amount and your expenses depends on One of the three rules for an accountable plan iswhether the reimbursement was paid to you 1) You receive an advance within 30 days ofthat you must adequately account to your em-under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablethe time you have an expense. ployer for your expenses. You adequately ac-plan.
count by giving your employer a statement of2) You adequately account for your expensesThis section explains the two types of plans,
expense, an account book, a diary, or a similarwithin 60 days after they were paid or in-how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
record in which you entered each expense at orcurred.ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax
near the time you had it, along with documentarytreatment of your reimbursements and ex- 3) You return any excess reimbursement evidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-penses. within 120 days after the expense wasage, and other employee business expenses.
paid or incurred.No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed (See Table 28–2, earlier, for details you need to
or given an allowance for your expenses if you enter in your record and documents you need to4) You are given a periodic statement (at
are paid a salary or commission with the under- prove certain expenses.)least quarterly) that asks you to either re-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. Inturn or adequately account for outstanding You must account for all amounts you re-this situation, you have no reimbursement oradvances and you comply within 120 days ceived from your employer during the year asallowance arrangement, and you do not have toof the statement. advances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisread this section on reimbursements. Instead, includes amounts you charged to your employersee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, by credit card or other method. You must givelater, for information on completing your tax re-Employee meets accountable plan rules.If your employer the same type of records andturn. you meet the three rules for accountable plans,supporting information that you would have to
your employer should not include any reim-give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionReimbursement, allowance, or advance.A
bursements in your income in box 1 of youron your return. You must pay back the amount ofreimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
Form W –2. If your expenses equal your reim-any reimbursement or other expense allowancerangement is a system or plan that an employer
bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.for which you do not adequately account or thatuses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
You have no deduction since your expensesis more than the amount for which you ac-penses, advances, reimbursements, and
and reimbursement are equal. counted.amounts charged to the employer for employee
Page 190 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 193 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You receive an allowance only for meals and sistently apply and that is in accordancePer Diem and Car Allowances
with reasonable business practice.incidental expenses when your employer does
If your employer reimburses you for your ex-one of the following.
penses using a per diem or car allowance, you The standard mileage rate.This is a set
can generally use the allowance as proof for the1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inrate per mile that you can use to compute your
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car kind). deductible car expenses. For 2001, the standard
allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- mileage rate is 341/2 cents a mile for all business2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,quirements for the amount of your expenses miles. This rate is adjusted periodically.for the actual cost of your lodging.only if all four of the following conditions apply. Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for yourallowance your employer may use to reimburse1) Your employer reasonably limits paymentslodging. your car expenses. Under this method, yourof your expenses to those that are ordinary employer pays an allowance that includes a4) Does not have a reasonable belief that youand necessary in the conduct of the trade combination of payments covering fixed and va-had (or will have) lodging expenses, suchor business. riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate toas when you stay with friends or relatives
2) The allowance is similar in form to and not cover your variable operating costs (such asor sleep in the cab of your truck.
more than the federal rate (discussed gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your5) Computes the allowance on a basis similarlater). fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-to that used in computing your compensa-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer3) You prove the time (dates), place, and tion, such as number of hours worked orchooses to use this method, your employer willbusiness purpose of your expenses to miles traveled. request the necessary records from you.your employer (as explained in Table
28–2) within a reasonable period of time.High-low rate.This is a simplified methodReporting your expenses with a per diem orof computing the federal per diem rate for travel4) You are not related to your employer (as car allowance.If your reimbursement is in thewithin the continental United States. It elimi-defined earlier under Who cannot use the form of an allowance received under an ac-nates the need to keep a current list of the perstandard meal allowance). If you are re- countable plan, the following two facts affectdiem rate for each city.lated to your employer, you must be able your reporting.
to prove your expenses to the IRS even ifUnder the high-low method, the per diem
you have already adequately accounted toamount for travel during January through Sep-1) The federal rate.
your employer and returned any excesstember of 2001 is $201 (including $42 for M&IE)2) Whether the allowance or your actual ex-reimbursement. for certain high-cost locations. All other areaspenses were more than the federal rate.have a per diem amount of $124 (including $34If the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-
for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542 The following discussions explain where to re-ance practices are not based on reasonably
port your expenses depending upon how the(Revised March 2001), which gives the areasaccurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-eligible for the $201 per diem amount under theognition of cost differences in different areas for
eral rate.high-low method for all or part of this period.)per diem amounts), you will not be considered to
have accounted to your employer. In this case, Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed-Effective October 1, 2001, the per diemyou must be able to prove your expenses to the eral rate.If your allowance is less than orrates under this method increased.IRS. equal to the federal rate, the allowance will notThe increased rate for certainCAUTION
!
be included in box 1 of your Form W–2. You dohigh-cost locations is $204 (including $42 for
The federal rate.The federal rate can be fig- not need to report the related expenses or theM&IE). The increased rate for all other locations
ured using any one of the following methods. allowance on your return if your expenses areis $124 (including $34 for M&IE). However, an
equal to or less than the allowance.employer can continue to use the lower rates
1) For per diem amounts: described in the preceding paragraph for theHowever, if your actual expenses are more
remainder of 2001 if those rates and locationsthan your allowance, you can complete Forma) The regular federal per diem rate. 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-are used consistently during October, Novem-
b) The standard meal allowance. ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-ber, and December for all employees. Employ-
penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS theers who did not use the high-low method duringc) The high-low rate. total amount of your expenses and reimburse-the first 9 months of 2001 cannot begin to use it
ments for the entire year. If you are using thebefore 2002. See Revenue Procedure 2001–472) For car expenses: standard meal allowance or the standard mile-for more information.
age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.a) The standard mileage rate.
Prorating the standard meal allowance onb) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles a yearpartial days of travel.The standard meal al-
for business. Under her employer’s accountablelowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you
plan, she accounts for the time (dates), place,travel for part of a day, such as on the days youRegular federal per diem rate.The regular
and business purpose of each trip. Her em-depart and return, you must prorate the full-dayfederal per diem rate is the highest amount that
ployer pays her a mileage allowance of 20 centsthe federal government will pay to its employeesM&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-
a mile.for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (orployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or
meal and incidental expenses only) while they Since Nicole ’s $3,450 expenses computedthe high-low rate.
are traveling away from home in a particular under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×You can use either of the following methods
area. The rates are different for different loca- 34 1/2 cents) are more than her $2,000 reim-to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
tions. Your employer should have these rates bursement (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she item-
available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, izes her deductions to claim the excess1) Method 1:
which gives the rates in the continental United expenses. Nicole completes Form 2106 (show-
a) For the day you depart, add 3/4 of theStates for the current year.) ing all of her expenses and reimbursements)
standard meal allowance amount for and enters $1,450 ($3,450 − $2,000) as an item-The standard meal allowance.The stan- that day. ized deduction.dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is the
b) For the day you return, add 3/4 of thefederal rate for meals and incidental expenses Allowance MORE than the federal rate.If
standard meal allowance amount for(M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the your allowance is more than the federal rate,
the preceding day.United States is $30. Most major cities and your employer must include the allowance
many other localities qualify for higher rates. amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your
2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-The rates for all localities within the continental Form W –2. This amount is not taxable. How-
lowance using any method that you con-United States are listed in Publication 1542. ever, the excess allowance will be included in
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 191

Page 194 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Returning ExcessTable 28–3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
ReimbursementsReimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required toIF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee return any excess reimbursement for your busi-other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on ness expenses to the person paying the reim-arrangement is under: W –2: Form 2106: * bursement or allowance. Excess
reimbursement means any amount for whichAn accountable plan with:
you did not adequately account within a reason-
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. able period of time. For example, if you received
Adequate accounting made and excess a travel advance and you did not spend all the
returned money on business-related expenses, or if you
do not have proof of all your expenses, you haveActual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount. an excess reimbursement.Adequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1. “Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-excess both required but excess not riod of time” were discussed earlier.
returned
Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-Per diem or mileage allowance up toNo amount. All expenses and vance if your employer provides you with anthe federal rate: reimbursements only expense allowance before you actually have theAdequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-returned. are claimed. pected to be no more than your expense. UnderOtherwise, form is notan accountable plan, you are required to ade-
filed. quately account to your employer for this ad-
vance and to return any excess within aPer diem or mileage allowance up toThe excess amount No amount. reasonable period of time.the federal rate: as wages in box 1. If you do not adequately account for or do notAdequate accounting and return of The amount up to return any excess advance within a reasonableexcess both required but excess not the federal rate is period of time, the amount you do not accountreturned. reported only in box for or return will be treated as having been paid13— it is not under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).reported in box 1.
Unproved amounts. If you do not prove
Per diem or mileage allowance exceedsThe excess amount All expenses (and that you actually traveled on each day for which
the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-
Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Forming the elements described in Table 28–2), you
rate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W–2, box 13) only ifmust return this unproved amount of the travel
advance within a reasonable period of time. Ifreported only in box expenses in excess of
you do not do this, the unproved amount is13— it is not the federal rate are
considered paid under a nonaccountable planreported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise,
(discussed later).form is not required.
Per diem allowance MORE than federalA nonaccountable plan with: rate. If your employer’s accountable plan pays
you an allowance that is higher than the federalEither adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses.
rate, you do not have to return the differenceexcess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1.
between the two rates for the period you can
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses. prove business-related travel expenses. How-
as wages in box 1. ever, the difference will be reported as wages on
your Form W–2. This excess amount is consid-* You may be able to use Form 2106–EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ . ered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
box 1 of your Form W–2. You must report this will not pay more than $50 a day for travel to SanExample. Your employer sends you on apart of your allowance as if it were wage income.Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a
If your actual expenses are less than or records that prove that he actually spent $290.$225 ($45 × 5 days) advance to cover your
equal to the federal rate, you do not completeHowever, he does account for the time, place,meals and incidental expenses. The federal per
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onand business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s diem for meals and incidental expenses for
your return. only business trip this year. Phoenix is $42. Your trip lasts only 3 days.
However, if your actual expenses are more Under your employer’s accountable plan, youJoe was reimbursed $200 ($50 × 4 days),
than the federal rate, you can complete Form must return the $90 ($45 × 2 days) advance forwhich is $16 more than the federal rate of $184
2106 and, generally, deduct those excess ex- the 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to($46 × 4 days). The employer includes the $16
penses. You must report on Form 2106 your return the $9 difference between the allowanceas income on Joe’s Form W –2 in box 1. Thereimbursements up to the federal rate (as shown you received and the federal rate for Phoenixemployer also enters $184 in box 12 of Joe’sin box 12 of your Form W–2) and all your ex- [($45 − $42) × 3 days]. However, the $9 will beForm W –2, along with a code L.penses. You should be able to prove these reported on your Form W–2 as wages.Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-amounts to the IRS.
ductible expenses. He enters the total of his
actual expenses for the year ($290) on FormExample. Joe lives and works in Austin. His Nonaccountable Plans2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatemployer sent him to San Diego for 4 days and
were not included in his income ($184). His totalpaid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. The A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or
deductible expense, before the 50% limit, isemployer reimbursed Joe $50 a day for his expense allowance arrangement that does not
$106. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier
for San Diego is $46 a day. reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will under Accountable Plans.
include the balance, $53, as an itemized deduc-Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses In addition, even if your employer has an
tion.totaled $290. His employer’s accountable plan accountable plan, the following payments will be
Page 192 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 195 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable 2106. Car expenses using the standard mileageExample. Rob ’s employer paid him an ex-
plan. pense allowance of $5,000 this year under anrate can also be figured on Form 2106–EZ by
accountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-completing Part II and line 1 of Part I.
1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return sisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-
to your employer. Transportation expenses.Show your trans- tainment and car expenses. The employer did
portation expenses that did not involve overnightnot clearly show how much of the $3,000 was for2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
travel on line 2, Column A, of Form 2106 or onthe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-penses related to your employer’s busi-
line 2, Part I, of Form 2106–EZ. Also include onally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forness. See Reimbursement of
this line business expenses you have for parkingairfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 fornondeductible expenses earlier under Ac-
fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-car expenses).countable Plans.
ating your car or expenses of commuting be-Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-If you are not sure if the reimbursement ortween your home and work. tified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the paymentexpense allowance arrangement is an account- goes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. Toable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-Employee business expenses other than allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses theployer. meals and entertainment.Show your other worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.
employee business expenses on lines 3 and 4,His completed worksheet follows.Reporting your expenses under a nonac- Column A, of Form 2106 or lines 3 and 4 of Formcountable plan.Your employer will combine2106–EZ. Do not include expenses for meals 1. Enter the total amount ofthe amount of any reimbursement or other ex- reimbursements your employer gaveand entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is forpense allowance paid to you under a nonac- you that were not reported to you inexpenses such as gifts, educational expensescountable plan with your wages, salary, or other box 1 of Form W–2 ........... $3,000(tuition and books), office-in-the-home ex-pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 2. Enter the total amount of yourpenses, and trade and professional publica-of your Form W–2. expenses for the periods covered bytions.You must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ this reimbursement............ 4,500
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- If line 4 expenses are the only ones you3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-are claiming, you received no reim- total expense for meals and
tertainment. Your meal and entertainment bursements (or the reimbursements entertainment............... 2,000
TIP
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter theexpenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-were all included in box 1 of your Form W–2),
result as a decimal (rounded to atcussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses.and the Special Rules discussed later do not
least three places)............ .444Also, your total expenses will be subject to theapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter the2%-of- adjusted-gross-income limit that applies2106–EZ. Claim these amounts directly on line
result here and in Column B, line 7 1,332to most miscellaneous itemized deductions.20 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type and6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter theamount of each expense on the dotted lines andresult here and in Column A, line 7 1,668Example. Kim’s employer gives her $500 ainclude the total on line 20.
month ($6,000 for the year) for her business On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668
expenses. Kim does not have to provide any ($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) inMeal and entertainment expenses. Showproof of her expenses to her employer, and Kim Column A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Columnthe full amount of your expenses forcan keep any funds that she does not spend. B.business-related meals and entertainment onKim is being reimbursed under a nonac-line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include mealscountable plan. Her employer will include the After you complete the form.After you havewhile away from your tax home overnight and$6,000 on Kim’s Form W–2 as if it were wages. completed your Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, followother business meals and entertainment. EnterIf Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, the directions on that form to deduct your ex-50% of the line 8 meal and entertainment ex-she must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ and penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.penses on line 9, Column B, of Form 2106.itemize her deductions. For most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule AIf you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the full(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentamount of your meals and entertainment on theofficial paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, orCompleting Forms line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total bya disabled employee with impairment-related50%. Enter the result on line 5.2106 and 2106–EZ work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Hours of service limits.If you are subjectThis section briefly describes how employees Limits on employee business expenses.to the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofcomplete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Table Your employee business expenses may be sub-service” limits, use 60% instead of 50%.28–3 explains what the employer reports on ject to any of the three limits described next.
Form W –2 and what the employee reports on These limits are figured in the following order onReimbursements. Enter on line 7 of FormForm 2106. The instructions for the forms have the specified form.2106 the amounts your employer (or third party)more information on completing them. reimbursed you that were not included in box 1 1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer-of your Form W –2. (You cannot use FormForm 2106 –EZ. You may be able to use the tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-2106–EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re-shorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your employee ject to a 50% limit. Employees figure this limit onported under code L in box 13 of Form W–2.business expenses. You can use this form if you line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 of Form 2106 –EZ.
meet all 3 of the following conditions. See 50% Limit under Entertainment Expenses,Allocating your reimbursement. If you
earlier.were reimbursed under an accountable plan and1) You are an employee deducting expenseswant to deduct excess expenses that were not2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-attributable to your job. reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-tions. Employees deduct employee businessbursement. This is necessary if your employer2) You were not reimbursed by your em- expenses (as figured on Form 2106 orpays your reimbursement in the following man-ployer for your expenses (amounts in- 2106–EZ) on line 20 of Schedule A (Formner:cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are not 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized deductions,
considered reimbursements). including employee business expenses, are1) Pays you a single amount that covers subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.3) If you claim car expenses, you use the meals and/or entertainment, as well asThis limit is figured on line 25 of Schedule Astandard mileage rate. other business expenses, and (Form 1040).
2) Does not clearly identify how much is forCar expenses. If you used a car to perform 3. Limit on total itemized deductions.Ifdeductible meals and/or entertainment.your job as an employee, you may be able to your adjusted gross income (line 34 of Form
You must allocate the reimbursement so thatdeduct certain car expenses. These are gener- 1040) is more than $134,950 ($66,475 if you are
you know how much to enter in Column A andally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and then married filing separately), the total of certain
Column B of line 7 of Form 2106.claimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of Form itemized deductions, including employee busi-
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 193

Page 196 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 22 you lived apart from your spouse at all times leaves his home on Long Island on Monday
for more information on this limit. during the tax year. morning and drives to Albany to exhibit the
If you file a joint return, you must figure re-Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-
quirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for bothers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion’s
Special Rules you and your spouse. However, requirement (4)new line of merchandise to Town Department
applies to your and your spouse’s combined Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talksThis section discusses special rules that applyadjusted gross income. with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for Townonly to government officials who are paid on a
Department Store, to discuss the new line. HeWhere to report. If you meet all of thefee basis, performing artists, and disabled em-
above requirements, you should first completelater takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerployees with impairment-related work ex-
Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you include yourpenses. to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’s new line
performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 ofof clothing.Officials paid on a fee basis.Certain fee-ba-Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the Bill purchased his car on January 3, 1998.sis officials can claim their employee businesstotal on line 32 of Form 1040. Write “QPA ” andexpenses whether or not they itemize their other He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-the amount of your performing-arts-related ex-deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). pense purposes. He records his total mileage,penses in the space to the left of line 32 of FormFee-basis officials are persons who are em- business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the1040.ployed by a state or local government and who year. Bill timely records his expenses and otherIf you do not meet all of the above require-are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They pertinent information in a travel expense log (notments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-can deduct their business expenses in perform- shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses forpenses as an adjustment to gross income.ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossInstead, you must complete Form 2106 or lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orincome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized2106–EZ and deduct your employee businessmore.deduction. expenses as an itemized deduction on line 20 ofIf you are a fee-basis official, include your During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000Schedule A (Form 1040).employee business expenses from line 10 of miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the He answers all the questions in Part II of FormImpairment-related work expenses of dis-total on line 32 of Form 1040. Write “FBO ” and 2106. He figures his car expense to be $6,900abled employees. If you are an employeethe amount of your employee business ex- (20,000 business miles × 341/2 cents standardwith a physical or mental disability, yourpenses in the space to the left of line 32 of Form mileage rate).impairment-related work expenses are not sub-1040.
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limitHis total employee business expenses are
Expenses of certain performing artists.If that applies to most other employee businessshown in the following table.you are a performing artist, you may qualify toexpenses. After you complete Form 2106 or
deduct your employee business expenses as an2106–EZ, enter your impairment-related work Type of Expense Amount
adjustment to gross income rather than as aexpenses from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 ofParking fees and tolls.... $3 2 5miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Form 2106–EZ on line 27 of Schedule A (FormCar expenses.......... 6,900you must meet all of the following requirements. 1040), and identify the type and amount of thisMeals ............... 2,632expense on the dotted line next to line 27. EnterLodging, laundry, dry1) During the tax year, you perform servicesyour employee business expenses that are un- cleaning............. 8,975in the performing arts for at least two em-related to your disability from line 10 of FormEntertainment......... 1,870ployers. 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ on line 20 of Gifts, education, etc...... 4 3 0
Schedule A.2) You receive at least $200 each from any Total ............... $ 21,132
two of these employers. Impairment-related work expenses are your
Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300allowable expenses for attendant care at your3) Your related performing-arts business ex- per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didworkplace and other expenses you have in con-penses are more than 10% of your grossnection with your workplace that are necessarynot have to account to his employer for theincome from the performance of those ser-for you to be able to work. For more information,reimbursement, and the $3,600 was included asvices. see chapter 23. income in box 1 of his Form W–2.
4) Your adjusted gross income is not more Because Bill’s reimbursement was includedthan $16,000 before deducting these busi-
in his income and he is using the standard mile-ness expenses. Illustrated Example age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
2106–EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form isBill Wilson is an employee of Fashion ClothingSpecial rules for married persons.If you
Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical week, Billshown on the next page.are married, you must file a joint return unless
Page 194 Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 197 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
6,900
325
8,975
430
2,251
18,881
4,502
13 9 8
20,000 2,600 2,400
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multipy line 8a by 341⁄2¢
(.345)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 60%
(.60) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2001)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting expenses attributable to your job.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2001.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2001, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
A Change To Note
The standard mileage rate has been
increased to 34
1⁄2 cents for each mile of
business use in 2001.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2001 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage
rate for the first year you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the
portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
2001
Chapter 28 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 195

Page 198 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 508 Tax Benefits for Work-Related job. If the courses will not qualify you for a new
Education trade or business, they are qualifying education
even if you eventually receive a master’s degree❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education29. and an increase in salary because of this extra
education.Form (and Instructions)
❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses Education To MaintainTax Benefits for ❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee or Improve SkillsBusiness Expenses
Work-Related If your education is not required by your em-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized
ployer or the law, it can be qualifying educationDeductions
only if it maintains or improves skills needed inEducation your present work. This could include refresher
courses, courses on current developments, and
academic or vocational courses.
Qualifying EducationImportant Change for Example. You repair televisions, radios,
and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep upYou can deduct the costs of qualifying educa-2001 with the latest changes, you take specialtion. This is education that meets at least one of
courses in radio and stereo service. Thesethe following two tests.Standard mileage rate. Generally, if you courses maintain and improve skills required indrive your car to and from school, you can de- your work.1) The education is required by your em-duct 341/2 cents per mile. See Using your car ployer or the law to keep your presentunder What Educational Expenses Are Deducti- Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.salary, status, or job. The required educa-ble. Education to maintain or improve skills neededtion must serve a bona fide business pur-
in your present work is not qualifying education ifpose of your employer.
it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-2) The education maintains or improves ness.skills needed in your present work.Important Change for Temporary absence. If you stop workingHowever, even if the education meets one orfor a year or less in order to get education toboth of the above tests, it is not qualifying educa-2002 maintain or improve skills needed in your pre-tion if it: sent work and then return to the same work,
Employer-provided educational assistance your absence is considered temporary. Educa-1) Is needed to meet the minimum educa-program extended. The tax-free status of up tion that you get during a temporary absence istional requirements of your present tradeto $5,250 of employer-provided educational as- qualifying education if it maintains or improvesor business, orsistance benefits each year was scheduled to skills needed in your present work.
end for courses beginning after December 31, 2) Is part of a program of study that will qual-
2001. This benefit has been extended and, be-ify you for a new trade or business. Example. You quit your biology research
ginning January 1, 2002, the benefit also applies job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-You can deduct the expenses for qualifyingto graduate-level courses. dent for one year. If you return to work in biologyeducation even if the education could lead to aresearch after completing the courses, the edu-degree. cation is related to your present work even if youYou can use Figure 29–A as a quick checkdo not go back to work with the same employer.to see if your education qualifies.
Indefinite absence.If you stop work forIntroduction
more than a year, your absence from your job isIf you are working and have work-related educa-Education Required by considered indefinite. Education during an in-tional expenses, you may be able to deduct all or definite absence, even if it maintains or im-Employer or by Lawpart of the cost of your education as a business proves skills needed in the work from which youexpense deduction. This chapter discusses:Once you have met the minimum educationalare absent, is considered to qualify you for a
requirements for your job, your employer or thenew trade or business. Therefore, it is not quali-• Qualifying education, law may require you to get more education. Thisfying education.
• What educational expenses are deducti-additional education is qualifying education if all
ble, and three of the following requirements are met.Education To Meet• Where to deduct expenses. 1) It is required for you to keep your presentMinimum Requirements
salary, status, or job,You cannot deduct educational expenses that Education you need to meet the minimum edu-are not work related, such as the costs of send-2) The requirement serves a business pur-cational requirements for your present trade oring your children to college. However, you maypose of your employer, and business is not qualifying education. The mini-be eligible for other tax benefits. Information on3) The education is not part of a program thatmum educational requirements are determinedthe education tax credits is in chapter 36, onwill qualify you for a new trade or busi-by:making withdrawals from IRAs for educationalness.expenses in chapter 18, and on cancellation of 1) Laws and regulations,student loans in chapter 13. Information on stu-When you get more education than your em-
dent loan interest is in Publication 970, Tax ployer or the law requires, the additional educa- 2) Standards of your profession, trade, or
Benefits for Higher Education. tion can be qualifying education only if it business, and
maintains or improves skills required in your3) Your employer.present work. See Education To Maintain orUseful Items
Once you have met the minimum educa-Improve Skills.You may want to see: tional requirements that were in effect when you
Example. You are a teacher who has satis- were hired, you do not have to meet any newPublication fied the minimum requirements for teaching. minimum educational requirements. This means
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Your employer requires you to take an additional that if the minimum requirements change after
Expenses college course each year to keep your teaching you were hired, any education you need to meet
Page 196 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 199 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
within 10 years from the date of hire. If the
employing school certifies to the state Depart-
ment of Education that qualified teachers cannot
be found, the school can hire persons with only 3
years of college. However, to keep their jobs,
these teachers must get a bachelor’s degree
and the required professional education courses
within 3 years.
Under these facts, the bachelor’s degree,
whether or not it includes the ten professional
education courses, is considered the minimum
educational requirement for qualification as a
teacher in your state.
If you have all the required education except
the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-
tional requirements. The fifth year of training is
qualifying education unless it is part of a pro-
gram of study that will qualify you for a new trade
or business.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as in
Example 1 except that you have a bachelor’s
degree and only six professional education
courses. The additional four education courses
can be qualifying education. Although you do
not have all the required courses, you have
already met the minimum educational require-
ments.
Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3
years of college. The courses you take that lead
to a bachelor’s degree (including those in edu-
cation) are not qualifying education. They are
needed to meet the minimum educational re-
quirements for employment as a teacher.
Example 4. You have a bachelor’s degree
and you work as a temporary instructor at a
university. At the same time, you take graduate
courses toward an advanced degree. The rules
of the university state that you can become a
faculty member only if you get a graduate de-
gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-
Figure 29-A. Does Your Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
tor only as long as you show satisfactory
the new requirements can be qualifying educa- progress toward getting this degree. You haveRequirements for Teachers
tion. not met the minimum educational requirements
States or school districts usually set the mini-to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-You have not necessarily met the mini-mum educational requirements for teachers.ate courses are not qualifying education.mum educational requirements of yourThe requirement is the college degree or thetrade or business simply because youCAUTION
!
Certification in a new state.Once you haveminimum number of college hours usually re-are already doing the work. met the minimum educational requirements forquired of a person hired for that position.
teachers for your state, you are considered toIf there are no requirements, you will have
have met the minimum educational require-Example 1. You are a full-time engineeringmet the minimum educational requirements
ments in all states. This is true even if you muststudent. Although you have not received yourwhen you become a faculty member. You gen-
get additional education to be certified in an-degree or certification, you work part time as anerally will be considered a faculty member when
other state. Any additional education you needengineer for a firm that will employ you as aone or more of the following occurs. 
is qualifying education. You have already metfull-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
the minimum requirements for teaching. Teach-1) You have tenure.though your college engineering courses im-
ing in another state is not a new trade or busi-prove your skills in your present job, they are2) Your years of service count toward ob-ness.also needed to meet the minimum job require-taining tenure.ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
Example. You hold a permanent teaching3) You have a vote in faculty decisions.not qualifying education.
certificate in State A and are employed as a4) Your school makes contributions for you toteacher in that state for several years. You moveExample 2. You are an accountant and you a retirement plan other than social securityto State B and are promptly hired as a teacher.have met the minimum educational require- or a similar program. You are required, however, to complete certainments of your employer. Your employer later
prescribed courses to get a permanent teachingchanges the minimum educational requirements
certificate in State B. These additional coursesExample 1. The law in your state requiresand requires you to take college courses to keep
are qualifying education because the teachingbeginning secondary school teachers to have ayour job. These additional courses can be quali-
position in State B involves the same generalbachelor’s degree, including ten professionalfying education because you have already satis-
kind of work for which you were qualified in Stateeducation courses. In addition, to keep the job, afied the minimum requirements that were in
A.teacher must complete a fifth year of trainingeffect when you were hired.
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 197

Page 200 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on a temporary basis, you can deduct theEducation That • Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-round-trip costs of transportation between yourilar items.Qualifies You for a home and school. This is true regardless of the
• Certain transportation and travel costs.location of the school, the distance traveled, orNew Trade or Business
whether you attend school on nonwork days.• Other educational expenses, such as
Education that is part of a program of study that Transportation expenses include the actualcosts of research and typing when writing
will qualify you for a new trade or business is not costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wella paper as part of an educational program.
qualifying education. This is true even if you do as the costs of using your car. Transportation
not plan to enter that trade or business. expenses do not include amounts spent forNondeductible expenses. Educational ex-If you are an employee, a change of duties travel, meals, or lodging while you are awaypenses do not include personal or capital ex-that involves the same general kind of work is from home overnight.penses. For example, you cannot deduct thenot a new trade or business.
dollar value of vacation time or annual leave youExample 1. You regularly work in Camden,take to attend classes. This amount is a per-Example 1. You are an accountant. Your New Jersey, and go directly from work to home.sonal expense.employer requires you to get a law degree at You also attend school every night for 3 monthsyour own expense. You register at a law schoolUnclaimed reimbursement. If you do not to take a course that improves your job skills.for the regular curriculum that leads to a lawclaim reimbursement that you are entitled toSince you are attending school on a temporarydegree. Even if you do not intend to become areceive from your employer, you cannot deductbasis, you can deduct your daily round-triplawyer, the education is not qualifying becausethe expenses that apply to the reimbursement.transportation expenses in going between homethe law degree will qualify you for a new trade or and school. This is true regardless of the dis-business. Example. Your employer agrees to pay tance traveled.
your educational expenses if you file a voucher
Example 2. You are a general practitionershowing your expenses. You do not file a Example 2. Assume the same facts as inof medicine. You take a 2-week course to reviewvoucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be-Example 1 except that on certain nights you godevelopments in several specialized fields ofcause you did not file a voucher, you cannotdirectly from work to school and then home. Youmedicine. The course does not qualify you for adeduct the expenses on your tax return. can deduct your transportation expenses fromnew profession. It is qualifying education be-
your regular work site to school and then home.cause it maintains or improves skills required in
Transportation Expensesyour present profession.
Example 3. Assume the same facts as in
If your education qualifies, you can deduct localExample 1 except that you attend the school for
transportation costs of going directly from work9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. SinceBar or CPA Review Course to school. If you are regularly employed and goyou are attending school on a temporary basis,
to school on a temporary basis, you can alsoReview courses to prepare for the bar examina- you can deduct your round-trip transportation
deduct the costs of returning from school totion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex- expenses in going between home and school.
home.amination are not qualifying education. They are
part of a program of study that can qualify you Example 4. Assume the same facts as inTemporary basis. If your attendance atfor a new profession. Example 1 except that you attend classes twiceschool is realistically expected to last (and doesa week for 15 months. Since your attendance inin fact last) for 1 year or less, you go to school onschool is not considered temporary, you cannota temporary basis (unless there are facts andTeaching and Related Duties deduct your transportation expenses in goingcircumstances that would indicate otherwise).between home and school. If you go directlyAll teaching and related duties are consideredIf your attendance at school is realisticallyfrom work to school, you can deduct thethe same general kind of work. A change inexpected to last for more than 1 year or if there isone-way transportation expenses of going fromduties in any of the following ways is not consid-no realistic expectation that the attendance willwork to school. If you go from work to home toered a change to a new business. last for 1 year or less, the attendance is notschool and return home, your transportation ex-temporary, regardless of whether it actually lastspenses cannot be more than if you had gone1) Elementary school teacher to secondaryfor more than 1 year. directly from work to school.school teacher. If attendance at school initially is realistically
expected to last for 1 year or less, but at someUsing your car. If you use your car2) Teacher of one subject, such as biology, to
later date the attendance is realistically ex-teacher of another subject, such as art. (whether you own or lease it) for transportation
pected to last more than 1 year, that attendanceto school, you can deduct your actual expenses3) Classroom teacher to guidance counselor.will be treated as temporary (unless there areor use the standard mileage rate to figure the
facts and circumstances that would indicate oth-4) Classroom teacher to school administrator. amount you can deduct. The standard mileage
erwise) until your expectation changes. It will notrate for 2001 is 341/2 cents per mile. Whichever
be treated as temporary after the date you deter-method you use, you can also deduct parking
mine it will last more than 1 year. fees and tolls. See Car Expenses in chapter 28
for information on deducting your actual ex-Attendance at school on a temporaryWhat Educational penses of using a car.basis was formerly defined as attend-
ance on an irregular or short-term ba-CAUTION
!
Expenses Are sis (generally a matter of days or weeks).Travel ExpensesDeductible? You can file an amended return on You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see
Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual50% Limit, later), and lodging if:If your education meets the requirements de- Income Tax Return, for any year in
TIP
scribed earlier under Qualifying Education, you which you used the former definition of attend-1) You travel overnight to obtain qualified ed-can generally deduct your educational ex-ance on a temporary basis. However, you gen-ucation, andpenses. If you are not self-employed, you canerally must file the amended return within 3deduct educational expenses only if you itemize 2) The main purpose of the trip is to attend ayears from the time you filed the original returnyour deductions. work-related course or seminar.or within 2 years from the time you paid the tax,You cannot deduct expenses related to whichever is later. Travel expenses for qualifying education aretax-exempt and excluded income.
treated the same as travel expenses for other
employee business purposes. For more infor-Deductible expenses. If you are regularlyDeductible expenses. The following educa-
employed and go directly from home to schooltional expenses can be deducted. mation, see chapter 28.
Page 198 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 201 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct expenses for per- undergraduate-level courses that begin beforeTravel as Education
sonal activities, such as sightseeing, January 1, 2002. The payments do not have to
You cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form ofvisiting, or entertaining. be for work-related courses.CAUTION
!
education. Beginning January 1, 2002, this benefit
has been expanded to include both un-Mainly personal travel.If your travel away Example. You are a French language dergraduate and graduate-levelfrom home is mainly personal, you cannot de-
TIP
teacher. While on sabbatical leave granted forcourses.duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, andtravel, you traveled through France to improve
lodging. You can deduct only your expenses foryour knowledge of the French language. You Educational assistance benefits do not in-lodging and 50% of your expenses for mealschose your itinerary and most of your activitiesclude payments for the following items.during the time you attend the qualified educa-to improve your French language skills. You
tional activities. 1) Meals, lodging, transportation, or tools orcannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-
Whether a trip’s purpose is mainly personal supplies (other than textbooks) that youtional expenses. This is true even if you spent
or educational depends upon the facts and cir- can keep after completing the course ofmost of your time learning French by visiting
cumstances. An important factor is the compari- instruction.French schools and families, attending movies
son of time spent on personal activities with timeor plays, and engaging in similar activities.2) Education involving sports, games, or hob-spent on educational activities. If you spend bies unless the education has a reasona-more time on personal activities, the trip is con- ble relationship to the business of yourStudent Loansidered mainly educational only if you can show employer or is required as part of a degreea substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling toInterest Expense program.a particular location.
You may be able to deduct interest you pay on a3) Graduate-level courses that are normally
qualified student loan. If you qualify, you canExample 1. John works in Newark, New taken under a program leading to a law,
take this deduction whether or not the educationJersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- business, medical, or other advanced aca-
is work related and even if you do not itemizeble 1-week course at the request of his em- demic or professional degree.
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Forployer. His main reason for going to Chicago
more information on the deduction of studentwas to take the course. Benefit over $5,250.If your employer paysloan interest, see Publication 970.While there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- more than $5,250 for educational benefits fortained some friends, and took a side trip to you during the year, you must generally pay taxPleasantville for a day. Expenses Relating to on the amount over $5,250. Your employer
Since the trip was mainly for business, he should include in your wages (box 1 of yourTax-Exempt andcan deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He Form W –2) the amount you must include in
cannot deduct his transportation expenses ofExcluded Income income.
going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the
Working condition fringe benefit.How-Some educational assistance you receive maymeals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging
ever, if the payments also qualify as a workingbe tax-exempt or excluded from your income.connected with his educational activities.
condition fringe benefit, your employer does notSince you do not pay tax on this income, you
have to include them in your wages. A workingmay not be able to deduct the related expenses.Example 2. Dave works in Nashville and
condition fringe benefit is a benefit which, hadExamples of tax-exempt or excluded incomerecently traveled to California to take a 2-week
you paid for it, you could deduct as an employeeinclude scholarships, veterans’ educational as-seminar. The seminar is qualifying education.
business expense.sistance, and the Education Savings Bond Pro-While there, he spent an extra 8 weeks on
gram. If you received assistance from any ofpersonal activities. The facts, including the extra
these sources, see Expenses Relating to8-week stay, show that his main purpose was to
Tax-Exempt and Excluded Income in Publica-take a vacation.
tion 508. Where To DeductHe cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or his
meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can
Expensesdeduct only his expenses for meals (subject toEmployer-Provided
the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks heEducational Assistance Self-employed persons and employees reportattended the seminar.
their educational expenses differently.If you receive educational assistance benefitsCruises and conventions. Certain cruises The following information explains whatfrom your employer under an educational assis-and conventions offer seminars or courses as forms you must use to deduct the cost of yourtance program, you can exclude up to $5,250 ofpart of their itinerary. Even if the seminars or qualifying education.those benefits each year. This means your em-courses are work related, your deduction forployer should not include the benefits with yourtravel may be limited. This applies to: wages, tips, and other compensation shown inSelf-Employed Persons
box 1 of your Form W–2. This also means that1) Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other If you are self-employed, you must report theyou do not have to include the benefits on yourform of luxury water transportation, and cost of your qualifying education on the appro-income tax return.
2) Conventions outside the North American priate form used to report your business incomeYou must reduce your deductible edu-area. and expenses (Schedule C, C–EZ, or F). If yourcational expenses by the amount ofeducational expenses include expenses for aFor a discussion of the limits on travel expenseany tax-free educational assistanceCAUTION
!
car or truck, travel, or meals, report them thedeductions that apply to cruises and conven-benefits you received for those expenses.same way you report other business expensestions, see Luxury Water Travel and Conventions for those items. See the instructions for the formin Publication 463. Educational assistance program.To qualify you file for information on how to complete it.
as an educational assistance program, the plan
must be written and must meet certain other
50% Limit Employeesrequirements. Your employer can tell you
whether there is a qualified program where youYou can deduct only 50% of the cost of your If you are an employee, you can deduct the costwork.qualifying meals while traveling away from home of qualifying education only if you were not reim-
to obtain education. You cannot have been re-Educational assistance. Tax-free educa- bursed by your employer or if the costs ex-
imbursed for the meals. tional assistance benefits include payments for ceeded your reimbursement. (Amounts your
 Employees must use Form 2106 or Form tuition, fees and similar expenses, books, sup- employer paid under a nonaccountable plan and
2106–EZ to apply the 50% limit. plies, and equipment. The payments must be for included in box 1 of your Form W–2 are not
Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related EducationPage 199

Page 202 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
considered reimbursements.) How you treat any (Form 1040). (Special rules for expenses of cer-Impairment-related work expenses.If you
reimbursement you receive depends on the type tain performing artists and fee-basis officials and are disabled and have impairment-related work
of reimbursement arrangement and the amount for impairment-related work expenses are ex- expenses that are necessary for you to be able
of the reimbursement. For information on how to plained later.) to get qualifying education, you can deduct
report your reimbursement, see chapter 28. these expenses on line 27 of Schedule A (FormUsing Form 2106–EZ. This form is shorterInclude the cost of your qualifying education 1040). They are not subject to the 2%-of-and easier to use than Form 2106. Generallywith your deduction for any other employee adjusted-gross-income limit.you can use this form if:business expenses on line 20 of Schedule A For more information on impairment-related
• You were not reimbursed for any of your(Form 1040). (Special rules for expenses of cer- work expenses, see chapter 28.
expenses, andtain performing artists and fee-basis officials and
for impairment-related work expenses are ex-• You are using the standard mileage rate ifplained later.) This deduction is subject to theyou are claiming vehicle expenses.2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies Recordkeepingto most miscellaneous itemized deductions. If you do not meet both of these requirements,
use Form 2106.Form 2106 or 2106–EZ. To figure your de- You must keep records as proof of anyduction for employee business expenses, in- deduction claimed on your tax return.Performing artists and fee-basis officials.Ifcluding qualifying education, you generally must Generally, you should keep your rec-you are a qualified performing artist, or a stateRECORDS
complete Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ. ords for 3 years from the date of filing the return(or local) government official who is paid in
and claiming the deduction.whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deductForm not required.Do not complete either
the cost of your qualifying education as an ad-Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ if: For specific information about keeping rec-justment to gross income rather than as an item-ords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping• You were not reimbursed for any of yourized deduction. in chapter 28.expenses, and For more information on qualified performing
artists and fee-basis officials, see chapter 28.• You are not claiming travel, transportation,
or meal expenses.
If you meet both of these requirements, enter
the expenses directly on line 20 of Schedule A
Page 200 Chapter 29 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 203 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
discussions of additional unreimbursed em-
ployee expenses that are more common.Deductions Subject
30. • Business bad debt of an employee.to the 2% Limit
• Education that is work related. (See chap-
You can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-ter 29.)
Miscellaneous ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Form• Legal fees related to your job.1040). You can claim the amount of expenses
that is more than 2% of your adjusted gross• Licenses and regulatory fees.Deductions income. You figure your deduction on Schedule• Malpractice insurance premiums.A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted gross in-
come from the total amount of these expenses.• Medical examinations required by an em-
Your adjusted gross income is the amount on ployer.Important Reminder
line 34, Form 1040. • Occupational taxes.Generally, you apply the 2% limit after youLimit on itemized deductions.For 2001, if apply any other deduction limit. For example,• Passport for a business trip.your adjusted gross income is more than you apply the 50% (or 60%) limit on business-re-$132,950 ($66,475 if you are married filing sep- • Subscriptions to professional journals andlated meals and entertainment (discussed inarately), you may have to reduce the amount of trade magazines related to your work.chapter 28) before you apply the 2% limit.certain itemized deductions, including most mis-Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis-• Travel, transportation, entertainment, gift,cellaneous deductions. cussed in the three categories in which you and car expenses related to your work.
report them on Schedule A. (See chapter 28.)
1) Unreimbursed employee expenses (line
20).Introduction Business Liability Insurance
2) Tax preparation fees (line 21).This chapter explains which expenses you can You can deduct insurance premiums you paidclaim as miscellaneous itemized deductions on for protection against personal liability for3) Other expenses (line 22).Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce the wrongful acts on the job.total of most miscellaneous itemized deductions
Impairment-related work expenses.If youby 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-
have a physical or mental disability, certain ex-ter covers the following topics. Damages for Breachpenses you incur that allow you to work may not• Deductions subject to the 2% limit. of Employment Contractbe subject to the 2% limit. See Impairment-Re-
lated Work Expenses under Deductions Not• Deductions not subject to the 2% limit. If you break an employment contract, you canSubject to the 2% Limit, later.• Expenses you cannot deduct. deduct damages you pay your former employer
if the damages are attributable to the pay youPerforming artists.If you are a qualified per-
received from that employer.forming artist, you may be able to deduct yourYou must keep records to verify your
employee business expenses as an adjustmentdeductions. You should keep receipts,
to gross income rather than as a miscellaneouscanceled checks, financial accountRECORDS
Depreciation on Computersitemized deduction. See Special Rules in chap-statements, and other documentary evidence.
ter 28 if you need more information about thisFor more information on recordkeeping, get or Cellular Telephones
exception.Publication 552, Recordkeeping for Individuals.
You can claim a depreciation deduction for a
State and local government officials paid oncomputer or cellular telephone that you use in
a fee basis.If you performed services as anUseful Items your work as an employee if its use is:
employee of a state or local government and youYou may want to see:
were paid in whole or in part on a fee basis, you1) For the convenience of your employer, and
can claim your trade or business expenses inPublication 2) Required as a condition of your employ-performing those services as an adjustment to❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car ment.gross income, rather than as a miscellaneousExpenses deduction. See Officials Paid on a Fee Basis For more information about the rules and
under Deductions Not Subject to the 2% Limit,❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income exceptions to the rules affecting the allowable
later. deductions for a home computer or cellular tele-❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
phone, see Publication 529.❏ 535 Business Expenses Unreimbursed
❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home Employee Expenses Dues to Chambers of Commerce(Including Use by Day-Care
(Line 20)Providers) and Professional Societies
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property You can deduct only unreimbursed employeeYou may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-
expenses that are: sional organizations (such as bar associationsForm (and Instructions) and medical associations) and to chambers of1) Paid or incurred during your tax year,❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses commerce and similar organizations, if member-
2) For carrying on your trade or business ofship helps you carry out the duties of your job.❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee being an employee, and Similar organizations include:Business Expenses
3) Ordinary and necessary. • Boards of trade,
An expense is ordinary if it is common and • Business leagues,accepted in your type of trade or business. An
expense is necessary if it is appropriate and• Civic or public service organizations,
helpful to your trade or business. • Real estate boards, andExamples of unreimbursed employee ex-
• Trade associations.penses are listed next. The list is followed by
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 201

Page 204 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza- ble for them, you do not include them in yourTools Used in Your Work
tion if one of its main purposes is to: gross income.
Generally, you can deduct amounts you spend
1) Conduct entertainment activities for mem- for tools used in your work if the tools wear outR ´esum ´e. You can deduct amounts you spendbers or their guests, or and are thrown away within 1 year from the date
for typing, printing, and mailing copies of a r´e- of purchase. You can depreciate the cost of2) Provide members or their guests with ac-sum ´e to prospective employers if you are look-tools that have a useful life substantially beyondcess to entertainment facilities. ing for a new job in your present occupation.the tax year. For more information about depre-
Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon clubs ciation, get Publication 946.
are not deductible. See Club Dues under Non- Travel and transportation expenses.If youdeductible Expenses, later. travel to an area and, while there, you look for aUnion Dues and Expensesnew job in your present occupation, you may beLobbying and political activities.You may
able to deduct travel expenses to and from thenot be able to deduct that part of your dues that You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay
area. You can deduct the travel expenses if theis for certain lobbying and political activities. See for union membership.
trip is primarily to look for a new job. The amountDues used for lobbying under Lobbying Ex- You can also deduct assessments for benefit
of time you spend on personal activity comparedpenses, later. payments to unemployed union members. How-
to the amount of time you spend in looking forever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-
work is important in determining whether the tripments or contributions that provides funds for
Home Office the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a
Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-new job.If you use a part of your home regularly and sion fund, even if the union requires you to makeEven if you cannot deduct the travel ex-exclusively for business purposes, you may be the contributions.penses to and from an area, you can deduct theable to deduct a part of the operating expenses You may not be able to deduct amounts youexpenses of looking for a new job in your pre-and depreciation of your home. pay to the union that are related to certain lobby-sent occupation while in the area.You can claim this deduction for the busi- ing and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-ness use of a part of your home only if you useYou may choose to use the standard mile-penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.that part of your home regularly and age rate to figure your car expenses. The stan-
exclusively: dard mileage rate for 2001 is 341/2 cents per
mile. See chapter 28 for more information.Work Clothes and Uniforms1) As your principal place of business for any
trade or business, You can deduct the cost and upkeep of work
clothes if the following two requirements are2) As a place to meet or deal with your pa-Licenses and Regulatory Fees
met.tients, clients, or customers in the normal
You can deduct the amount you pay each yearcourse of your trade or business, or
1) You must wear them as a condition of yourto state or local governments for licenses and3) In the case of a separate structure not employment.regulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro-attached to your home, in connection withfession. 2) The clothes are not suitable for everydayyour trade or business.
wear.
The regular and exclusive business use
must be for the convenience of your em- Occupational Taxes It is not enough that you wear distinc-
ployer and not just appropriate and helpful in tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-You can deduct an occupational tax charged atyour job. Get Publication 587 for more detailed cifically required by your employer. NorCAUTION
!
a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of workinginformation and a worksheet. is it enough that you do not, in fact, wear your
or conducting a business in the locality. If youwork clothes away from work. The clothing must
are an employee, you can claim occupationalnot be suitable for taking the place of your regu-
Job Search Expenses taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subjectlar clothing.
to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as aExamples of workers who may be able toYou can deduct certain expenses you have indeduction for taxes elsewhere on your return.deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are:looking for a new job in your present occupation,
delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-even if you do not get a new job. You cannot
ers, law enforcement officers, letter carriers,deduct these expenses if: Repayment of professional athletes, and transportation work-
Income Aid Payment1) You are looking for a job in a new occupa- ers (air, rail, bus, etc.).
tion, Musicians and entertainers can deduct theAn “income aid payment” is one that is receivedcost of theatrical clothing and accessories if they2) There was a substantial break betweenunder an employer’s plan to aid employees whoare not suitable for everyday wear.the ending of your last job and your look-lose their jobs because of lack of work. If youHowever, work clothing consisting of whiteing for a new one, or repay a lump-sum income aid payment that youcap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-received and included in income in an earlier3) You are looking for a job for the first time. alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter isyear, you can deduct the repayment. required by his union to wear on the job, is not
distinctive in character or in the nature of aEmployment and outplacement agency fees.
uniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-You can deduct employment and outplacementResearch Expenses of taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at theagency fees you pay in looking for a new job in
a College Professor request of a foreman are not deductible.your present occupation.
Employer pays you back.If, in a later year,If you are a college professor, you can deductProtective clothing.You can deduct the costyour employer pays you back for employmentresearch expenses, including travel expenses,of protective clothing required in your work, suchagency fees, you must include the amount youfor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishingas safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hardreceive in your gross income up to the amount ofon subjects that relate directly to the field of yourhats, and work gloves.your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov- teaching duties. You must have undertaken theExamples of workers who may be required toeries in chapter 13.) research as a means of carrying out the dutieswear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-
expected of a professor and without expectationEmployer pays the employment agency. ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boat
of profit apart from salary. However, you cannotIf your employer pays the fees directly to the crew members, machinists, oil field workers,
deduct the cost of travel as a form of education.employment agency and you are not responsi- pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.
Page 202 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 205 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Military uniforms.You generally cannot de-Certain Casualty and Hobby Expenses
duct the cost of your uniforms if you are onTheft Losses You can generally deduct hobby expenses, butfull-time active duty in the armed forces. How-
only up to the amount of hobby income. A hobbyYou can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you is not a business because it is not carried on tomiscellaneous itemized deduction subject to thecan deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni- make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-2% limit if you used the damaged or stolenform if military regulations restrict you from ter 13 under Other Income.property in performing services as an employee.wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In
First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,figuring the deduction, you must reduce the cost
Casualties and Thefts. You may also have toby any nontaxable allowance you receive for Indirect Deductions ofinclude the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-these expenses. Pass-Through Entitiesness Property, if you are otherwise required to
If local military rules do not allow you to wearfile that form. Your deduction is the amount ofPass-through entities include partnerships, Sfatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you canthe loss included on lines 32 and 38b of Formcorporations, and mutual funds that are not pub-
deduct the amount by which the cost of buying4684 and line 18b of Form 4797. For otherlicly offered. Deductions of pass-through entities
and keeping up these uniforms is more than thecasualty and theft losses, see chapter 27.are passed through to the partners or sharehold-
uniform allowance you receive. ers. The partners or shareholders can deduct
their share of passed-through deductions forYou can deduct the cost of your uniforms ifClerical Help and Office Rent investment expenses as miscellaneous item-you are a civilian faculty or staff member of a ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.military school. You can deduct office expenses, such as rent
and clerical help, that you have in connectionExample. You are a member of an invest-
with your investments and collecting the taxablement club that is formed solely to invest in secur-Tax Preparation Fees
income on them. ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The(Line 21) partnership’s income is solely from taxable divi-
dends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-You can usually deduct tax preparation fees in ties. In this case, you can deduct your share ofDepreciation onthe year you pay them. Thus, on your 2001 the partnership’s operating expenses as miscel-Home Computerreturn, you can deduct fees paid in 2001 for laneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%
preparing your 2000 return. These fees include limit. However, if the investment club partner-You can deduct depreciation on your home
the cost of tax preparation software programs ship has investments that also produce nontax-computer if you use it to produce income (for
able income, you cannot deduct your share ofand tax publications. They also include any feeexample, to manage your investments that pro-
the partnership’s expenses that produce theyou paid for electronic filing of your return.duce taxable income). You generally must de-
nontaxable income.preciate the computer using the straight lineDeduct expenses of preparing tax schedules
method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys-relating to profit or loss from business (Schedule Publicly offered mutual funds.Publicly of-tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as anC or C–EZ), rentals or royalties (Schedule E), or fered mutual funds do not pass deductions foremployee and also use the computer in thatfarm income and expenses (Schedule F) on the investment expenses through to shareholders.work, see Publication 946. A mutual fund is “publicly offered” if it is:appropriate schedule. Deduct the expenses of
preparing the remainder of the return on line 21, 1) Continuously offered pursuant to a publicSchedule A (Form 1040). Excess Deductions of an Estate offering,
2) Regularly traded on an established securi-If an estate’s total deductions in its last tax yearOther Expenses (Line 22) ties market, orare more than its gross income for that year, the
beneficiaries succeeding to the estate’s prop-You can deduct certain other expenses as mis- 3) Held by or for at least 500 persons at all
erty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-cellaneous itemized deductions subject to the times during the tax year.
ductions for personal exemptions and charitable2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. These are A publicly offered mutual fund will send you acontributions when figuring the estate’s total de-expenses you pay: Form 1099–DIV, or a substitute form, showingductions. The beneficiaries can claim the deduc-the net amount of dividend income (gross divi-tion only for the tax year in which, or with which,1) To produce or collect income that must be dends minus investment expenses). This netthe estate terminates, whether the year of termi-included in your gross income, figure is the amount you report on your return asnation is a normal year or a short tax year. Forincome. You cannot deduct investment ex-2) To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-more information, see Termination of Estate in penses.erty held for producing such income, orPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and Ad-
ministrators. Information returns.You should receive in-3) To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-
formation returns from pass-through entities.fund of any tax.
Partnerships and S corporations.TheseYou can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-Fees to Collect entities issue Schedule K–1, which lists theposes in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-Interest and Dividends items and amounts you must report and identi-sonably and closely related to these purposes.
fies the tax return schedules and lines to use.You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank,Some of these other expenses are explained in
trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxablethe following discussions. Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.These
bond interest or dividends on shares of stock.funds will send you a Form 1099–DIV, Divi-If the expenses you pay produce income that dends and Distributions, or a substitute form,But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a brokeris only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Income showing your share of gross income and invest-to buy investment property, such as stocks orExpenses, later, under Nondeductible Ex- ment expenses. You can claim the expensesbonds. You must add the fee to the cost of thepenses. only as a miscellaneous itemized deduction sub-property.
ject to the 2% limit.You cannot deduct the fee you pay to a
broker to sell securities. You can use the feeAppraisal Fees
only to figure gain or loss from the sale. See theInvestment Fees and ExpensesYou can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them toinstructions for columns (d) and (e) of Schedule
figure a casualty loss or the fair market value ofD (Form 1040) for information on how to reportYou can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,
donated property. the fee. trust administration fees, and other expenses
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 203

Page 206 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you paid for managing your investments that Certain Casualty and1) Holding shares acquired through a plan,produce taxable income. Theft Losses
2) Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,
You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as aand
Legal Expenses miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to3) Keeping individual records and providingthe 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property
detailed statements of accounts.You can usually deduct legal expenses that you was income-producing property (property held
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds,
income or that you pay in connection with the gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First
determination, collection, or refund of any tax. report the loss in Section B of Form 4684. YouTrustee’s Administrative
You can also deduct legal expenses that are: may also have to include the loss on Form 4797Fees for IRA if you are otherwise required to file that form.
1) Related to either doing or keeping your Your deduction is the amount of the loss in-Trustee’s administrative fees that are billed sep-
job, such as those you paid to defend cluded on lines 32 and 38b of Form 4684 andarately and paid by you in connection with your
yourself against criminal charges arising line 18b of Form 4797. For more information onindividual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de-out of your trade or business, casualty and theft losses, see chapter 27.ductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as a
miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the2) For tax advice related to a divorce if the bill
2% limit. For more information about IRAs, seespecifies how much is for tax advice and it Federal Estate Tax on Incomechapter 18.is determined in a reasonable way, or
in Respect of a Decedent
3) To collect taxable alimony.
You can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-You can deduct expenses of resolving tax ble to income in respect of a decedent that youissues relating to profit or loss from businessDeductions as a beneficiary include in your gross income.(Schedule C or C–EZ), rentals or royalties Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses come that the decedent would have receivedNot Subject to(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. You had death not occurred and that was not prop-deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness tax erly includible in the decedent’s final income taxthe 2% Limitissues on Schedule A (Form 1040). return. See Publication 559 for more informa-
tion.You can deduct the items listed below as miscel-
laneous itemized deductions. They are not sub-Loss on Deposits ject to the 2% limit. Report these items on line
Gambling Losses Up to the27, Schedule A (Form 1040).For information on whether, and if so, how, you
Amount of Gambling Winningsmay deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified
financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent orList of Deductions You must report the full amount of your gamblingBankrupt Financial Institution in chapter 15. winnings for the year on line 21, Form 1040. YouEach of the following items are discussed indeduct your gambling losses for the year on linedetail after the list. 27, Schedule A (Form 1040). You cannot deductRepayments of Income gambling losses that are more than your win-• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
nings.If you had to repay an amount that you included• Casualty and theft losses fromin income in an earlier year, you may be able to You cannot reduce your gambling win-income-producing property.deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount you nings by your gambling losses and re-had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 or• Federal estate tax on income in respect of port the difference. You must report theCAUTION
!
less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If ita decedent. full amount of your winnings as income andwas more than $3,000, see Repayments Under claim your losses up to the amount of winnings• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject to as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-bling winnings.the 2% Limit, later. ords should show your winnings separately from
• Impairment-related work expenses of per-your losses.
sons with disabilities.
Repayments of Diary of winnings and losses. You• Repayments of more than $3,000 under aSocial Security Benefits must keep an accurate diary or similarclaim of right. record of your losses and winnings.RECORDS
For information on how to deduct your repay-• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Your diary should contain at least the follow-
ments of certain social security benefits, see ing information.• Expenses of officials paid on a fee basis.Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap-
ter 12.
Amortizable Premium 1) The date and type of your specific wager
or wagering activity.on Taxable BondsSafe Deposit Box Rent
2) The name and address or location of theIn general, if the amount you pay for a bond isYou can deduct safe deposit box rent if you use gambling establishment.greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-the box to store taxable income-producingcess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize3) The names of other persons presentstocks, bonds, or investment-related papers and with you at the gambling establishment.the premium on taxable bonds. The amortizationdocuments. You cannot deduct the rent if youof the premium is generally an offset to interestuse the box only for jewelry, other personal 4) The amount(s) you won or lost.income on the bond rather than a separate de-items, or tax-exempt securities. See Publication 529 for more information.duction item.
Part of the premium on some bonds may be
a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2%Service Charges on
limit. For more information, see Amortizable Impairment-RelatedDividend Reinvestment Plans
Premium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529Work Expenses
and Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 ofYou can deduct service charges you pay as a
Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex-subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan. If you have a physical or mental disability that
These service charges include payments for:penses. limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
Page 204 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 207 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
its one or more of your major life activities, such Commuting Expenses
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking,Nondeductible You cannot deduct commuting expenses (thebreathing, learning, and working, you can de-
cost of transportation between your home andduct your impairment-related work expenses.Expenses your main or regular place of work). If you haulImpairment-related work expenses are ordi- tools, instruments, or other items, in your car toExamples of nondeductible expenses are listednary and necessary business expenses for at- and from work, you can deduct only the addi-next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-tendant care services at your place of work and tional cost of hauling the items such as the renttional nondeductible expenses that are moreother expenses in connection with your place of on a trailer to carry the items.common.work that are necessary for you to be able to
work.
List of Nondeductible Fines or Penalties
ExpensesWhere to report.If you are an employee, you You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay toenter impairment-related work expenses on a governmental unit for violating a law. This• Adoption expenses.Form 2106 or Form 2106–EZ. Enter on line 27, includes an amount paid in settlement of your
Schedule A (Form 1040) that part of the amount actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty• Broker’s commissions that you paid in
on line 10 of Form 2106, or line 6 of Form connection with your IRA or other invest-(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include
2106–EZ, that is related to your impairment.ment property. parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de-
Enter the amount that is unrelated to your im- ducted from teachers’ paychecks after an illegal• Burial or funeral expenses, including thepairment on line 20, Schedule A (Form 1040). strike.cost of a cemetery lot.  
• Capital expenses.
Repayments Under Health Spa Expenses• Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,
Claim of Right marriage licenses, and dog tags. You cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if
• Hobby losses —  But see Hobby Ex- there is a job requirement to stay in excellentIf you had to repay more than $3,000 that you
penses, earlier. physical condition, such as might be required ofincluded in your income in an earlier year be-
a law enforcement officer.cause at the time you thought you had an un-• Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
restricted right to it, you may be able to deduct• Illegal bribes and kickbacks— See Bribesthe amount you repaid or take a credit againstand kickbacks in chapter 13 of PublicationHome Security Systemyour tax. See Repayments in chapter 13 for 535.more information. You cannot deduct the cost of a home security• Losses from the sale of your home, furni-system as a miscellaneous deduction. However,ture, personal car, etc. you may be able to claim a deduction for a homeUnrecovered Investment • Personal disability insurance premiums.security system as a business expense if you
in Annuity have a home office. See Home Office under• Personal, living, or family expenses.Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, andA retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-• The value of wages never received or lostSecurity System under Deducting Expenses inity can exclude from income a part of each vacation time. Publication 587.
payment received as a tax-free return of the
retiree’s investment. If the retiree dies before the
Campaign Expensesentire investment is recovered tax free, any un- Homeowners ’ Insurance Premiums
recovered investment can be deducted on theYou cannot deduct campaign expenses of a You cannot deduct premiums that you pay orretiree’s final income tax return. See chapter 11candidate for any office, even if the candidate isthat are placed in escrow for insurance on yourfor more information about the tax treatment ofrunning for reelection to the office. These in-home, such as fire and liability or mortgagepensions and annuities. clude qualification and registration fees for pri-insurance.mary elections.
Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees
paid to defend charges that arise from partici-Investment-Related SeminarsOfficials Paid on pation in a political campaign.
You cannot deduct any expenses for attending aa Fee Basis
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-
Check-Writing Fees vestment purposes.
If you are a fee-basis official, you can claim youron Personal Account
expenses in performing services in that job as
If you have a personal checking account, youLife Insurance Premiumsan adjustment to income rather than as a miscel-cannot deduct fees charged by the bank for thelaneous itemized deduction. To qualify as a You cannot deduct premiums you pay on yourprivilege of writing checks, even if the accountfee-basis official, you must be employed by a life insurance. You may be able to deduct, aspays interest.state or local government and be paid in whole alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance
or in part on a fee basis. policies assigned to your former spouse. See
chapter 20 for information on alimony.Club Dues
Where to report.If you qualify as a fee-basisGenerally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem-official, you should first complete Form 2106 orbership in any club organized for business, plea-Lobbying ExpensesForm 2106–EZ. Then include your expenses insure, recreation, or other social purpose. Thisperforming services in that job (line 10 of Formincludes business, social, athletic, luncheon,You generally cannot deduct amounts paid or
2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ) on line 32 ofsporting, airline, and hotel clubs. For exceptions,incurred for lobbying expenses. These include
Form 1040. Then write “FBO ” and the amount ofsee Dues to Chambers of Commerce and Pro-expenses to:
those expenses on the dotted line next to line 32fessional Societies under Unreimbursed Em-
of Form 1040. ployee Expenses, earlier. 1) Influence legislation,
Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 205

Page 208 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Participate or intervene in any political Stockholders’ Meetings1) Custody of children.campaign for, or against, any candidate for
You cannot deduct transportation and other ex-public office, 2) Breach of promise (to marry) suit.
penses you pay to attend stockholders’ meet-3) Attempt to influence the general public, or3) Civil or criminal charges resulting from aings of companies in which you own stock butsegments of the public, about elections, personal relationship. have no other interest. You cannot deduct theselegislative matters, or referendums, or expenses even if you are attending the meeting4) Damages for personal injury.
to get information that would be useful in making4) Communicate directly with covered execu-
5) Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-further investments.tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
tion of a title).ence the official actions or positions of
those officials. 6) Preparation of a will.
Tax-Exempt Income ExpensesLobbying expenses also include any amounts7) Property claims or property settlement in a
paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-divorce. You cannot deduct expenses to produce tax-ex-
ning, or coordination of any of these activities. empt income. You cannot deduct interest on aYou cannot deduct these expenses even if adebt incurred or continued to buy or carryDues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt result of the legal proceeding is the loss oftax-exempt securities.organization notifies you that part of the dues orincome-producing property. If you have expenses to produce both taxa-other amounts you pay to the organization are
ble and tax-exempt income, but you cannotused to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses,
identify the expenses that produce each type ofyou cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex- Political Contributions income, you must divide the expenses based onpenses in Publication 529 for information on
the amount of each type of income to determineexceptions. You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-
the amount that you can deduct.ical candidate, a campaign committee, or a
newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention
Example. During the year, you receivedLost or Mislaid bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs
taxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter-that benefit a political party or political candidateCash or Property est of $1,200. In earning this income, you hadare not deductible.
total expenses of $500 during the year. YouYou cannot deduct a loss based on the mere
cannot identify the amount of each expense itemdisappearance of money or property. However,
that is for each income item. Therefore, 80%an accidental loss or disappearance of propertyProfessional Accreditation Fees
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxablecan qualify as a casualty if it results from an
interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for theYou cannot deduct professional accreditationidentifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject tofees such as the following.unusual. See chapter 27.
the 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500).
1) Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-Example. A car door is accidentally tial right to practice accounting.slammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
Travel Expenses foryour diamond ring. The diamond falls from the2) Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in
ring and is never found. The loss of the diamond Another Individualsecuring admission to the bar.
is a casualty. 3) Medical and dental license fees paid to getYou generally cannot deduct travel expenses
initial licensing. you pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or
other individual who accompanies you (or yourLunches With Coworkers
employee) on business travel. See chapter 28
for more information on deductible travel ex-You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches with
Professional Reputation penses.co-workers, except while traveling away from
home on business. See chapter 28 for informa-You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TV
tion on deductible expenses while travelingappearances to increase your personal prestige
away from home. Voluntary Unemploymentor establish your professional reputation.
Benefit Fund Contributions
You cannot deduct voluntary unemploymentMeals While Working Late Relief Fund Contributions
benefit fund contributions you make to a union
You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work- fund or a private fund. However, you can deductYou cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri-
ing late. However, you may be able to claim a contributions as taxes if state law requires you tovate plan that pays benefits to any covered em-
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible make them to a state unemployment fund thatployee who cannot work because of any injury or
entertainment expense, or if you are traveling covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy-illness not related to the job.
away from home. See chapter 28 for information ment caused by business conditions.
on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-
penses while traveling away from home. Residential Telephone Service
Wristwatches
You cannot deduct any charge (including taxes)
You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,for basic local telephone service for the firstPersonal Legal Expenses
even if there is a job requirement that you knowtelephone line to your residence, even if it is
You cannot deduct personal legal expenses the correct time to properly perform your duties.used in a trade or business.
such as those for the following.
Page 206 Chapter 30 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 209 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,500 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 37 discusses the
earned income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to
Credits you in advance throughout the year.
explain whether you are eligible for these cred- other taxes you may need to add to your income
tax.its. You can find that information in chapters 33
through 38 and your form instructions. See the31. following table for credits you may be able to OTHER TAXES
subtract from your income tax. See
For information on: chapter:
How To Figure CREDITS Tax on qualified retirement plans and
See IRAs ..................... 11, 18
For information on: chapter: Advance earned income creditYour Tax payments ................. 3 7Adoption.................. 3 8 Household employment taxes..... 3 3Child and dependent care...... 3 3 Social security and Medicare tax onChild tax credit.............. 3 5 unreported tips.............. 7Introduction Education................. 3 6 Uncollected social security andElderly or disabled........... 3 4After you have figured your income and deduc- Medicare tax on tips.......... 7Foreign tax................ 3 8tions as explained in Parts One through Five, Mortgage interest............ 3 8 Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-your next step is to figure your tax. This chapterPrior year minimum tax........ 3 8 native minimum tax, is discussed later in thisdiscusses: Qualified electric vehicle....... 3 8 chapter.Rate reduction.............. 3 8• The general steps you take to figure your There are other taxes that are not discussedtax, Some credits (such as the earned incomein this publication. These include the following
• An additional tax you may have to paycredit) are not listed above because they are items.
called the alternative minimum tax, andtreated as payments. See Payments, later.
1) Self-employment tax. You must figure thisThere are other credits that are not dis-• The conditions you must meet if you want tax if either of the following applies to youcussed in this publication. These include thethe IRS to figure your tax. (or your spouse if you file a joint return).following items.
a) You were self-employed and your net• General business credit, which is made up
earnings from self-employment wereof several separate business-related cred-
$400 or more. The term “net earningsits. These generally are reported on Form from self-employment” may include cer-Figuring Your Tax 3800, General Business Credit, and are tain nonemployee compensation anddiscussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334, other amounts reported to you on FormYour income tax is based on your taxable in-Tax Guide for Small Business. 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Ifcome. After you figure your income tax, subtract
• Empowerment zone employment credit, you received a Form 1099–MISC, seeyour tax credits and add any other taxes you
which is for certain employers whose em- the Instructions to Recipients on themay owe. The result is your total tax. Compare
ployees work and live in an empowerment back. Also see the instructions foryour total tax with your total payments to deter-
zone. See Publication 954, Tax Incentives Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Em-mine whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
additional tax. ployment Tax, and Publication 533,for Empowerment Zones and Other Dis-
This section provides a general outline of Self-Employment Tax.tressed Communities, and the instructions
how to figure your tax. You can find step-by-stepfor Form 8844, Empowerment Zone Em- b) You had church employee income ofdirections in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ,ployment Credit. $108.28 or more.1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax• District of Columbia first-time homebuyerform you should file, see Which Form Should I 2) Recapture taxes. You may have to paycredit, which is for certain persons whoUse? in chapter 1. these taxes if you previously claimed anbuy a main home in the District. See the
education credit, an investment credit, aTax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Tableinstructions for Form 8859, District of Co-
low-income housing credit, a mortgage in-or the Tax Rate Schedules to figure their incomelumbia First-Time Homebuyer Credit.
terest credit, a qualified electric vehicletax. However, there are special methods if your• Credit for fuel from a nonconventional credit, or an Indian employment credit. Forincome includes any of the following items.
source, which is for the person who sold more information about recapture of an ed-• Capital gains (see chapter 17). the fuel. See the instructions for line 51 ofucation credit, see chapter 36. For more
Form 1040 and section 29 of the Internal information about other recapture taxes,• Lump-sum distributions (see chapter 11).
Revenue Code. see the instructions for line 58 of Form• Farm income (see Schedule J (Form 1040.1040), Farm Income Averaging).
Other taxes.After you subtract your tax cred-3) Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If• Investment income over $1,500 for chil-its, determine whether there are any other taxesyou are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi-dren under age 14 (see chapter 32). you must pay. This chapter does not explain ness and you received a distribution that
these other taxes. You can find that informationexceeds the benefits provided for you
in other chapters of this publication and yourunder the qualified pension or annuity planCredits. After you figure your income tax, de-
form instructions. See the following table for formula, you may have to pay this addi-termine your tax credits. This chapter does not
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 207

Page 210 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in additional tax, compare your total payments with
Publication 560, Retirement Plans for your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, seeTax Figured by IRSSmall Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Quali-your form instructions for information on having
fied Plans). it directly deposited into your financial accountIf you file by April 15, 2002, you can have theinstead of receiving a paper check.4) Uncollected social security and Medicare IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,
tax on group-term life insurance. If your Form 1040A, or Form 1040.former employer provides you with more If the IRS figures your tax and you paid toothan $50,000 of group-term life insurance
much, you will receive a refund. If you did notcoverage, you must pay the employee partAlternative pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-of social security and Medicare taxes on
ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for latethose premiums. The amount should be Minimum Tax
shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of
codes M and N. the date of the bill or by the due date for yourThis section briefly discusses an additional tax
return, whichever is later.you may have to pay.5) Tax on golden parachute payments. This
The tax law gives special treatment to sometax applies if you, as a key employee, re-
kinds of income and allows special deductionsceived an “excess parachute payment” When the IRS cannot figure your tax.The
and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-(EPP) due to a change in a corporation’s IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of theers who benefit from the law in these ways mayownership or control. See the instructions following apply.for line 58 of Form 1040. have to pay at least a minimum amount of tax
through an additional tax. This additional tax is1) You want your refund directly deposited.6) Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts.called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).This applies if you are the beneficiary of a 2) You want any of your refund applied toYou may have to pay the alternative mini-trust that accumulated its income instead your 2002 estimated tax.mum tax if your taxable income for regular taxof distributing it currently. See the instruc-
purposes, combined with certain adjustmentstions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation 3) Any of your income for the year was from
and tax preference items, is more than:Distribution of Trusts. other than wages, salaries, tips, interest,
dividends, taxable social security benefits,• $49,000 if your filing status is married filing7) Additional tax on MSAs. If amounts con-
unemployment compensation, IRA distri-tributed to, or distributed from, your medi-a joint return (or a qualifying widow(er)
butions, pensions, and annuities.cal savings account do not meet the ruleswith dependent child),
for these accounts, you may have to pay 4) Your taxable income is $100,000 or more.• $35,750 if your filing status is single oradditional taxes. See Publication 969, head of household, or 5) You itemize deductions.Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs), and
Forms 8853, Archer MSAs and Long-Term • $24,500 if your filing status is married filing6) You file any of the following forms.Care Insurance Contracts, and 5329, Addi- a separate return.
tional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including a) Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts.Adjustments and tax preference items.The b) Form 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned In-
more common adjustments and tax preference come Exclusion.
Payments. After you determine your total tax,items include: c) Form 4137, Social Security and Medi-figure the total payments you have already
care Tax on Unreported Tip Income.• Addition of personal exemptions,made for the year. Include credits that are
treated as payments. This chapter does not ex- d) Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri-• Addition of the standard deduction (ifplain these payments and credits. You can findclaimed), bution of Trusts.that information in other chapters of this publica-
• Addition of itemized deductions claimed e) Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu-tion and your form instructions. See the follow-
for state and local taxes, certain interest,tions.ing table for amounts you can include in your
most miscellaneous deductions, and parttotal payments. f) Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.of medical expenses,
g) Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—• Subtraction of any refund of state and Individuals.local taxes included in gross income,
h) Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs and• Changes to accelerated depreciation ofPAYMENTS Coverdell ESAs.certain property,See
i) Form 8615, Tax for Children Under AgeFor information on: chapter: • Difference between gain or loss on the
14 Who Have Investment Income ofsale of property reported for regular taxChild tax credit (additional)...... 3 5 More Than $1,500.purposes and AMT purposes,Earned income credit......... 3 7
Estimated tax paid........... 5 j) Form 8814, Parents’ Election To Report• Addition of certain income from incentiveExcess social security and RRTA Child’s Interest and Dividends.stock options,tax withheld................ 3 8
k) Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex-Federal income tax withheld..... 5 • Change in certain passive activity loss
Regulated investment company penses.deductions,
credit.................... 3 8 l) Form 8853, Archer MSAs and• Addition of certain depletion that is moreTax paid with extension........ 1
Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.than the adjusted basis of the property,
Another credit that is treated as a payment is
• Addition of part of the deduction for certainthe credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.
intangible drilling costs, andThis credit is for persons who have a nontaxable Filing the Returnuse of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel and• Addition of tax-exempt interest on certain
kerosene. It is claimed on line 65 of Form 1040.private activity bonds. After you complete the line entries for the taxSee Publication 378, Fuel Tax Credits and Re- form you are filing (discussed next), attach thefunds, and Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax peel-off label, enter your social securityMore information. For more informationPaid on Fuels.
number(s), sign the return, and mail it. If you doabout the alternative minimum tax, see the in-
not have a peel-off label, fill in your name andstructions for Form 1040, line 41, and FormRefund or balance due. To determine
address. See chapter 1 for more information.6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— Individuals.whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
Page 208 Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 211 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.If you not fill in lines 45 and 61a if you want the IRS toForm 1040EZ Line Entries
figure the credits shown on those lines.can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 34,
Read lines 1 through 9 and fill in the lines thatattach Schedule 3 (1040A), Credit for the ElderlyFill in any forms or schedules asked for onapply to you. If you are filing a joint return, writeor the Disabled for Form 1040A Filers. Print the lines you completed, and attach them to youryour taxable income and your spouse’s taxable “CFE ” in the space to the left of line 28 (Formreturn.income to the left of line 6. 1040A). The IRS will figure this credit for you. On
Earned income credit. If you can take thisSchedule 3, check the box in Part I for your filingCredit for child and dependent care ex-credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS canstatus and age. Complete Part II and lines 11penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-figure it for you. Print “EIC” in the space to theand 13 of Part III if they apply. cussed in chapter 33, complete Form 2441 andright of line 9a. Enter the amount of any nontax- attach it to your return. Enter the amount of theable earned income on line 9b. credit on line 44. The IRS will not figure thisEarned income credit. If you can take thisIf your credit for any year after 1996 was credit.credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS willreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
figure it for you. Print “EIC” directly to the right ofhave to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with line 39a. Enter the amount of any nontaxableCredit for the elderly or the disabled.If you
your return. For details, see that form and itsearned income on line 39b. If you have a qualify-can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 34,
instructions. attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or theing child, you must fill in Schedule EIC, Earned
Disabled. Print “CFE ” on the dotted line next toIncome Credit, and attach it to your return.
line 45 of Form 1040. The IRS will figure theIf your credit for any year after 1996 wasForm 1040A Line Entries credit for you. On Schedule R check the box inreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoPart I for your filing status and age. Completehave to file Form 8862 with your return. ForRead lines 1 through 25 and fill in the lines that Part II and lines 11 and 13 of Part III if they apply.apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, writedetails, see that form and its instructions.
your taxable income and your spouse’s taxable
income to the left of line 25. Complete lines 27 Earned income credit. If you can take this
through 30, 35, and 37 through 40 if they apply credit, as discussed in chapter 37, the IRS willForm 1040 Line Entries
to you. Do not fill in lines 28 and 39a if you want figure it for you. Print “EIC” directly to the right of
the IRS to figure the credits shown on those line 61a of Form 1040. Enter the amount of anyRead lines 1 through 39 and fill in the lineslines. Also, enter any write-in information that nontaxable earned income in the space pro-that apply to you.applies to you in the space to the left of line 41. vided on line 61b. If you have a qualifying child,
If you are filing a joint return, write your taxa-you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach it toCredit for child and dependent care ex- ble income and your spouse’s taxable income inyour return.penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-the space under the words “Adjusted Gross In- If your credit for any year after 1996 wascussed in chapter 33, complete Schedule 2 andcome ” on the front of your return. reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsoattach it to your return. Enter the amount of the
Read lines 41 through 65. Fill in the lines thathave to file Form 8862 with your return. Forcredit on line 27 (Form 1040A). The IRS will not
details, see that form and its instructions.apply to you, but do not fill in the “Total” lines. Dofigure this credit.
Chapter 31 How To Figure Your Tax Page 209

Page 212 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income (including capital gain distribu- who had custody of the child for the greater part
tions) on the parent’s return rather than file of the year (the custodial parent) has not remar-
a return for the child. (See Parent’s Elec- ried, use the return of the custodial parent.
tion To Report Child’s Interest and Divi-32. Custodial parent remarried.If the custo-dends, later.) dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather
For these rules, the term “child” includes a le- than the noncustodial parent) is treated as the
gally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules child’s other parent. Therefore, if the custodial
apply whether or not the child is a dependent. parent and the stepparent file a joint return, useTax on
that joint return. Do not use the return of theThese rules do not apply if: noncustodial parent.
Investment
If the custodial parent and the stepparent are1) The child is not required to file a tax return,
married, but file separate returns, use the returnor
Income of of the one with the greater taxable income. If the2) Neither of the child’s parents were living atcustodial parent and the stepparent are marriedthe end of the tax year. but not living together, the earlier discussionCertain Minor under Parents not living together applies.
Useful ItemsChildren Parents never married.If a child’s parentsYou may want to see:
did not marry each other, but lived together all
year, use the return of the parent with thePublication
greater taxable income. If the parents did not liveImportant Change ❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and together all year, the rules explained earlier
Dependents under Parents are divorced apply.
Tax computation for certain dependents.
Form (and Instructions)Generally, the tax computed for a dependent
Widowed parent remarried. If a widow orusing the 2001 Tax Table or Tax Rate Sched-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 14 Withwidower remarries, the new spouse is treated asules can be reduced to take into account the Investment Income of More Than the child’s other parent. The rules explainednew 10% tax rate. To figure the reduced tax, use $1,500 earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.the Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain De-
❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’spendents in the instructions for Form 1040 (line
Interest and Dividends40), Form 1040A (line 26), and Form 1040EZ
(line 11).
This computation does not apply to the Parent’s Electionfollowing.
To Report Child’sWhich Parent’s• Dependents who received (before any off-
sets) an advance payment of their 2001 Interest and DividendsReturn To Usetaxes.
You may be able to elect to include your child’s• Dependents who file Form 1040NR, Non- If a child’s parents are married to each other andinterest and dividend income (including capitalresident Alien Income Tax Return. file a joint return, use the joint return to figure thegain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,tax on the investment income of a child underyour child will not have to file a return.age 14. For parents who do not file a joint return,
the following discussions explain which parent’s You can make this election for 2001 only if all
tax return must be used to figure the tax. Onlythe following conditions are met.
Important Reminder the parent whose tax return is used can make
the election described under Parent’s Election 1) Your child was under age 14 on January 1,To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends. TheParent’s election to report child’s interest 2002.tax rate and other return information from thatand dividends. You may be able to elect to
parent’s return are used to compute the child’sinclude your child’s interest and dividends on 2) Your child is required to file a return for
tax as explained later under Tax for Childrenyour tax return. If you make this election, the 2001 unless you make this election.
Under Age 14 Who Have Investment Income ofchild does not have to file a return. See Parent’s 3) Your child had income only from interestMore Than $1,500.Election To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- and dividends (including capital gain distri-dends, later. butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
Parents are married.If the child’s parents file dends).
separate returns, use the return of the parent4) The dividend and interest income was lesswith the greater taxable income. than $7,500.
Introduction Parents not living together.If the child’s 5) No estimated tax payment was made forparents are married to each other but not livingThis chapter discusses two special tax rules that 2001 and no 2000 overpayment was ap-together, and the parent with whom the childapply to certain investment income of a child plied to 2001 under your child’s name andlives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar-under age 14. social security number.ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If the
custodial parent is not considered unmarried,6) No federal income tax was taken out of1) If the child’s interest, dividends, and otheruse the return of the parent with the greateryour child’s income under the backup with-investment income total more than $1,500,taxable income. holding rules.part of that income may be taxed at the
For an explanation of when a married personparent’s tax rate instead of the child’s tax 7) You are the parent whose return must be
living apart from his or her spouse is consideredrate. (See Tax for Children Under Age 14 used when applying the special tax rules
unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2.Who Have Investment Income of More for children under age 14. (See Which
Than $1,500, later.) Parent’s Return To Use, earlier.)
2) The child’s parent may be able to chooseParents are divorced.If the child’s parents These conditions are also shown in Figure
to include the child’s interest and dividend are divorced or legally separated, and the parent32–A.
Page 210 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 213 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Effect of Making the
Election
The federal income tax on your child’s income
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-
tion rather than file a return for the child.
Rates may be higher.If you use Form 8814,
the child’s income may be taxed at a higher rate
on your return than it would be on the child’s own
return.
Deductions you cannot take.By making the
Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the
following deductions the child would be entitled
to on his or her return. 
1) The higher standard deduction for a blind
child.
2) The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child’s savings.
3) Itemized deductions (such as your child’s
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits.If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
1) Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
2) Deduction for student loan interest.
3) Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
4) Total itemized deductions.
5) Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
6) Child tax credit.
7) Education tax credits.
8) Earned income credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2001 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2002, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
5 for more information.
Figuring Child’s Income
Use Part I of Form 8814 to figure your child’s
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,500 is added to
your income. This amount is shown on line 6 of
Form 8814. Include this amount on line 21 of
Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. Write “Form 8814”
Figure 32–A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 14 on
January 1, 2002?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
in 2001 if you do not make this election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child ’s income less than
$7,500?
/H17074
Yes
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2001?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of
tax on his or her 2000 return applied to
the 2001 estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child ’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
in the space next to line 21. If you file more than
one Form 8814, include the total amounts from
How to make the election.Make the election election for one or more children and not forline 6 of all your Forms 8814 on line 21.
by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040 or others.
Form 1040NR. (If you make this election, you Capital gain distributions.If your child’s divi-
cannot file Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) At- dend income included any capital gain distribu-
tach a separate Form 8814 for each child for tions, see Capital gain distributions under
whom you make the election. You can make the Figuring Child’s Income in Publication 929.
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 211

Page 214 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.
Tax for Children Under
Age 14 Who Have
Investment Income of
More Than $1,500
Part of a child’s 2001 investment income may be
subject to tax at the parent’s tax rate if:
1) The child was under age 14 on January 1,
2002,
2) The child’s investment income was more
than $1,500, and
3) The child is required to file a return for
2001.
These conditions are also shown in Figure
32–B .
If the parent does not or cannot choose to
include the child’s income on the parent’s return,
use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach
the completed form to the child’s Form 1040,
Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
The following discussions explain the paren-
tal information needed for Form 8615 and the
steps to follow in figuring the child’s tax. Form
8615 is illustrated later.
Providing Parental
Figure 32–B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child under age 14 on January 1, 2002?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2001?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child ’s investment income more than $1,500?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child ’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child ’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child ’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Information
then Philip’s name and social security number.Figuring Additional Tax (Form 8615, lines A–C)She enters Philip’s taxable interest income,
$3,200, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exemptUse Part II of Form 8814 to figure the tax on the On lines A and B of Form 8615, enter theinterest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.$1,500 of your child’s interest and dividends that parent’s name and social security number. (IfLinda enters Philip’s ordinary dividends, $300,you do not include in your income. This tax is the parents filed a joint return, enter the nameon line 2. Philip did not have any capital gainadded to the tax figured on your income. and social security number listed first on the jointdistributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.This additional tax is the smaller of: return.) On line C, check the box for the parent’sLinda adds lines 1a and 2 and enters thefiling status.result, $3,500, on line 4. From that amount she1) 10% × (your child’s gross income − $750), See Which Parent’s Return To Use at thesubtracts the $1,500 base amount shown on lineor beginning of this chapter for information on5 and enters the result, $2,000, on line 6. This is
which parent’s return information must be used2) $75. the part of Philip’s income that Linda must add to
on Form 8615.her income.Include the amount from line 9 of all yourLinda includes the $2,000 in the total on lineForms 8814 in the total on line 40, Form 1040, or Parent with different tax year.If the parent21 of her Form 1040 and in the space next toline 39, Form 1040NR. Check box a on Form and the child do not have the same tax year,that line prints “Form 8814 – $2,000.” Adding1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR, line 39. complete Form 8615 using the information onthat amount to her income increases each of thethe parent’s return for the tax year that ends inamounts on lines 22, 33, 34, 37, and 39 of herthe child’s tax year.Illustrated Example Form 1040 by $2,000. Linda is not claiming any
deductions or credits that are affected by theParent’s return information not knownDavid and Linda Parks are married and will fileincrease to her income. Therefore, her revisedtimely. If the information needed from theseparate tax returns for 2001. Their only child,taxable income on line 39 is $61,300 ($59,300 +parent’s return is not known by the time thePhilip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099–INT $2,000). child’s return is due (usually April 15), you canshowing $3,200 taxable interest income and aOn Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $750file the return using estimates.Form 1099 –DIV showing $300 ordinary divi-shown on line 7 from the $3,500 on line 4 andYou can use any reasonable estimate. Thisdends. His parents decide to include that in-enters the result, $2,750, on line 8. Because thatincludes using information from last year’s re-come on one of their returns so they will notamount is not less than $750, she checks theturn. If you use an estimated amount on Formhave to file a return for Philip. “No ” box and enters $75 on line 9. This is the tax8615, write “Estimated” on the line next to theFirst, David and Linda each figure their taxa-on the first $1,500 of Philip’s income, which amount.ble income (Form 1040, line 39) without regardLinda did not have to add to her income. SheWhen you get the correct information, file anto Philip’s income. David’s taxable income ismust add this additional tax to the tax figured on
amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S.$41,700 and Linda’s is $59,300. Because herher revised taxable income.
Individual Income Tax Return.taxable income is greater, Linda can elect toThe tax on her $61,300 revised taxable in-
include Philip’s income on her return. Instead of using estimated information, youcome is $14,240. She adds $75, and enters the
may want to request an extension of time to file.On Form 8814 (see illustrated form), Linda $14,315 total on line 40 of Form 1040, and
Extensions are discussed in chapter 1.enters her name and social security number, checks box a.
Page 212 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 215 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Linda P arks
Philip P arks
1 1 1 00 1 1 1 1
000 00 0000
3,200
300
3,500
2,000
2,750
75
OMB No. 1545-1128Parents’ Election To Report
Child’s Interest and Dividends
Form 8814
/H17075See instructions below and on back.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 40/H17075Attach to parents’ Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
How To Make the Election. To make the
election, complete and attach Form(s) 8814
to your tax return and file your return by
the due date (including extensions). A
separate Form 8814 must be filed for each
child whose income you choose to report.
● Had no estimated tax payments for 2001
(including any overpayment of tax from his
or her 2000 return applied to 2001
estimated tax).
General Instructions
Purpose of Form. Use this form if you
elect to report your child ’s income on your
return. If you do, your child will not have to
file a return. You can make this election if
your child meets all of the following
conditions.
● Had no Federal income tax withheld
from his or her income.
● Was under age 14 on January 1, 2002.
You must also qualify. See Parents Who
Qualify To Make the Election below.
● Had income only from interest and
dividends, including Alaska Permanent
Fund dividends.
● Had gross income for 2001 that was less
than $7,500.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on your return
Child’s social security numberChild’s name (first, initial, and last)
If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here /H17075
Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return
Enter your child ’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions
1a
1a
b Enter your child ’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this
amount on line 1a 1b
2 Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions
Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions
as a nominee, see the instructions
Add lines 1a, 2, and 3. If the total is $1,500 or less, skip lines 5 and 6 and go to line 7. If the
total is $7,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to report
the income
3
1,500 00
4
Base amount
4
5
Subtract line 5 from line 4. If you checked the box on line C above or if you entered an amount
on line 3, see the instructions. Also, include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or
Form 1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount.
Go to line 7 below
/H170756
Tax on the First $1,500 of Child ’s Interest and Dividends
750 00Amount not taxed
9
77
Subtract line 7 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0-
No. Enter $75 here and see the Note below.
Tax. Is the amount on line 8 less than $750?
8 8
Yes. Multiply line 8 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below.
Note: If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 9 in the tax you enter
on Form 1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR, line 39. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 40, or Form 1040NR, line 39.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Form 8814 (2001)Cat. No. 10750J
/H20854
A B
C
● Is required to file a 2001 return.
(99)
3
6
2
5
Part I
Part II
9
Parents Who Qualify To Make the
Election. You qualify to make this election
if you file Form 1040 or Form 1040NR and
any of the following apply.
● You are filing a joint return for 2001 with
the child’s other parent.
● You were unmarried, treated as
unmarried for Federal income tax
purposes, or separated from the child ’s
other parent by a divorce or separate
maintenance decree. You must have had
custody of your child for most of the year
(you were the custodial parent). If you were
the custodial parent and you remarried,
you may make the election on a joint
return with your new spouse. But if you
and your new spouse do not file a joint
return, you qualify to make the election
only if you had higher taxable income than
your new spouse.
Caution: The Federal income tax on your child ’s income, including capital gain distributions, may be less if you file a separate tax
return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax benefits that your child coul d take
on his or her own return. For details, see Tax Benefits You May Not Take on the back.
● You and the child ’s other parent were
married to each other but file separate
returns for 2001 and you had the higher
taxable income.
(continued)
2001
/H12011
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 213

Page 216 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cause they are pay received for work actuallyWhen figuring the tentative tax, do notStep 1. Figuring the refigure any of the exclusions, deductions, ordone. Her tax-exempt interest is not included
Child’s credits on the parent’s return because of thebecause it is nontaxable.
child’s net investment income. For example, doNet Investment Income Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary ofnot refigure the medical expense deduction.a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-(Form 8615, Part I)  Figure the tentative tax on lines 6 through 13dends, capital gains, and other investment in-of Form 8615.come from the trust are investment income toThe first step in figuring a child’s tax using Form
the child.8615 is to figure the child’s net investment in- Note. If the child has any capital gains or
come. To do that, use Part I of Form 8615. losses, get Publication 929 for help in complet-
Line 2 (deductions).If the child does noting Part II of Form 8615.
Line 1 (investment income).If the child haditemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040
You may be able to skip lines 7 throughno earned income, enter on this line the ad-or Form 1040NR), enter $1,500 on line 2.
16 of Form 8615. See the Form 8615justed gross income shown on the child’s return. If the child does itemize deductions, enter oninstructions for line 6 for details.Adjusted gross income is shown on line 33 of
TIP
line 2 the larger of:
Form 1040, line 19 of Form 1040A, or line 33 of
Form 1040NR. Form 1040EZ cannot be used if1) $750 plus the child’s itemized deductions Line 7 (net investment income of other chil-
Form 8615 must be filed. that are directly connected with the pro-dren). If the tax return information of the par-
duction of investment income, orIf the child had earned income, figure the ent is also used on any other child’s Form 8615,
amount to enter on line 1 of Form 8615 by using enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line2) $1,500.the worksheet in the instructions for the form. 5 of all the other children’s Forms 8615. Do not
However, if the child has excluded any for- include the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615Directly connected.Itemized deductionseign earned income or deducted either a loss being completed.are directly connected with the production offrom self-employment or a net operating lossinvestment income if they are for expenses paidfrom another year, use the Alternate Worksheet Example. Paul and Jane Persimmon haveto produce or collect taxable income or to man-for Line 1 of Form 8615 in Publication 929 to three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, whoage, conserve, or maintain property held forfigure the amount to enter on line 1 of Form must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. Theproducing income. These expenses include8615. children’s net investment income amounts oncustodian fees and service charges, serviceline 5 of their Forms 8615 are:fees to collect taxable interest and dividends,Investment income defined. Investment
and certain investment counsel fees.income is generally all income other than sala- • Sharon —  $800
ries, wages, and other amounts received as payThese expenses are added to certain other• Jerry —  $600for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-miscellaneous deductions on Schedule A (Form
est, dividends, capital gains, the taxable part of • Mike —  $1,0001040). Only the amount greater than 2% of the
social security and pension payments, and cer-child’s adjusted gross income can be deducted.
Line 7 of Sharon’s Form 8615 will showtain distributions from trusts. Investment incomeSee chapter 30 for more information.
$1,600 ($600 + $1,000), the total of the amountsincludes amounts produced by assets the child
on line 5 of Jerry’s and Mike’s Forms 8615.obtained with earned income (such as interestExample 1. Roger, age 12, has investment
Line 7 of Jerry’s Form 8615 will show $1,800on a savings account into which the child depos-income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust-
($800 + $1,000).ited wages). ments to income, and itemized deductions of
Line 7 of Mike’s Form 8615 will show $1,400$300 (net of the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-incomeNontaxable income. For this purpose, in- ($800 + $600).limit) that are directly connected with his invest-vestment income includes only amounts that thement income. His adjusted gross income is Other children’s information not available.child must include in total income. Nontaxable$8,000, which is entered on line 1. Line 2 isIf the net investment income of the other childreninvestment income, such as tax-exempt interest$1,500 because that is more than the sum ofis not available when the return is due, either fileand the nontaxable part of social security and$750 and his directly-connected itemized de-the return using estimates or get an extension ofpension payments, is not included. ductions of $300. time to file. See Parent’s return information notIncome from property received as a gift. known timely, earlier.A child’s investment income includes all incomeExample 2. Eleanor, 8, has investment in-
produced by property belonging to the child.come of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen-Line 11 (tentative tax).Subtract line 10 from
This is true even if the property was transferredalty of $100. She has no other income. She hasline 9 and enter the result on this line. This is the
to the child regardless of when the property wasitemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2% oftentative tax.
transferred or purchased or who transferred it.adjusted gross income limit) that are directlyIf line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and
connected with the production of her investmentA child’s investment income includes income enter the amount from line 11 on line 13.
income. Her adjusted gross income, entered onproduced by property given as a gift to the child.
Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentativeline 1, is $15,900 ($16,000 − $100). Line 2 isThis includes gifts to the child from grandparents
tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divide$1,800. This is the larger of:or any other person and gifts made under the
the tentative tax shown on line 11 among theUniform Gift to Minors Act.
children according to each child’s share of the1) $750 plus the $1,050 of directly connected
total net investment income. This is done onitemized deductions, orExample. Amanda Black, age 13, received
lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 7the following income. 2) $1,500. to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on line
• Dividends —  $600 12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amount
on line 12a and enter the result as a decimal on• Wages —  $2,100 Step 2. Figuring line 12b.
• Taxable interest —  $1,200 Tentative Tax at
Example. In the earlier example under Line• Tax-exempt interest —  $100 the Parent’s Tax Rate 7 (net investment income of other children),
• Net capital gains —  $100. (Form 8615, Part II) Sharon’s Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.
Line 12a is $2,400, the total of lines 5 and 7The dividends were on stock given to her by herThe tentative tax is the difference between the($800 + $1,600). The decimal on line 12b isgrandparents. tax on the parent’s taxable income figured with.333, figured as follows and rounded to three
Amanda ’s investment income is $1,900. This the child’s net investment income (plus the netplaces.
is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter- investment income of any other child whose
est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Her Form 8615 includes the tax return information of
wages are earned (not investment) income be- that parent) and the tax figured without it.
$800
$2,400 .333=
Page 214 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 217 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
she has certain items given preferential treat- Sara’s taxable income, as shown on line 25Step 3. Figuring ment under the tax laws or certain adjustmentsof her Form 1040A, is $2,500. This is her total
the Child’s Tax to taxable income that total more than an ex-income ($4,250) minus her standard deduction
emption amount. See Alternative Minimum Tax($1,750). Her standard deduction is limited to(Form 8615, Part III) in chapter 31. the amount of her earned income plus $250.
AMT is figured on Form 6251. For informa-John enters $2,500 on line 4.The final step in figuring a child’s tax using Form
tion on special limits that apply to a child who8615 is to determine the larger of: John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters thefiles Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax— In- smaller amount, $1,250, on line 5.1) The total of: dividuals, see Alternative Minimum Tax in Publi- John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is thecation 929. taxable income from line 39 of their joint Forma) The child’s share of the tentative tax
1040 return. Sara is an only child, so line 7 isbased on the parent’s tax rate, plus
Illustrated Example blank. He adds line 5 ($1,250), line 6 ($48,000),b) The tax on the child’s taxable income in and line 7 (blank), and enters $49,250 on line 8.excess of net investment income, fig-The following example includes a completed Using the column for married filing jointly inured at the child’s tax rate, or Form 8615. the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $49,250. HeJohn and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.enters the tax, $7,901 on line 9. He enters2) The tax on the child’s taxable income, fig-She is 13 and has $2,750 taxable interest and
$7,557 on line 10. This is the tax from line 40 ofured at the child’s tax rate. dividend income and $1,500 earned income.
John and Laura’s Form 1040. He enters $344 onShe does not itemize deductions and did notThis is the child’s tax. It is figured on lines 14 line 11 ($7,901 − $7,557).receive an advance payment of her 2001 taxesthrough 18 of Form 8615.
Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12aduring 2001. John and Laura file a joint return
Tax computation for certain depen-with John’s name and social security number and 12b and enters $344 on line 13.
dents. Generally, if the child can belisted first. They claim three exemptions, includ-John subtracts line 5 ($1,250) from line 4claimed as a dependent on someone ing an exemption for Sara, on their return.
CAUTION
!
($2,500) and enters the result, $1,250, on lineelse’s tax return, you can reduce any tax amountBecause Sara is under age 14 and has more14. Using the column for single filing status infigured using the 2001 Tax Table or Tax Ratethan $1,500 investment income, part of her in-the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,250 andSchedules (including any line 15 tax figured oncome may be subject to tax at her parents’ rate. reduces it as explained earlier. He enters thisany worksheet or schedule described in the fol-A completed Form 8615 must be attached to hertax, $126, on line 15. He adds lines 13 ($344)lowing paragraphs) by one-third of the taxreturn. and 15 ($126) and enters $470 on line 16.amount or $300, whichever is smaller. Sara’s father, John, fills out Sara’s return for Using the column for single filing status in theThis reduction does not apply to the follow-her. Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 ( line 4)ing dependents. John enters his name and social securityand reduces it as explained earlier. He entersnumber on Sara’s Form 8615 because his namethis tax, $251, on line 17.and number are listed first on the joint return he• A child who received (before any offsets) John compares lines 16 and 17 and entersand Laura are filing. He checks the box foran advance payment of their 2001 taxes. the larger amount, $470, on line 18 of Sara’smarried filing jointly.• A child who files Form 1040NR. Form 8615. He also enters that amount on lineHe enters Sara ’s investment income,
26 of Sara’s Form 1040A.$2,750, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc-
John also completes Schedule 1 (FormAlternative minimum tax. A child may be tions, so John enters $1,500 on line 2. He enters
1040A) for Sara.subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he or $1,250 ($2,750 − $1,500) on line 3.
Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor ChildrenPage 215

Page 218 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proof as of
October 31, 2001(subject to change)
Sara L. Brown
John J. Brown
1 1 7 00 1 1 1 1
007 00 0001
2,750
1,500
1,250
2,500
1,250
48,000
49,250
7,901
7,557
344
344
1,250
126
470
251
470
OMB No. 1545-0998Tax for Children Under Age 14
With Investment Income of More Than $1,500
Form 8615
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 33
/H17075Attach only to the child ’s Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
Child’s social security numberChild’s name shown on return
Parent’s social security numberParent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing.
Parent’s filing status (check one):
Child’s Net Investment Income
Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions)1 1
If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter
$1,500. If the child did itemize deductions, see instructions
2
2
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, do not complete the rest of this form but do attach
it to the child ’s return
3
3
4
Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 39; Form 1040A, line 25; or Form 1040NR,
line 38
4
Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero or less, do not complete the rest of this form but
do attach it to the child ’s return 
5
5
Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent
Enter the parent’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 39; Form 1040A, line 25; Form 1040EZ,
line 6; TeleFile Tax Record, line K; Form 1040NR, line 38; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero
or less, enter -0-
6
6
Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named
above. Do not include the amount from line 5 above
7
7
8
Add lines 5, 6, and 7. If the total is not more than $45,200, lines 9 through 16 may not have
to be completed (see instructions)
8
9
Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions).
If the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used, check here /H17075
9
10 Enter the parent ’s tax from Form 1040, line 40; Form 1040A, line 26, minus any alternative
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 11; TeleFile Tax Record, line K; Form 1040NR, line 39; or Form
1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814. If the Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) was used to figure the tax, check here
/H1707510
Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line
13 and go to Part III
11
11
12aAdd lines 5 and 712a
12b .Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal rounded to at least three placesb
Multiply line 11 by line 12b13 13
Child’s Tax— If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on lines 14 and 15 and go to line 16.
1414 Subtract line 5 from line 4
15
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child ’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used, check here /H17075
1616 Add lines 13 and 15
17
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child ’s filing status (see instructions). If
the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or Schedule D or J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax,
check here
/H17075
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child ’s Form 1040, line 40; Form 1040A,
line 26; or Form 1040NR, line 39 18
Form 8615 (2001)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 2 of the instructions.
A B
C
Single
Cat. No. 64113U
/H11003
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99) /H17075See separate instructions.
Before you begin: If the child, the parent, or any of the parent ’s other children under age 14 received capital gains (including
capital gain distributions) or farm income, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It explains
how to figure the tax for lines 9 and 15 using the Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 or Form
1040A instructions, or Schedule D or J (Form 1040).
2001
Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
Page 216 Chapter 32 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Minor Children

Page 219 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dependent Care Benefits under How To Figure unless an exception applies to you. (See
Joint Return Test, later.)the Credit, later.
7) You must identify the care provider on33. Useful Items your tax return. (See Provider Identification
Test, later.)You may want to see:
8) If you exclude dependent care benefitsChild and Publication provided by your employer, the amount
you exclude must be less than the dollar❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
limit for qualifying expenses (generally,and Filing InformationDependent Care
$2,400 if one qualifying person was cared❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care for or $4,800 if two or more qualifying per-ExpensesCredit sons were cared for). (See Reduced Dollar
Limit under How To Figure the Credit,❏ 926 Household Employer’s Tax Guide
later.)
Form (and Instructions)Important Reminders These tests are presented in Figure 33–A and
are also explained in detail in this chapter.❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Care
Limit on credit.For 2001, your credit can off- Expenses
set both your regular tax (after reduction by any Qualifying Person Test❏ Schedule 2 (Form 1040A)Child andforeign tax credit) and your alternative minimum Dependent Care Expenses fortax, if any. Previously, the credit could offset only Your child and dependent care expenses mustForm 1040A Filersyour regular tax. be for the care of one or more qualifying per-
❏ Schedule H (Form 1040)Household sons.Taxpayer identification number needed for Employment Taxes A qualifying person is:each qualifying person.You must include on
❏ W –7 Application for IRS Individualline 2 of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) 1) Your dependent who was under age 13
Taxpayer Identification Numberthe name and taxpayer identification number when the care was provided and for whom
(generally the social security number) of each you can claim an exemption,❏ W –10 Dependent Care Provider’squalifying person. See Taxpayer identification Identification and Certification 2) Your spouse who was physically or men-number under Qualifying Person Test, later.
tally not able to care for himself or herself,
You may have to pay employment taxes.If or
you pay someone to come to your home and 3) Your dependent who was physically orcare for your dependent or spouse, you may be mentally not able to care for himself orTests To Claima household employer who has to pay employ- herself and for whom you can claim anment taxes. Usually, you are not a household exemption (or could claim an exemptionthe Creditemployer if the person who cares for your de- except the person had $2,900 or more ofpendent or spouse does so at his or her home or gross income).To be able to claim the credit for child andplace of business. See Employment Taxes for
dependent care expenses, you must file FormHousehold Employers, later. If you are divorced or separated, see Child of
1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, and Divorced or Separated Parents, later, to deter-
meet all the following tests. mine which parent may treat the child as a quali-
fying person.
1) The care must be for one or more qualify-Introduction Physically or mentally not able to care foring persons who are identified on the formoneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, oryou use to claim the credit. (See QualifyingThis chapter discusses the credit for child and feed themselves because of physical or mentaldependent care expenses and covers the fol- Person Test.) problems are considered not able to care forlowing topics. 2) You (and your spouse if you are married)themselves. Also, persons who must have con-
• Tests you must meet to claim the credit. must keep up a home that you live in withstant attention to prevent them from injuring
the qualifying person or persons. (Seethemselves or others are considered not able to• How to figure the credit. Keeping Up a Home Test, later.) care for themselves.
• How to claim the credit. 3) You (and your spouse if you are married)Person qualifying for part of year.You de-
• Employment taxes you may have to pay must have earned income during the year. termine a person’s qualifying status each day.
as a household employer. For example, if the person for whom you pay(However, see Rule for student-spouse or
child and dependent care expenses no longerspouse not able to care for self under
You may be able to claim the credit if you pay qualifies on September 16, count only thoseEarned Income Test, later.)
someone to care for your dependent who is expenses through September 15. Also see Dol-4) You must pay child and dependent careunder age 13 or for your spouse or dependent lar Limit under How To Figure the Credit, later.expenses so you (and your spouse if youwho is not able to care for himself or herself. The Taxpayer identification number.You mustare married) can work or look for work.credit can be up to 30% of your expenses. To include on your return the name and taxpayer(See Work-Related Expense Test, later.)qualify, you must pay these expenses so you identification number (generally the social se-can work or look for work. 5) You must make payments for child and curity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the
dependent care to someone you (or yourThis credit should not be confused with correct information is not shown, the credit may
spouse) cannot claim as a dependent. Ifthe Child Tax Credit discussed in chap- be reduced or disallowed.
you make payments to your child, he orter 35.CAUTION
!
Individual taxpayer identification numbershe cannot be your dependent and must
(ITIN) for aliens.If your qualifying person is abe age 19 or older by the end of the year.Dependent care benefits. If you received nonresident or resident alien who does not have(See Payments to Relatives underany dependent care benefits from your em- and cannot get a social security number (SSN),Work-Related Expense Test, later.)ployer during the year, you may be able to ex- use that person ’s ITIN. To apply for an ITIN, file
6) Your filing status must be single, head ofclude from your income all or part of them. You Form W –7 with the IRS. The ITIN is entered
household, qualifying widow(er) with de-must complete Part III of Form 2441 or Schedule wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return.
pendent child, or married filing jointly. You2 (Form 1040A) before you can figure the An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle
must file a joint return if you are married,amount of your credit. See Employer-Provided the holder to social security benefits or change
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 217

Page 220 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33–A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
1 
keep up a home for you and that qualifying person or
persons?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you
2 
have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you
2 
to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single?
Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider ’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you exclude at least $2,400 of dependent
care benefits ($4,800 if two or more qualifying
persons)?
You CAN claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out
Form 2441 or Schedule 2
(Form 1040A).
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
3
/H17074
No
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
1
This includes your spouse if you were married.
2
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
3
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2000, except that you did not pay them until 2001, you may be able to claim t hose expenses in 2001.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
Page 218 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 221 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the holder’s employment or immigration status son, you are considered divorced or separated if in-kind quarters and subsistence, and military
under U.S. law. either of the following applies. pay earned in a combat zone.
Adoption taxpayer identification number Members of certain religious faiths op-1) You are divorced or separated under a de-
(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who posed to social security.Certain incomecree of divorce or separate maintenance
was placed in your home for adoption and for earned by persons who are members of certainor a written separation agreement.
whom you do not have an SSN, you must get an religious faiths that are opposed to participation
2) You lived apart from your spouse for all ofATIN for the child. File Form W–7A, Application in Social Security Act Programs and have an
the last 6 months of the year.for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending IRS-approved form that exempts certain income
U.S. Adoptions. from social security and Medicare taxes may not
be considered earned income for this purpose.
Keeping Up a Home Test See Earned Income Test in Publication 503.
Child of Divorced To claim the credit, you must keep up a home.Not earned income. Earned income does notor Separated Parents You and one or more qualifying persons mustinclude pensions or annuities, social security
live in the home. payments, workers’ compensation, interest, div-To be a qualifying person, your child usuallyYou are keeping up a home if you (and youridends, or unemployment compensation. It alsomust be your dependent for whom you can claimspouse if you are married) pay more than halfdoes not include scholarship or fellowshipan exemption. But an exception may apply if youthe cost of running it for the year. grants, except amounts paid to you (and re-are divorced or separated. Under the exception,
ported on Form W–2) for teaching, research, orif you are the custodial parent, you can treat yourHome. The home you keep up must be the other services.child as a qualifying person even if you cannotmain home for both you and the qualifying per-claim the child’s exemption. If you are the non-son. Your home can be the qualifying person’s Rule for student-spouse or spouse not ablecustodial parent, you cannot treat your child as amain home even if he or she does not live thereto care for self.Your spouse is treated asqualifying person even if you can claim theall year because of his or her: having earned income for any month that he orchild’s exemption. she is:This exception applies if all of the following1) Birth,
are true. 1) A full-time student, or2) Death, or
1) One or both parents had custody of the 2) Physically or mentally not able to care for3) Temporary absence due to:child for more than half of the year. himself or herself.
a) Sickness,2) One or both parents provided more than Figure the earned income of the nonworking
half of the child’s support for the year. b) School, spouse described under (1) or (2) above as
explained under Earned Income Limit, later.3) Either— c) Business, This rule applies to only one spouse for any
d) Vacation, one month. If, in the same month, both you anda) The custodial parent signed Form
your spouse do not work and are either full-time8332, Release of Claim to Exemption e) Military service, or students or physically or mentally not able tofor Child of Divorced or Separated Par-
f) Custody agreement. care for yourselves, only one of you can beents, or a similar statement, agreeing
treated as having earned income in that month.not to claim the child’s exemption for
the year, or Full-time student.You are a full-time stu-Costs of keeping up home. The costs of
dent if you are enrolled at and attend a school forb) The noncustodial parent provided atkeeping up a home normally include property
the number of hours or classes that the schoolleast $600 for the child’s support and taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges,
considers full time. You must have been a stu-can claim the child’s exemption under a home repairs, insurance on the home, and food
dent for some part of each of 5 calendar monthspre-1985 decree of divorce or separateeaten at home.
during the year. (The months need not be con-maintenance or written agreement. Costs not included.The costs of keepingsecutive.) If you attend school only at night, you
up a home do not include payments for clothing,are not a full-time student. However, as part ofFor purposes of 3(a), a similar statement in-education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-your full-time course of study, you may attendcludes a divorce decree or separation agree-surance, transportation, or mortgage principal. some night classes.ment that went into effect after 1984 that allowsThey also do not include the purchase, per-the noncustodial parent to claim the child’s ex- School. The term “school” includes elemen-manent improvement, or replacement of prop-emption without any conditions, such as pay- tary schools, junior and senior high schools,erty. For example, you cannot include the cost ofment of support. colleges, universities, and technical, trade, andreplacing a water heater. However, you can in-You can use Figure 33–B to see whether mechanical schools. It does not includeclude the cost of repairing a water heater.this exception applies to you. If it applies, only on-the-job training courses, correspondencethe custodial parent can treat the child as a schools, and night schools.qualifying person. If the exception does not ap-Earned Income Test
ply, follow the regular rules for a qualifying per-
Work-Relatedson under Qualifying Person Test, earlier. To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if you
are married) must have earned income duringExpense TestExample. You are divorced and have cus-the year.
tody of your 8-year-old child. You sign Form Child and dependent care expenses must beEarned income. Earned income includes8332 to allow your ex-spouse to take the exemp- work related to qualify for the credit. Expenseswages, salaries, tips, other employee compen-tion. You pay child care expenses so you can are considered work related only if both of thesation, and net earnings from self-employment.work. Your child is a qualifying person and you, following are true.A net loss from self-employment reducesthe custodial parent, can claim the credit for
• They allow you (and your spouse if youearned income. Earned income also includesthose expenses, even though your ex-spouse
are married) to work or look for work.strike benefits and any disability pay you reportclaims an exemption for the child.
as wages. • They are for a qualifying person’s care.Custodial parent.You are the custodial par-
Certain nontaxable earned income included.ent if, during the year, you have custody of your
It also includes nontaxable earned income suchchild longer than your child’s other parent has Working or Looking for Work
as parsonage allowances, meals and lodgingcustody.
furnished for the convenience of the employer, To be work related, your expenses must allow
Divorced or separated.For purposes of de-voluntary salary deferrals, military basicyou to work or look for work. If you are married,
termining whether your child is a qualifying per-quarters and subsistence allowances and generally both you and your spouse must work
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 219

Page 222 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33–B. Is a Child of Divorced or Separated Parents a Qualifying Person?
Start Here
/H17074
Is the child’s exemption claimed under a
multiple support agreement?
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you divorced or legally separated, or
did you live apart from your spouse the last 6
months of the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together have
custody of the child for more than half of the
year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you and the other parent together provide
more than half the child ’s support for the year?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Did you have custody of the child for more of
the year than the other parent?
No
No
/H17075
Do not use this chart. Determine whether
your child is a qualifying person using the
regular rules. (See Qualifying Person Test).
Yes
/H17075
Could you claim the child ’s exemption except
that you signed an agreement to let the other
parent claim it?
Could you claim the child ’s exemption except
that the other parent claims it under a
pre-1985 agreement?
This child is a qualifying person.
This child is not a qualifying
person.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No Yes
/H17076
/H17075
Can you claim the child ’s exemption?
Was the child capable of
caring for himself or herself?
Was the child under age 13
when the care was provided?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
No
/H17076
Yes
/H17076
/H17074
No Yes
Page 220 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 223 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-Example 2. You place your 10-year-old Joint Return Testing during any month he or she is a full-time child in a boarding school so you can work full
student or is physically or mentally not able to time. Only the part of the boarding school ex-Generally, married couples must file a joint re-care for himself or herself. pense that is for the care of your child is a turn to take the credit. However, if you are legallywork-related expense. You can count that partYour work can be for others or in your own separated or living apart from your spouse, youof the expense in figuring your credit if it can bebusiness or partnership. It can be either full time may be able to file a separate return and stillseparated from the cost of education. You can-or part time. take the credit.not count any part of the amount you pay theWork also includes actively looking for work.school for your child’s education. Legally separated.You are not consideredHowever, if you do not find a job and have no
married if you are legally separated from yourearned income for the year, you cannot take thisCare outside your home.You can count the
spouse under a decree of divorce or separatecredit. See Earned Income Test, earlier. cost of care provided outside your home if the
maintenance. You are eligible to take the creditcare is for your dependent under age 13 or anyWhether your expenses allow you to work or on a separate return.other qualifying person who regularly spends atlook for work depends on the facts. For example,
least 8 hours each day in your home.the cost of a sitter while you and your spouse go Married and living apart.You are not consid-out to eat is not normally a work-related ex-Dependent care center. You can count ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifpense. care provided outside your home by a depen-all the following apply.An expense is not considered work relateddent care center only if the center complies with
merely because you had it while you were work- 1) You file a separate return.all state and local regulations that apply to these
ing. The purpose of the expense must be tocenters. 2) Your home is the home of a qualifying per-enable you to work. A dependent care center is a place that pro-son for more than half the year.
vides care for more than six persons (other thanVolunteer work.  You are not gainfully em- 3) You pay more than half the cost of keepingpersons who live there) and receives a fee,ployed if you do unpaid volunteer work or volun- up your home for the year.payment, or grant for providing services for anyteer work for a nominal salary. of those persons, even if the center is not run for4) Your spouse does not live in your home for
profit. the last 6 months of the year.Work for part of year.If you work or actively
Camp. The cost of sending your child to anlook for work during only part of the period cov-
overnight camp is not considered a work-relatedered by the expenses, then you must figure your Death of spouse. If your spouse died during
expense.expenses for each day. For example, if you work the year and you do not remarry before the end
all year and pay care expenses of $200 a month of the year, you generally must file a joint returnTransportation.The cost of getting a qualify-($2,400 for the year), all the expenses are work to take the credit. If you do remarry before theing person from your home to the care locationrelated. However, if you work or look for work for end of the year, the credit can be claimed onand back, or from the care location to school andonly 2 months and 15 days during the year and your deceased spouse’s separate return.back, is not considered a work-related expense.pay expenses of $200 a month, your work-re-This includes the costs of bus, subway, taxi, orlated expenses are limited to $500 a month (21/2
private car. Also, if you pay the transportationProvidermonths × $200). cost for the care provider to come to your home,Identification Testyou cannot count this cost as a work-relatedPayments while you are out sick.Do not expense. You must identify all persons or organizationscount as work-related expenses amounts you
that provide care for your child or dependent.pay for child and dependent care while you areHousehold services. Expenses you pay for
Use Part I of Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Formoff work because of illness. These amounts arehousehold services meet the work-related ex-
1040A) to show the information.not paid to allow you to work. This applies even ifpense test if they are at least partly for the
you get sick pay and are still considered anwell-being and protection of a qualifying person.
Information needed.To identify the care pro-employee. Household services are ordinary and usual
vider, you must give the provider’s:services done in and around your home that are
necessary to run your home. They include the1) Name,services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-Care of a Qualifying Person
2) Address, andever, they do not include the services of a chauf-
To be work related, your expenses must be tofeur, bartender, or gardener. See Household 3) Taxpayer identification number.provide care for a qualifying person. You do notServices in Publication 503 for more informa-
have to choose the least expensive way of pro- If the care provider is an individual, the tax-tion.
viding the care. payer identification number is his or her socialIn this chapter, the term housekeeper refers
 Expenses are for the care of a qualifying security number or individual taxpayer identifi-to any household employee whose services in-
person only if their main purpose is the person’s cation number. If the care provider is an organi-clude the care of a qualifying person.
well-being and protection. zation, then it is the employer identificationTaxes paid on wages. The taxes you pay number (EIN).Expenses for household services qualify ifon wages for qualifying child and dependentYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi-part of the services is for the care of qualifyingcare services are work-related expenses. Seefication number if the care provider is one ofpersons. See Household services, later. Employment Taxes for Household Employers,certain tax-exempt organizations (such as alater. church or school). In this case, write “Tax-Ex-Expenses not for care.Expenses for care do
empt” in the space where the tax form calls fornot include amounts you pay for food, clothing,
the number.education, and entertainment. However, youPayments to Relatives If you cannot provide all of the information orcan include small amounts paid for these items if
if the information you provide is incorrect youthey are incident to and cannot be separatedYou can count work-related payments you makemust be able to show that you used due dili-from the cost of caring for the qualifying person.to relatives who are not your dependents, even ifgence (discussed later) in trying to furnish thethey live in your home. However, do not countEducation. Expenses to attend first grade necessary information.any amounts you pay to:or a higher grade are not expenses for care. Do
not use these expenses to figure your credit. Getting the information.You can use Form1) A dependent for whom you (or your
W –10 to request the required information fromspouse if you are married) can claim anExample 1. You take your 3-year-old child the care provider. If you do not use Form W–10,exemption, orto a nursery school that provides lunch and you can get the information from:
educational activities as a part of its preschool 2) Your child who was under age 19 at the
child-care service. You can count the total cost end of the year, even if he or she is not 1) A copy of the provider’s social security
when you figure the credit. your dependent. card,
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) A copy of the provider’s driver’s license (in them on your 2001 return, but you must figure it 2) The total amount of qualified expenses
a state where the license includes the so- separately. See Payments for previous year’s you incurred during the year,
cial security number), expenses under Amount of Credit in Publication 3) Your earned income,503.3) A copy of the provider’s completed Form 4) Your spouse’s earned income, orW –4 if he or she is your household em- If you had expenses in 2001 that you
5) $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately).ployee, did not pay until 2002, you cannot
count them when figuring your 2001
TIP
4) A copy of the statement furnished by yourcredit. You may be able to claim a credit for themStatement for employee. Your employeremployer if the provider is your employer’s on your 2002 return. must give you a Form W –2 (or similar state-dependent care plan, or
ment), showing in box 10 the total amount of5) A letter or invoice from the provider if itExpenses reimbursed. If a state social ser-dependent care benefits provided to you duringshows the information. vices agency pays you a nontaxable amount tothe year under a qualified plan. Your employer
reimburse you for some of your child and depen-will also include any dependent care benefitsYou should keep this information withdent care expenses, you cannot count the ex-over $5,000 in your wages shown in box 1 ofyour tax records. Do not send Formpenses that are reimbursed as work-relatedyour Form W–2.W –10 (or other document containingRECORDS
expenses. Forfeitures. Forfeitures are amountsthis information) to the Internal Revenue Ser-
credited to your dependent care benefit accountvice. Example. You paid work-related expenses(flexible spending account) and included in theof $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a stateamount shown in box 10 of your Form W–2, butDue diligence.If the care provider informationsocial services agency. You can use only not received because you did not incur the ex-you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit$1,000 to figure your credit. pense. When figuring your exclusion, subtractmay not be allowed. However, if you can show any forfeitures from the total dependent careMedical expenses. Some expenses for thethat you used due diligence in trying to supply benefits reported by your employer. To do this,care of qualifying persons who are not able tothe information, you can still claim the credit. enter the forfeited amount on line 11 of Formcare for themselves may qualify as work-relatedYou can show due diligence by getting and 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).expenses and also as medical expenses. Youkeeping the provider’s completed Form W–10
can use them either way, but you cannot use theor one of the other sources of information listed Forfeitures do not include amounts that
same expenses to claim both a credit and aearlier. Care providers can be penalized if they you expect to receive in the future.
medical expense deduction.do not provide this information to you or if they CAUTION
!
If you use these expenses to figure the creditprovide incorrect information.
and they are more than the earned income limitProvider refusal.If the provider refuses to Effect of exclusion.If you exclude dependentor the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addgive you their identifying information, you should care benefits from your income, the amount ofthe excess to your medical expenses. However,report whatever information you have (such as the excluded benefits:if you use your total expenses to figure yourthe name and address) on the form you use tomedical expense deduction, you cannot use anyclaim the credit. Write “See page 2” in the col- 1) Is not included in your work-related ex-part of them to figure your credit.umns calling for the information you do not have. penses, and
Amounts excluded from your incomeOn the bottom of page 2, explain that you re- 2) Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later.under your employer’s dependent carequested the information from the care provider,
benefits plan cannot be used to claimbut the provider did not give you the information.CAUTION
!
a medical expense deduction.This statement will show that you used due Earned Income Limitdiligence in trying to furnish the necessary infor-
mation. The amount of work-related expenses you use
to figure your credit cannot be more than:Employer-Provided Dependent
Care Benefits 1) Your earned income for the year if you are
single at the end of the year, orHow To Figure Dependent care benefits include:
2) The smaller of your or your spouse’s1) Amounts your employer pays directly tothe Credit earned income for the year if you are mar-either you or your care provider for the ried at the end of the year.care of your qualifying person while youYour credit is a percentage of your work-related
Earned income is defined under Earned In-work, andexpenses. Your expenses are subject to the
come Test, earlier.earned income limit and the dollar limit. The2) The fair market value of care in a day-care
percentage is based on your adjusted gross For purposes of item (2), use yourfacility provided or sponsored by your em-
income. spouse’s earned income for the entireployer.
year, even if you were married for only
TIP
Your salary may have been reduced to pay forpart of the year.Figuring Total these benefits. If you received benefits, they
should be shown on your W–2 form. See State-Work-Related Expenses Separated spouse. If you are legally sepa-ment for employee, later.
rated or married and living apart from yourTo figure the credit for 2001 work-related ex-
spouse (as described under Joint Return Test,Exclusion. If your employer provides depen-penses, count only those you paid by December
earlier), you are not considered married for pur-dent care benefits under a qualified plan, you31, 2001.
poses of the earned income limit. Use only yourmay be able to exclude these benefits from your
income in figuring the earned income limit.Expenses prepaid in an earlier year.If you income. Your employer can tell you whether
pay for services before they are provided, youyour benefit plan qualifies. If it does, you must
Surviving spouse.If your spouse died duringcan count the prepaid expenses only in the yearcomplete Part III of either Form 2441 or Sched-
the year and you file a joint return as a survivingthe care is received. Claim the expenses for theule 2 (Form 1040A) to claim the exclusion even if
spouse, you are not considered married for pur-later year as if they were actually paid in thatyou cannot take the credit. You cannot use Form
poses of the earned income limit. Use only yourlater year. 1040EZ.
income in figuring the earned income limit.The amount you can exclude is limited to the
Expenses not paid until the following year.smallest of:
Do not count 2000 expenses that you paid in Community property laws. You should dis-
2001 as work-related expenses for 2001. You 1) The total amount of dependent care bene- regard community property laws when you fig-
may be able to claim an additional credit for fits you received during the year, ure earned income for this credit.
Page 222 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 225 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Minus: Dependent care benefitsStudent-spouse or spouse not able to care
George excludes from income−1,000for self.Your spouse who is either a full-time Employment Taxes3) Reduced dollar limit onstudent or not able to care for himself or herself
expenses George can use foris treated as having earned income. His or her for Householdthe credit............... $1,400earned income for each month is considered to
be at least $200 if there is one qualifying person Employers
in your home, or at least $400 if there are two orAmount of Creditmore. If you pay someone to come to your home and
care for your dependent or spouse, you may beTo determine the amount of your credit, multiplySpouse works. If your spouse works during
a household employer. If you are a householdthat month, use the higher of $200 (or $400) oryour work-related expenses (after applying the
employer, you will need an employer identifica-his or her actual earned income for that month.earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-tion number (EIN) and you may have to payage. This percentage depends on your adjustedSpouse qualifies for part of month. If employment taxes. If the individuals who work ingross income shown on line 34 of Form 1040 oryour spouse is a full-time student or not able to your home are self-employed, you are not liableline 19 of Form 1040A. The following tablecare for himself or herself for only part of a for any of the taxes discussed in this section.
shows the percentage to use based on adjustedmonth, the full $200 (or $400) still applies for that Self-employed persons who are in business for
gross income.month. themselves are not household employees. Usu-
ally, you are not a household employer if theBoth spouses qualify. If, in the same IF your adjusted gross THEN the person who cares for your dependent or spousemonth, both you and your spouse are eitherincome is ......... percentage is... does so at his or her home or place of business.full-time students or not able to care for your- If you use a placement agency that exercisesOver But not overselves, only one spouse can be considered to control over what work is done and how it will behave this earned income of $200 (or $400) for$0 $10,000 30% done by a babysitter or companion who works inthat month. 10,000 12,000 29% your home, that person is not your employee.12,000 14,000 28% This control could include providing rules of con-14,000 16,000 27%Dollar Limit duct and appearance and requiring regular re-16,000 18,000 26% ports. In this case, you do not have to pay18,000 20,000 25%There is a dollar limit on the amount of your employment taxes. But, if an agency merely20,000 22,000 24%work-related expenses you can use to figure the gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from22,000 24,000 23%credit. This limit is $2,400 for one qualifying that list, the sitter may be your employee.24,000 26,000 22%person, or $4,800 for two or more qualifying If you have a household employee you may26,000 28,000 21%persons. be subject to:28,000 No limit 20%
1) Social security and Medicare taxes,Yearly limit.The dollar limit is a yearly limit.
The amount of the dollar limit remains the same 2) Federal unemployment tax, and
no matter how long, during the year, you have a 3) Federal income tax withholding.qualifying person in your household. Use theHow To Claim
$2,400 limit if you paid work-related expenses Social security and Medicare taxes are gener-
for the care of one qualifying person at any time ally withheld from the employee’s pay andthe Creditduring the year. Use $4,800 if you paid work-re- matched by the employer. Federal unemploy-
lated expenses for the care of more than one ment (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlyTo claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 orqualifying person at any time during the year. and provides for payments of unemploymentForm 1040A. You cannot claim the credit oncompensation to workers who have lost theirForm 1040EZ. jobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the
employee’s total pay if the employee asks you toReduced Dollar Limit
do so and you agree.Form 1040. You must complete Form 2441
If you received dependent care benefits from For more information on a householdand attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit
your employer that you exclude from your in- employer’s tax responsibilities, see Publicationon line 44 of your Form 1040. An example of acome, you must subtract that amount from the 926 and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-filled-in Form 2441 is at the end of this chapter.dollar limit that applies to you. Your reduced tions.
dollar limit is figured on lines 20 through 24 of
Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 2Form 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A). See State employment taxes.You may also have
Employer-Provided Dependent Care Benefits,(Form 1040A) and attach it to your Form 1040A.to pay state unemployment tax. Contact your
earlier, for information on excluding these bene-Enter the credit on line 27 of your Form 1040A.state unemployment tax office for information.
fits. You should also find out whether you need to
pay or collect other state employment taxes orLimit on credit.The amount of credit you canExample. George is a widower with one carry workers’ compensation insurance. A list ofclaim is limited to the amount of your regular taxchild and earns $24,000 a year. He pays state employment tax agencies, including ad-(after reduction by any allowable foreign taxwork-related expenses of $1,900 for the care of dresses and phone numbers, is in Publication
credit) plus your alternative minimum tax, if any.his 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim the 926.
For more information, see the instructions forcredit for child and dependent care expenses.
His employer pays an additional $1,000 under aForm 2441 or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A).
dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-Tax credit not refundable. You cannot getcluded from George’s income. Examplea refund for any part of the credit that is moreAlthough the dollar limit for his work-relatedthan this limit.expenses is $2,400 (one qualifying person), The following example shows how to figure the
Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-George figures his credit on only $1,400 of the credit for child and dependent care expenses for
ords of your work-related expenses.$1,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is two children when employer dependent care
Also, if your dependent or spouse isbecause his dollar limit is reduced as shownRECORDS
benefits are involved. The filled-in Form 2441 is
not able to care for himself or herself, your rec-next. shown at the end of this chapter.
ords should show both the nature and the length
George ’s Reduced Dollar Limit of the disability. Other records you should keepIllustrated example.Joan Thomas is di-
to support your claim for the credit are describedvorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She1) Maximum allowable expenses
earlier under Provider Identification Test.for one qualifying person..... $2,400 works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 223

Page 226 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Minus: Dependent care benefitsincome (AGI) is $29,000, and the entire amount A neighbor cares for Joan’s older child (Seth)
excluded from Joan’s income...... −3,000is earned income. after school, on holidays, and during the sum-
Reduced dollar limit............ $1,800Joan’s younger child (Susan) stays at her mer. She pays her neighbor $2,400 for this care.
Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400) oremployer’s on-site child-care center while she Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 as
dollar limit ($1,800)............ $1,800works. The benefits from this child-care center follows.
qualify to be excluded from her income. Her Percentage for AGI of $29,000..... x  . 2 0
Work-related expenses Joan paid . . . $2,400employer reports the value of this service as Amount of credit (20% of $1,800) $ 360
Dollar limit.................. $4,800$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown in box
10 of her Form W–2, but is not included in
taxable wages in box 1.
Page 224 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 227 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Joan Thomas 559 00 3436
P at Green
ACME Computers
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240
(See W-2)
240-00-3811 2,400
1,800
29,000
29,000
1,800
29,000
20
360
Seth
Susan
Thomas
Thomas
2,400559 00 1234
559 00 5678
OMB No. 1545-0068
Child and Dependent Care Expenses2441Form
/H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 21/H17075See separate instructions.
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care — You must complete this part. 
(If you need more space, use the bottom of page 2.)
(b) Address
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(d) Amount paid
(see instructions)
(c) Identifying number
(SSN or EIN)1 (a) Care provider’s
name
Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2
Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $2,400 for one qualifying
person or $4,800 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount
from line 24
Enter your earned income
3
3
If married filing a joint return, enter your spouse ’s earned income (if your spouse was a
student or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from
line 4
4 4
Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5
5
5
6
7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 347
/H11003
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
Decimal
amount is
If line 7 is:
But not
overOver
But not
overOver
.24$20,000— 22,000.30$0— 10,000
.2322,000— 24,000.2910,000— 12,000
.2224,000— 26,000.2812,000— 14,000
.2126,000— 28,000.2714,000— 16,000
.2028,000— No limit.2616,000— 18,000
.2518,000— 20,000
9
Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. Enter the result here and on Form 1040,
line 44. But if this amount is more than the amount on Form 1040, line 42, minus any
amount on line 43, or you paid 2000 expenses in 2001, see the instructions for the amount
to enter on line 44
9
Form 2441 (2001)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3 of the instructions.
Before you begin: You need to understand the following terms. See Definitions on page 1 of the instructions.
Cat. No. 11862M
Part I
Part II
Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
Did you receive
dependent care benefits? Yes
No
8
Complete only Part II below.
Complete Part III on the back next.
/H17075
/H17075
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. See the instructions for Form 1040, line 57.
.
(99)
Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a) Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b) Qualifying person’s social
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you
incurred and paid in 2001 for the
person listed in column (a)
8
6
● Dependent Care Benefits ● Qualifying Person(s) ● Qualified Expenses ● Earned Income
2001
Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 225

Page 228 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3,000
3,000
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
3,000
-0-
4,800
3,000
1,800
2,400
1,800
Page 2Form 2441 (2001)
Dependent Care Benefits
Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received for 2001. This amount
should be shown in box 10 of your W-2 form(s). Do not include amounts that were
reported to you as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2
Enter the amount forfeited, if any. See the instructions
Subtract line 11 from line 10
Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred
in 2001 for the care of the qualifying person(s)
11
13
14Enter the smaller of line 12 or 13
12
Enter your earned income
13
15
If married filing a joint return, enter your spouse’s earned
income (if your spouse was a student or was disabled,
see the instructions for line 5); if married filing a separate
return, see the instructions for the amount to enter;
all others, enter the amount from line 15
16
Enter the smallest of line 14, 15, or 16
14
17
Excluded benefits. Enter here the smaller of the following:
15
18
● The amount from line 17 or
● $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing a separate return
and you were required to enter your spouse ’s
earned income on line 16).
Taxable benefits. Subtract line 18 from line 12. Also, include this amount on Form 1040,
line 7. On the dotted line next to line 7, enter “DCB”
16
19
Part III
/H20854
To claim the child and dependent care
credit, complete lines 20 –24 below.
20
21
22
17
18
19
20 Enter $2,400 ($4,800 if two or more qualifying persons)
Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit.
Exception. If you paid 2000 expenses in 2001, see the instructions for line 9
Enter the smaller of line 22 or 23. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this
form and complete lines 4 –9
Enter the amount from line 18
24
21
22
24
11
12
10
10
Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown
on line 18 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here
23
23
Form 2441 (2001)
Page 226 Chapter 33 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 229 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can take the credit only if you fileUnder Age 65
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot
If you are under age 65, you can qualify for thetake the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP
34. credit only if you are retired on permanent and
total disability. If you retired after January 1,
1977, you are retired on permanent and totalQualified Individual
disability if you were permanently and totally
Credit for the disabled when you retired.You are a qualified individual for this credit if you
Even if you do not retire formally, you areare a U.S. citizen or resident and either of the
considered retired on disability when you havefollowing applies.Elderly or the stopped working because of your disability.
1) You were age 65 or older at the end of
Permanent and total disability.You are per-Disabled 2001. manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-
2) You were under age 65 at the end of 2001gage in any substantial gainful activity because
and all three of the following statementsof your physical or mental condition. A physician
are true. must certify that the condition has lasted or canIntroduction
be expected to last continuously for 12 monthsIf you qualify, the law provides a number ofa) You retired on permanent and total dis-or more, or that the condition can be expected tocredits that can reduce the tax you owe for a ability (explained later). result in death. See Physician’s statement, later.year. One of these credits is the credit for theb) You received taxable disability incomeSubstantial gainful activity.Substantialelderly or the disabled.
for 2001. gainful activity is the performance of significantThis chapter explains:
duties over a reasonable period of time whilec) On January 1, 2001, you had not• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly working for pay or profit, or in work generallyreached mandatory retirement age (de-or the disabled, and done for pay or profit.fined later under Disability Income).
Full-time work (or part-time work done at• How to figure this credit.
your employer’s convenience) in a competitive
work situation for at least the minimum wageThe maximum credit available is $1,125. YouAge 65. You are considered to be age 65 onconclusively shows that you are able to engagemay be able to take this credit if you are:the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore,in substantial gainful activity.you are 65 at the end of the year if your 65th• Age 65 or older, or Substantial gainful activity is not work you dobirthday is on January 1 of the following year.to take care of yourself or your home. It is not• Retired on permanent and total disability. unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy or
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-U.S. Citizen or Resident grams, and similar activities. However, doingUseful Items
this kind of work may show that you are able toYou may want to see: You must be a U.S. citizen or resident (or beengage in substantial gainful activity.treated as a resident) to take the credit. Gener-The fact that you have not worked for somePublication ally, you cannot take the credit if you were atime is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that younonresident alien at any time during the tax year.cannot engage in substantial gainful activity.❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the
Disabled Sheltered employment. Certain work of-Exceptions. You may be able to take the
fered at qualified locations to physically or men-❏ 554 Older Americans’ Tax Guide credit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
tally impaired persons is considered shelteredried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of the❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax employment. These qualified locations are intax year and you and your spouse choose to
sheltered workshops, hospitals and similar insti-treat you as a U.S. resident. If you make thatForms (and Instructions) tutions, homebound programs, and Departmentchoice, both you and your spouse are taxed onof Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsored homes.❏ Schedule 3 (Form 1040A)Credit for theyour worldwide income. Compared to commercial employment, payElderly or the Disabled for Form If you were a nonresident alien at the begin-is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,1040A Filers ning of the year and a resident at the end of theone usually does not look for sheltered employ-year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen or❏ Schedule R (Form 1040)Credit for the ment if he or she can get other employment. The
resident at the end of the year, you may be ableElderly or the Disabled fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-
to choose to be treated as a U.S. resident for thement is not proof of that person’s ability to en-
entire year. In that case, you may be allowed togage in substantial gainful activity.
take the credit. For information on these
Physician’s statement. If you are under agechoices, see chapter 1 of Publication 519, U.S.
65, you must have your physician complete aTax Guide for Aliens.Can You Take statement certifying that you were permanently
and totally disabled on the date you retired. Youthe Credit? can use the statement in the instructions forMarried Persons
Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (FormYou can take the credit for the elderly or theGenerally, if you are married at the end of the tax1040A).disabled if you meet both of the following re-year, you and your spouse must file a joint returnYou do not have to file this statement withquirements. your Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you mustto take the credit. However, if you and your
keep it for your records.spouse did not live in the same household at any1) You are a qualified individual.
time during the tax year, you can file either jointVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af-2) Your income is not more than certain lim-or separate returns and still take the credit.fairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently andits. totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form
Head of household. You can file as head ofYou can use Figure 34–A and Figure 34–B as 21–0172, Certification of Permanent and Total
household and qualify to take the credit, even ifguides to see if you qualify. Disability, for the physician’s statement you are
your spouse lived with you during the first 6Use Figure 34–A first to see if you are a required to keep. VA Form 21 –0172 must be
months of the year, if you meet all the tests. Seequalified individual. If you are, go to Figure signed by a person authorized by the VA to do
Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests you34–B to make sure your income is not too high so. You can get this form from your local VA
to take the credit. must meet. regional office. 
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 227

Page 230 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 34–A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident?
1
Yes
Yes
No
/H17076
/H17074
Were you 65 or older at the end of the
year?
No
/H17074
Are you retired on permanent and total
disability?
Yes
/H17074
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
No
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be
able to take the credit
for the elderly or the
disabled unless your
income exceeds the
limits in Figure 34–B.
/H17076
/H17074
Yes
/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073/H17073
No
/H17076
No
1
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of th e tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident, answer “yes” to this question.
2
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 34–B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
Single, Head of household, or
Qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
Married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 34–A
$25,000
Married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 34–A
$20,000
Married filing a separate return and
you did not live with your spouse
at any time during the year
$12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 34–A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR your nontaxable social security
and other nontaxable pension(s)
is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 19, or Form 1040, line 34.
START HERE
Page 228 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 231 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Physician’s statement obtained in earlier(if you are filing Form 1040A). Next, fill out Part Enter these nontaxable payments on lines
year. If you got a physician’s statement in an 13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you areIII of either Schedule R or Schedule 3.
earlier year and, due to your continued disabled married filing a joint return, you must enter theThere are four steps in Part III to deter-condition, you were unable to engage in any combined amount of nontaxable payments bothmine the amount of your credit:substantial gainful activity during 2001, you may you and your spouse receive.
not need to get another physician’s statement Worksheets are provided in the Formfor 2001. For a detailed explanation of the condi-1) Determine your initial amount (lines 1040 or Form 1040A instructions totions you must meet, see the instructions for 10–12). help you determine if any part of your
TIP
Part II of Schedule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 social security benefits (or equivalent railroad2) Total any nontaxable social security(Form 1040A). If you meet the required condi- retirement benefits) is taxable.and certain other nontaxable pensionstions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Sched-
and disability benefits you received Include the following nontaxable paymentsule R (Form 1040) or Schedule 3 (Form 1040A).
(lines 13a, 13b, and 13c). in the amounts you enter on lines 13a and 13b.If you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of either
Schedule R or Schedule 3, print in the space3) Determine your excess adjusted gross • Nontaxable social security payments. Thisabove the box on line 2 in Part II, the first income ( lines 14–17). is the nontaxable part of the amount ofname(s) of the spouse(s) for whom the box is benefits shown in box 5 of Form4) Determine your credit (lines 18–20).checked. SSA –1099, which includes disability bene-
These steps are discussed in more detail next.fits, before deducting any amounts withheldDisability income.If you are under age 65, to pay premiums on supplementary Medi-you can qualify for the credit only if you have care insurance, and before any reductiontaxable disability income. Disability income mustStep 1. Determine Initial because of receipt of a benefit under work-meet both of the following requirements. ers’ compensation.Amount Do not include a lump-sum death benefit1) It must be paid under your employer’s ac-
payment you may receive as a survivingcident or health plan or pension plan.To figure the credit, you must first determine
spouse, or a surviving child’s insuranceyour initial amount. See Table 34–1.2) It must be included in your income as benefit payment you may receive as awages (or payments instead of wages) for guardian.Initial amounts for persons under age 65.Ifthe time you are absent from work be-
you are a qualified individual under age 65, your• Social security equivalent part of tier 1 rail-cause of permanent and total disability.
road retirement pension payments that isinitial amount cannot be more than your taxable
not taxed. This is the nontaxable part ofdisability income.Payments that are not disability income.
the amount of benefits shown in box 5 ofAny payment you receive from a plan that does
Form RRB –1099.not provide for disability retirement is not disabil-Step 2. Total Certainity income. Any lump-sum payment for accrued • Nontaxable pension or annuity payments orNontaxable Pensions andannual leave that you receive when you retire on disability benefits that are paid under a lawdisability is a salary payment and is not disability administered by the Department of Veter-Benefitsincome. ans Affairs (VA).
For purposes of the credit for the elderly orStep 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxableDo not include amounts received as a pen-the disabled, disability income does not includesocial security and certain other nontaxable pay-sion, annuity, or similar allowance for per-amounts you receive after you reach mandatoryments (listed below) you received during the sonal injuries or sickness resulting fromretirement age. Mandatory retirement age is year. active service in the armed forces of anythe age set by your employer at which you would
have had to retire, had you not become dis-Table 34–1. Initial Amountsabled.
IF your filing status is ... THEN enter on line 10
of Schedule R (FormIncome Limits
1040) or Schedule 3
(Form 1040A)...To determine if you can claim the credit, you
must consider two income limits. The first limit isSingle, head of household, or qualifying widow or widower withthe amount of your adjusted gross income dependent child and by the end of 2001, you were(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-
• 65 or older...................................... $5,000able social security and other nontaxable pen-
sions you received. The limits are shown in• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 ......... $5,000
Figure 34–B, earlier.
Married filing a joint return and by the end of 2001If both your AGI and nontaxable pensions
are less than the income limits, you may be able• both of you were 65 or older.......................... $7,500
to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit, next. • both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on permanent and
total disability
1 ..................................... $5,000If either your AGI or your nontaxable
pensions are equal to or more than the• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on permanent and
income limits, you cannot take the total disability2 ..................................... $7,500
CAUTION
!
credit. • one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under 65 and retired
on permanent and total disability3 ........................ $7,500
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under 65 and not
retired on permanent and total disability.................... $5,000
Figuring the Credit Married filing a separate return return and did not live with your
spouse at any time during the year and, by the end of 2001, you wereYou can figure the credit yourself (see the expla-
• 65 or older...................................... $3,750nation that follows) or the IRS will figure it for
you. See Credit Figured for You, later. • under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 ........ $3,750
Figuring the credit yourself.If you figure the1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.credit yourself, fill out the front of either Sched-3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.ule R (if you are filing Form 1040) or Schedule 3
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 229

Page 232 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Credit Limit Worksheet (Form 1040A)country or in the National Oceanic and At-Example. You are 66 years old and your
spouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. Youmospheric Administration or the Public
1)  Enter the amount from Form 1040A,file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjustedHealth Service, or as a disability annuity
line 26.....................gross income is $14,630. Together you receivedunder section 808 of the Foreign Service 2)  Enter the amount, if any from Form$3,200 from social security, which was nontax-Act of 1980. 1040A, line 27................able. You figure the credit as follows:• Pension or annuity payments or disability 3)  Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........
4)  Enter the credit you first figured onbenefits that are excluded from income1)  Initial amount................ $5,000 Schedule 3, line 20............under any provision of federal law other2)  Subtract the total of: 5) Credit. Enter the smaller of line 3 orthan the Internal Revenue Code. a) Nontaxable social security line 4 here and on Form 1040A, lineand other nontaxable pensions $3,200Do not include amounts that are a return of 28. If line 3 is the smaller amount,b) Excess adjusted grossyour cost of a pension or annuity. These also replace the amount on Scheduleincome [($14,630 − $10,000) ÷amounts do not reduce your initial amount. 3, line 20, with that amount.......2 ] ................... 2,315 5,515
3)  Balance (Not less than –0–) ..... –0–
You should be sure to take into ac-4) Credit..................... –0–
Credit Figured for Youcount all of the nontaxable amounts You cannot take the credit since your non-you receive. These amounts are veri-CAUTION
!
taxable social security (line 2a) plus your excessIf you choose to have the Internal Revenuefied by the IRS through information supplied byadjusted gross income (line 2b) is more thanService (IRS) figure the credit for you, read theother government agencies. your amount on line 1. following discussion for the form you will file
(Form 1040 or 1040A). If you want the IRS to
figure your tax, see chapter 31.
Step 3. Determine Excess Limit on Credit
Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure yourAdjusted Gross Income
credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries under TaxThe amount of credit you can claim may be
Figured by IRS in chapter 31.limited. Use one of the following worksheets (orYou also must reduce your initial amount by your
the worksheet in the instructions for Schedule 3,excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure yourForm 1040A, or Schedule R, Form 1040, which-cess adjusted gross income on lines 14 through credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Taxever applies) to determine the amount of credit17. Figured by IRS in chapter 31.you can claim if any of the following apply. You figure your excess adjusted gross in-
come as follows: 1) You file Form 1040A and the credit youExamplesfigured on line 20 of Schedule 3 is more1) Subtract from your adjusted gross incomethan the tax on Form 1040A, line 26. The following examples illustrate the credit for(line 34 of Form 1040 or line 19 of Form the elderly or the disabled. The initial amounts2) You file Form 1040 and the credit you fig-1040A) the amount shown for your filing are taken from Table 34–1, shown earlier.ured on line 20 of Schedule R is more thanstatus in the following list:
the amount on Form 1040, line 42 (regular
Example 1. James Davis is 58 years old,a) $7,500 if you are single, a head of tax plus any alternative minimum tax), mi-
single, and files Form 1040A. In 1998 he retiredhousehold, or a qualifying widow(er) nus any foreign tax credit on Form 1040,
on permanent and total disability, and he is stillwith a dependent child, line 43.
permanently and totally disabled. He got the
b) $10,000 if you are married filing a joint 3) You are claiming the credit for child andrequired physician’s statement in 1998, and kept
dependent care expenses on:return, or it with his records. His physician signed on line B
of the statement. This year James checks thec) $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa-a) Form 1040A, line 27, or box in Part II of Schedule 3. He does not need torate return and you and your spouse b) Form 1040, line 44. get another statement for 2001.did not live in the same household at He received the following income for theany time during the tax year. If (1), (2), and (3) above do not apply, you doyear:
not need to use a worksheet to figure a limit on2) Divide the result of (1) by 2. Nontaxable social security......... $2,500your credit. Claim the full amount of the credit
Interest (taxable)............... 1 0 0you figured on Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) or
Taxable disability pension......... 9,400Schedule R (Form 1040).Step 4. Determine Your
James ’ adjusted gross income is $9,500Credit Limit Worksheet (Form 1040)Credit ($9,400 + $100). He figures the credit on Sched-
ule 3 as follows:To determine if you can take the credit, you mustCredit limit Worksheet (Form 1040)
1) Enter the amount from Form 1040,add the amounts you figured in Step 2 and Step 1)  Initial amount............... $5,000line 42, minus any amount on Form3. 2)  Taxable disability pension....... $9,4001040, line 43................. 3)  Smaller of (1) or (2)........... $5,0002) Enter the amount, if any, from FormIF the total of Steps THEN ... 4)  Subtract the total of:1040, line 44.................2 and 3 is ... a) Nontaxable disability3) Subtract line 2 from line 1........ benefits (social security).... $2,500Equal to or more You cannot take the 4) Enter the credit you first figured on b) Excess adjusted grossthan the amount in credit. Schedule R, line 20............ incomeStep 1 5) Credit. Enter the smaller of line 3 or [($9,500 − $7,500) ÷ 2 ] ..... 1,000 3,500line 4 here and on Form 1040, line 45.Less than the You can take the 5) Balance (Not less than 0)....... $1,500If line 3 is the smaller amount, alsoamount in Step 1 credit. 6) Credit (15% of $1,500)......... $  2 2 5replace the amount on Schedule R,
line 20, with that amount......... His credit is $225. He enters $225 on line 28
of Form 1040A.Figuring the credit.If you can take the credit,
subtract the total of Step 2 and Step 3 from the Example 2. William White is 53. His wife
amount in Step 1 and multiply the result by 15%. Helen is 49. William had a stroke 3 years ago
This is your credit. and retired on permanent and total disability. He
In certain cases, the amount of your credit is still permanently and totally disabled because
may be limited. See Limit on Credit, later. of the stroke. In November of last year, Helen
Page 230 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 233 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
was injured in an accident at work and retired on Schedule R. Helen is not required to include the Schedule R and writes his first name in the
permanent and total disability. statement with her return, but she must keep it space above line 2.
William received nontaxable social security for her records. William and Helen use Schedule R to figure
disability benefits of $3,000 during the year and William got a physician’s statement for the their $135 credit for the elderly or the disabled.
a taxable disability pension of $6,000. Helen year he had the stroke. His doctor had signed on They attach Schedule R to their joint return and
earned $9,200 from her job and received a taxa- line B of that physician’s statement to certify that enter $135 on line 45 of Form 1040. See their
ble disability pension of $1,000. Their joint return William was permanently and totally disabled.filled-in Schedule R and Helen’s filled-in
on Form 1040 shows adjusted gross income of William has kept the physicians’s statement with physician’s statement on the next three pages.
$16,200 ($6,000 + $9,200 + $1,000). his records. He checks the box in Part II of
Helen got her doctor to complete the
physician’s statement in the instructions for
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 231

Page 234 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
William M. White and Helen A. White 220 00 3333
William
/H12011
/H12011
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled(Form 1040)
Attachment
Sequence No. 16/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule R (Form 1040).
Your social security number
You may be able to take this credit and reduce your tax if by the end of 2001:
● You were age 65 or older or
You filed a physician ’s statement for this disability for 1983 or an earlier year, or you filed or got a
statement for tax years after 1983 and your physician signed line B on the statement, and
If:
Due to your continued disabled condition, you were unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity
in 2001, check this box /H17075
● If you checked this box, you do not have to get another statement for 2001.
OMB No. 1545-0074Schedule R
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Name(s) shown on Form 1040
But you must also meet other tests. See page R-1.
In most cases, the IRS can figure the credit for you. See page R-1.
Check the Box for Your Filing Status and Age
Statement of Permanent and Total Disability (Complete only if you checked box 2, 4, 5, 6, or 9 above.)
1
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2001
2
If your filing status is:
You were 65 or older1 1
You were under 65 and you retired on permanent and total disability2 2
3 3Both spouses were 65 or older
4 Both spouses were under 65, but only one spouse retired on
permanent and total disability 4
5 Both spouses were under 65, and both retired on permanent and total
disability 5
Married filing a
joint return
6 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
retired on permanent and total disability 6
7 One spouse was 65 or older, and the other spouse was under 65 and
not retired on permanent and total disability 7
8 You were 65 or older and you lived apart from your spouse for all of
2001 8Married filing a
separate return
9 You were under 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2001 9
Did you check
box 1, 3, 7,
or 8?
Single,
Head of household, or 
Qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child
And by the end of 2001: Check only one box:
Cat. No. 11359K
Part I
Part II
● You were under age 65, you retired on permanent and total disability, and
you received taxable disability income.
Yes Skip Part II and complete Part III on back.
No Complete Parts II and III.
/H17075
/H17075
● If you did not check this box, have your physician complete the statement on page R-4. You must
keep the statement for your records.
(99)
2001
Page 232 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 235 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
7,500
7,000
7,000
3,000
3,000
16,200
10,000
6,200
3,100
6,100
900
135
Page 2Schedule R (Form 1040) 2001
Figure Your Credit
Box 1, 2, 4, or 7 $5,000
Enter:10
10
● Box 6 in Part I, add $5,000 to the taxable disability income
of the spouse who was under age 65. Enter the total.
11
If you completed line 11, enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11; all others, enter the
amount from line 10
12
12
Enter the following pensions, annuities, or disability income
that you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) received in
2001:
13
a Nontaxable part of social security benefits and
13aNontaxable part of railroad retirement benefits
treated as social security. See page R-3.
Nontaxable veterans’ pensions andb
13bAny other pension, annuity, or disability benefit that
is excluded from income under any other provision
of law. See page R-3.
Add lines 13a and 13b. (Even though these income items are
not taxable, they must be included here to figure your credit.)
If you did not receive any of the types of nontaxable income
listed on line 13a or 13b, enter -0- on line 13c
c
13c
14
Enter the amount from Form 1040,
line 34
14
15
15
Subtract line 15 from line 14. If zero or
less, enter -0-
16
16
17Enter one-half of line 1617
18Add lines 13c and 1718
Subtract line 18 from line 12. If zero or less, stop; you cannot take the credit. Otherwise,
go to line 20
19
19
20
20 Multiply line 19 by 15% (.15). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 45. But if
this amount is more than the amount on Form 1040, line 42, minus any amount on line
43, or you are filing Form 2441, see page R-3 for the amount of credit you may take
Did you check
box 2, 4, 5, 6,
or 9 in Part I?
Box 3, 5, or 6
$7,500
Box 8 or 9 $3,750
If you checked (in Part I):
Box 1 or 2 $7,500
Enter:
Box 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 $10,000
Box 8 or 9 $5,000
If you checked (in Part I):
Part III
/H20854
/H20854
/H20854
● Box 2, 4, or 9 in Part I, enter your taxable disability income.
● Box 5 in Part I, add your taxable disability income to your
spouse’s taxable disability income. Enter the total.
For more details on what to include on line 11, see page R-3.
11
If you checked:
/H20854
You must complete line 11.Yes
No Enter the amount from line 10
on line 12 and go to line 13.
/H17075
/H17075
/H20854
Schedule R (Form 1040) 2001
Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the DisabledPage 233

Page 236 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instructions for Physician’s Statement
If you retired after 1976, enter the date you retired in
the space provided on the statement below. 2. A physician determines that the disability has
lasted or can be expected to last continuously for at
least a year or can lead to death.
Taxpayer
Physician
A person is permanently and totally disabled if both of
the following apply:
1. He or she cannot engage in any substantial
gainful activity because of a physical or mental
condition, and
I certify that
was permanently and totally disabled on January 1, 1976, or January 1, 1977, OR was permanently and totally disabled
on the date he or she retired. If retired after 1976, enter the date retired. /H17075
Physician: Sign your name on either line A or B below.
Physician’s signature
Physician’s signature Date
Physician’s Statement (keep for your records)
Name of disabled person
The disability has lasted or can be expected
to last continuously for at least a year
Date
There is no reasonable probability that the
disabled condition will ever improve
Physician’s addressPhysician’s name
A
B
Helen A. White
November 30, 2001
2/7/2002
Juanita D. Doctor 1900 Green St., Hometown, MD 20000
Juanita D. Doctor
Page 234 Chapter 34 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 237 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3) Claimed as your dependent. But you may be able to take the addi-
tional child tax credit. See Additional4) Your: Child Tax Credit, later.
35. a) Son or daughter, 2) Your modified adjusted gross income
(AGI) is above the amount shown belowb) Stepson or stepdaughter,
for your filing status.
c) Adopted child,Child Tax Credit • Married filing jointly – $110,000.d) Grandchild, or
• Single, head of household, or qualifyinge) Eligible foster child.
widow(er) – $75,000.Important Changes
• Married filing separately – $55,000.Example. Your son turned 17 on DecemberChild tax credit increased.The maximum 30, 2001. He is a citizen of the United States andchild tax credit for each qualifying child is in- Modified AGI. For purposes of the child taxyou claimed him as a dependent on your return.creased to $600 for 2001. credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus theHe is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit
following amounts that may apply to you.because he was not under age 17 at the end ofAdditional child tax credit expanded.For
2001.tax years after 2000, the qualifications for claim- • Any amount excluded from income be-
ing the additional child tax credit have been cause of the exclusion of income fromAdopted child. A child placed with you by anexpanded to include qualifying individuals with Puerto Rico.authorized placement agency for legal adoptionfewer than three children. See Additional Childis an adopted child even if the adoption is not• Any amount on lines 43 and 48 of FormTax Credit, later, for more information. final. 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
Grandchild. A grandchild is any descendant • Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555–EZ,
of your son, daughter, or adopted child and Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
includes your great-grandchild,Introduction • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-great-great-grandchild, etc.
clusion of Income for Bona Fide ResidentsThe child tax credit is a credit that can reduceEligible foster child.An eligible foster child isof American Samoa.your tax. You may be able to take a credit onany child you cared for as your own and who is:your tax return of up to $600 for each of your
If you do not have any of the above, modifiedqualifying children. 1) Your brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis-AGI is the AGI amount on line 34 (Form 1040) orThe child tax credit is not the same as theter, or line 20 (Form 1040A).credit for child and dependent care expenses.
2) A descendent (such as a child) of yourFor information on the credit for child and depen-
brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsister, ordent care expenses, see chapter 33.
This chapter gives you information about the3) A child placed with you by an authorized
child tax credit. It explains: placement agency. Claiming the Credit
In addition, the child must have lived with you for• Who is a qualifying child. To claim the child tax credit, you must file Formall of 2001. A child who was born or died in 20011040 or Form 1040A. You must provide the• How much is the credit. is considered to have lived with you for all ofname and identification number (usually a social2001 if your home was the child’s home for the• How do I claim the credit. security number) on your tax return for eachentire time he or she was alive.• Why should I check my tax withholding. qualifying child.
Kidnapped child.A kidnapped child is treatedAnswer the Questions in your form instruc-
as a qualifying child for the child tax credit if thetions for line 48 (Form 1040) or line 31 (FormIf you have no tax.Credits, such as the childchild is presumed by law enforcement authori-1040A) to find out which child tax credit work-tax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit forties to have been kidnapped by someone who issheet you can use to figure the credit.child and dependent care expenses, are used tonot a member of your family or the child’s family. If you answer “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 inreduce tax. If your tax on line 42 (Form 1040) orThis treatment applies for all years that the childyour Form 1040 instructions or question 1 or 2 inline 26 (Form 1040A) is zero, do not figure theremains kidnapped. However, the last year thisyour Form 1040A instructions, you must com-child tax credit because there is no tax to re-treatment can apply is the earlier of: plete the child tax credit worksheet in Publica-duce. However, you may qualify for the addi-
tion 972, Child Tax Credit. Otherwise, you cantional child tax credit on line 63 (Form 1040) or1) The year the child is determined to beuse the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in yourline 40 (Form 1040A). dead, or Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. (See the
2) The year the child would have reachedfilled-in example, later.)Useful Items age 17.You may want to see:
Example
Form (and Instructions)
Amy Brown files as head of household and has❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit two dependent children under age 17. The chil-Amount of Credit dren are qualifying children for purposes of the❏ W –4 Employee’s Withholding Allowance
child tax credit. Amy’s only income is her salaryCertificate The maximum credit you can claim is $600 for
of $23,500. She had $1,439 of social securityeach qualifying child.
and Medicare taxes withheld. Amy chooses to
itemize her deductions and files Form 1040. Her
Limits on the Credit AGI, shown on line 34 of her Form 1040, is
$23,500. This is her taxable earned income.Qualifying Child You must reduce your child tax credit if either (1)Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555–EZ, oror (2) applies.A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax 4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
credit must be all of the following. Rico. Her modified AGI is $23,500.1) The amount on line 42 (Form 1040) or line
Amy ’s tax, shown on line 42 of her Form26 (Form 1040A) is less than the credit. If1) Under age 17 at the end of 2001. 1040, is $1,226. She claims a $960 credit forthis amount is zero, you cannot take this
2) A citizen or resident of the United States. credit because there is no tax to reduce. child and dependent care expenses on line 44.
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 235

Page 238 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
She claims a $1,810 earned income credit onHow to claim the additional child tax credit.for Form 8812 to figure your taxable earned
line 61a. She has no other credits. income.To claim the additional child tax credit, follow the
 After answering the Questions in the Form steps below.
1040 instructions for line 48, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax1) Make sure you figured the amount, if any,credit of $266. Amy’s completed questions and Checking Yourof your child tax credit. See Claiming thechild tax credit worksheet are shown later. Credit, earlier.Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and Withholdingfinds that she may be able to take the additional2) Use Form 8812 to see if you can take the
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit additional child tax credit only if you an-The child tax credit decreases your tax. You canand Amy’s completed Form 8812, later. swered “Yes” on line 4 or line 5 of thecheck your tax withholding by using Worksheet
Child Tax Credit Worksheet. 7 in Publication 919, How Do I Adjust My Tax
Withholding.3) If you have an additional child tax credit onIf you are having too much tax withheld, andline 13 of Form 8812, carry it to line 63you prefer to have the money during the year,Additional Child Tax (Form 1040) or line 40 (Form 1040A). you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W–4 andCredit
giving it to your employer.
Taxable earned income. Generally, for pur-This credit is for certain individuals who get less
poses of the additional child tax credit, yourthan the full amount of the child tax credit. The
taxable earned income is the amount on line 7 ofadditional child tax credit may give you a refund
even if you do not owe any tax. Form 1040 or Form 1040A. See the instructions
Page 236 Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit

Page 239 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
/H12011
Who Must Use Pub. 972
1. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income)
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa)
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
2. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 34, more than the amount
shown below for your filing status?
● Married filing jointly – $110,000
● Single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er) –
$75,000
● Married filing separately – $55,000
3. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
● Adoption credit, Form 8839 (see the instructions for
Form 1040, line 49, on page 39)
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396 (see the instructions
for Form 1040, line 50, on page 39)
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit,
Form 8859
No. Use the
worksheet on
page 38 to figure
your child tax credit.
Yes. Y ou must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. Y ou will
also need the form(s)
listed above for any
credit(s) you are claiming.
/H17074
STOP
No. Continue Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
Questions Pub.
972
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 237

Page 240 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filled-in Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
2 1,200
1,226
960
266
266
/H12011
Form 1040— Line 48
/H12011
Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Line 48
1040
Yes. STOP
Keep for Y our Records
Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1, 2, or 3 on page 37.
Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1
2
Number of qualifying children: /H11003$600. Enter the result.
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 42.
Add the amounts from Form 1040:
Line 43
Line 45
Line 47 + Enter the total.
Are the amounts on lines 2 and 3 the same?
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax to reduce. However, see
the TIP below before completing the rest of your Form 1040.
No. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 4?
Yes. Enter the amount from line 4.
Also, see the TIP below .
No. Enter the amount from line 1.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 48.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 63, if you answered “Yes” on line 4
or line 5 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through line 62.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child
tax credit.
+
3
4
/H20854
5
/H17076
Line 44 +
Line 46 +
960
Page 238 Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit

Page 241 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
OMB No. 1545-1620
Additional Child Tax Credit8812Form
Complete and attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 47
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Form 8812 (2001)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form. Cat. No. 10644E
3
2
4
6
Enter the total of the withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s)
W -2, boxes 4 and 6. If married filing jointly , include your spouse’s amounts
with yours. If you worked for a railroad, see the instructions on back
Add lines 7 and 8
1
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
27 and 54, plus any uncollected social security and
Medicare or RRTA taxes included on line 58.
Enter -0-.
Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines
61a and 62.
Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line
39a, plus any excess social security and RRTA taxes
withheld that you entered to the left of line 41 (see the
instructions on back).
Enter the amount from line 1 of your Child T ax Credit W orksheet on page 38 of the Form 1040 instructions
or page 37 of the Form 1040A instructions. If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of the
worksheet on page 3 of the publication
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 48, or Form 1040A, line 31
Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit
8
9
/H20854
6
/H208541040A filers:
1040 filers:
1040 filers:
1040A filers:
1
2
13
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 63, or
Form 1040A, line 40.
/H17076
/H17076
8812
1040
1040A
. . . . . . . . . .
2001
3
Enter your total taxable earned income. See the instructions on back
5 Is the amount on line 4 more than $10,000?
No.
Ye s .Subtract $10,000 from the amount on line 4. Enter the result
Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6.
4
5
Multiply the amount on line 5 by 10% (.10) and enter the result
7
Next. Do you have three or more qualifying children?
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the
smaller of line 3 or line 6 on line 13.
Ye s .
7
8
9
10
10
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0-
11
12 12Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11 here
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13.
13 This is your additional child tax credit
Part III
Part I
Part II
All Filers
Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children
Your Additional Child Tax Credit
If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on
line 13. Otherwise, go to line 7.
Amy Brown 012 00 5678
/H12011
1,200
266
934
23,500
13,500
1,350
934
/H12011
Chapter 35 Child Tax Credit Page 239

Page 242 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36–1 compares the Hope and lifetimePrepaid expenses. If you paid qualified tui-
learning credits. If you are eligible to claim both tion and related expenses in 2001 for an aca-
credits based on the higher education expenses demic period that begins in the first three months
36. of one student, it will generally be to your benefit of 2002, you can use the prepaid amount in
to claim the Hope credit. figuring your credit.
For example, if you paid $2,000 in DecemberIf a student receives a tax-free with-2001 for qualified tuition for the winter 2002drawal from an education IRA in a par-Education semester beginning in January 2002, you canticular tax year, none of that student’sCAUTION
!
use that $2,000 in figuring your 2001 credit.expenses can be used as the basis of a higher
education credit for that tax year. However, thePayments with borrowed funds. You canCredits
student can waive the tax-free treatment. Seeclaim an education credit for qualified tuition and
Waiver of tax-free treatment under No double related expenses paid with the proceeds of a
benefit allowed. loan. You claim the credit in the year in which the
Introduction expenses are paid, not in the year in which the
loan is repaid.This chapter discusses the Hope credit and theRules That Apply tolifetime learning credit. It will: Expenses that do not qualify.Qualified tui-Both Credits tion and related expenses do not include the• Give you general information that applies
cost of:to both of the credits, The amount of each credit is determined by the
amount you pay for qualified tuition and related• Insurance,• Give you specific information about each
expenses for students and the amount of yourof the credits, • Medical expenses (including studentmodified adjusted gross income. Education health fees),• Help you choose which of the credits tocredits are subtracted from your tax but they areclaim, and nonrefundable. This means if the credits are• Room and board,
more than your tax, the excess is not refunded to• Show you how to figure the credit you • Transportation, oryou.choose.
• Similar personal, living or family expenses.If you are married filing separately you
cannot claim the higher education This is true even if the fee must be paid to theUseful Items credits. institution as a condition of enrollment or attend-CAUTION
!
You may want to see: ance.
Qualified tuition and related expenses gener-Publication What expenses qualify. The credits are ally do not include expenses that relate to any
based on qualified tuition and related expenses❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education course of instruction or other education that in-
you pay for yourself, your spouse, or a depen-volves sports, games, or hobbies, or any non-
dent for whom you claim an exemption on yourForm (and Instructions) credit course. However, if the course of
tax return. Generally the credits are allowed forinstruction or other education is part of the❏ 8863 Education Credits (Hope and qualified tuition and related expenses paid for anstudent’s degree program or, in the case of theLifetime Learning Credits) academic period beginning in the same year aslifetime learning credit, is taken by the student to
the year the payment is made (but see Prepaid acquire or improve job skills, these expenses
expenses, later). can qualify.
In general, qualified tuition and related ex-Dependent for whom you claim anpenses are tuition and fees required for enroll-exemption. You claim an exemption for a de-Education Tax Credits ment or attendance at an eligible educationalpendent if you list his or her name on line 6c,institution. Student-activity fees and fees forForm 1040 (or Form 1040A). (See chapter 3 forThe following two tax credits are available tocourse-related books, supplies, and equipmentdetails on exemptions for dependents.)persons who pay higher education costs. are included in qualified tuition and related ex-
penses only if the fees must be paid to the• The Hope credit. Eligible educational institution.An eligibleinstitution as a condition of enrollment or at-educational institution is any college, university,• The lifetime learning credit. tendance. vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-Table 36–1. Comparison of Education Credits dent aid program administered by the
Department of Education. It includes virtually all
Hope Scholarship Credit Lifetime Learning Credit accredited, public, nonprofit, and proprietary
(privately owned profit-making) postsecondary
Up to $1,500 credit per eligible Up to $1,000 credit per return institutions. The educational institution shouldstudent be able to tell you if it is an eligible educational
institution.Available ONLY  for the first two years Available for all years of postsecondary
of postsecondary education education Academic period. An academic period in-
cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherAvailable ONLY  for 2 years per eligible Available for an unlimited number ofperiod of study (such as a summer school ses-student years sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-
tional institution.Student must be pursuing a degree or Student does not need to be pursuing a
other recognized educational credential degree or other recognized educational
No double benefit allowed. You cannot:credential
• Deduct higher education expenses onStudent must be enrolled at least half Available for one or more courses your income tax return and also claim atime for at least one academic period Hope credit based on those same ex-during the year penses,
No felony drug conviction on student’s Felony drug conviction rule does not • Claim a Hope credit and a lifetime learning
record apply credit based on the same qualified educa-
tion expenses, or
Page 240 Chapter 36 Education Credits

Page 243 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Claim a credit based on expenses paid either you or your dependent, but not both ofModified adjusted gross income.For most
with tax-free scholarship, grant, or you, can claim a credit for that dependent’s taxpayers, modified adjusted gross income
employer-provided educational assis- expenses for that year. If you claim an exemp- (MAGI) will be their adjusted gross income (AGI)
tance. See Adjustments to qualified ex-tion for your dependent on your tax return, only as figured on their federal income tax return.
penses, next. you can claim a credit. If you do not claim an On Form 1040, AGI is line 34. On Form
exemption for your dependent on your tax re-1040A, AGI is line 19.
Adjustments to qualified expenses.If you turn, only your dependent can claim a credit.However, you must file using Form 1040 and
pay higher education expenses with certain make adjustments to your AGI if you excludedExpenses paid by dependent.If you claimtax-free funds, you cannot claim a credit for income earned abroad or from certain U.S. terri-an exemption on your tax return for an eligiblethose amounts. You must reduce the qualified tories or possessions.student who is your dependent, treat any ex-expenses by the amount of any tax-free educa- If this applies to you, increase your AGI bypenses paid by the student as if you had paidtional assistance you received. Tax-free educa- the following amounts you excluded from yourthem. Include these expenses when figuring thetional assistance could include: income.amount of your Hope or lifetime learning credit.
• Scholarships, Qualified tuition and related expenses1) Foreign earned income of U.S. citizens or• Pell grants, paid directly to an eligible educationalresidents living abroad.institution for your dependent under a
TIP
• Employer-provided educational assis- 2) Housing costs of U.S. citizens or residentscourt-approved divorce decree are treated astance, living abroad.paid by your dependent.
• Veterans’ educational assistance, and 3) Income from sources within Puerto Rico,Expenses paid by others. If someone Guam, American Samoa, or the Northern• Any other nontaxable payments (other other than you, your spouse, or your dependentMariana Islands.than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-(such as a relative or former spouse) makes aceived for education expenses. At present, no implementation agreementpayment directly to an eligible educational insti-
has been signed with Guam or the Northerntution to pay for an eligible student’s qualifiedDo not reduce the qualified expenses by Marianna Islands to allow exclusion of incometuition and related expenses, the student isamounts paid with the student’s: from those sources. Until an implementationtreated as receiving the payment from the other
agreement is signed, there is no exclusion from• Earnings, person. The student is treated as paying the
these sources which must be added to your AGIqualified tuition and related expenses to the in-• Loans, to determine MAGI.stitution. If you claim an exemption on your tax
• Gifts, return for the student, you are considered to
have paid the expenses. Hope Credit• Inheritances, and
• Personal savings. Example. Ms. Allen makes a payment di-You may be able to claim a Hope credit of up to
rectly to an eligible educational institution in$1,500 for qualified tuition and related expenses
Also, do not reduce the qualified expenses by2001 for her grandson Todd’s qualified tuitionpaid for each eligible student.
any scholarship reported as income on theand related expenses. For purposes of claiming
student’s return or any scholarship which, by itsan education credit, Todd is treated as receivingEligible student for the Hope credit.For pur-
terms, cannot be applied to qualified tuition andthe money from Ms. Allen and, in turn, paying hisposes of the Hope credit an eligible student is a
related expenses. qualified tuition and related expenses himself.student who meets all of the following require-
If Todd’s exemption is not claimed on ments.Waiver of tax-free treatment.The desig- anyone’s return, he can use the payment tonated beneficiary of a Coverdell ESA (formerly 1) Did not have expenses that were used toclaim an education credit.known as an education IRA) can waive the figure a Hope credit in any 2 earlier years.If anyone, such as his parents, claims antax-free treatment of the withdrawal and elect toexemption for him on their tax return, whoeverpay any tax that would otherwise be owed on the 2) Had not completed the first 2 years oflists him as a dependent may be able to use thewithdrawal. The beneficiary or the beneficiary’s postsecondary education (generally, theexpenses to claim an education credit.parents may then be eligible to claim a Hope freshman and sophomore years of col-
credit or lifetime learning credit for qualified lege).Nonresident alien.You cannot claim an edu-higher education expenses paid in that tax year.cation credit if you (or your spouse) were a3) Was enrolled at least half-time in a pro-See Coverdell ESAs in Publication 970. nonresident alien for any part of 2001, and thegram that leads to a degree, certificate, or
nonresident alien did not elect to be treated as aRefunds. Qualified tuition and related ex- other recognized educational credential,
resident alien. More information on nonresidentpenses do not include expenses for which you for at least one academic period begin-
aliens can be found in Publication 519, Taxreceive a refund. If you paid expenses in 2001, ning in 2001.
Guide for U.S. Aliens.and you received a refund of those expenses 4) Was free of any federal or state felonybefore you file your tax return for 2001, simply conviction for possessing or distributing areduce the amount of the expenses by the Does the Amount of Your controlled substance as of the end ofamount of the refund received. If you receive the 2001.Income Affect the Amountrefund after you file your tax return, see When
must the credit be repaid, next. of Your Credit? Completion of first 2 years.A student who
When must the credit be repaid?If, after was awarded 2 years of academic credit for
Your education credits are phased out (gradu-you file your 2001 tax return, you receive postsecondary work completed before 2001 has
ally reduced) if your modified adjusted grosstax-free educational assistance for, or a refund completed the first 2 years of postsecondary
income is between $40,000 and $50,000of, an expense you used to figure a higher edu- education. This student would not be an eligible
($80,000 and $100,000 if you file a joint return).cation credit on that return, you may have to student for purposes of the Hope credit.
You cannot claim any higher education credits ifrepay all or part of the credit. You must refigure Any academic credit awarded solely on theyour modified adjusted gross income is $50,000your education credits as if the assistance or basis of the student’s performance on profi-or more ($100,000 or more if you file a jointrefund was received in 2001. Subtract the ciency examinations is disregarded in determin-return).amount of the refigured credit from the amount ing whether the student has completed 2 years
of the credit you claimed. See the instructions for of postsecondary education.How the phaseout works. The phaseout (re-your 2001 tax return for information about howduction) works on a sliding scale. The higherEnrolled at least half-time.A student wasand where to report the repayment (recapture).your modified adjusted gross income, the more enrolled at least half-time if the student was
Who can claim the credit.If there are higher your credits are reduced. You figure the reduc- taking at least half the normal full-time work load
education costs for your dependent for a year, tion, if any, in Part III of Form 8863. for his or her course of study.
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 241

Page 244 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The standard for what is half of the normal course of instruction to acquire or improve This means that, for example, you can claim the
full-time work load is determined by each eligible job skills. Hope credit for one student and the lifetime
educational institution. However, the standards learning credit for another student in the same4) There is no limit on the number of yearsmay not be lower than those established by the tax year.for which the lifetime learning credit can beDepartment of Education under the Higher Edu-claimed for each student. It is not limited tocation Act of 1965. students in the first 2 years of postsecon-How Is the Credit
Amount of credit.The amount of the Hope dary education. Claimed?credit is the sum of: 5) The amount you can claim as a lifetime
You elect to claim education credits and youlearning credit does not vary (increase)1) 100% of the first $1,000 qualified tuition
based on the number of students for whomfigure their amount by completing Form 8863. Aand related expenses you paid for each
you pay qualified expenses. filled-in Form 8863 is shown in the Illustratedeligible student, and
Example at the end of this chapter.2) 50% of the next $1,000 qualified tuition An eligible educational institution (such as aAmount of credit.The amount of the lifetimeand related expenses you paid for each college or university) that received payment oflearning credit is 20% of the first $5,000 qualifiedeligible student. qualified tuition and related expenses in 2001,tuition and related expenses you pay for all eligi-
The maximum amount of Hope credit you ble students. The maximum amount of lifetimegenerally must issue Form 1098 –T, Tuition
can claim in 2001 is $1,500 times the number oflearning credit you can claim for 2001 is $1,000Payments Statement, to each student by Febru-
eligible students. You can claim the full $1,500(20% × $5,000). However, that amount may beary 1, 2002.   The eligible educational institution
for each eligible student for whom you paid atreduced based on your modified adjusted grossmay ask for a completed Form W –9S, Request
least $2,000 of qualified expenses. However,income. See Does the Amount of Your Incomefor Student’s or Borrower’s Social Security Num-
the credit may be reduced based on your modi-Affect the Amount of Your Credit, earlier. ber and Certification, or similar statement, to
fied adjusted gross income. See Does the obtain the student’s name, address, and tax-Amount of Your Income Affect the Amount of Example. Bruce and Toni are married andpayer identification number.Your Credit?, earlier. file a joint tax return. For 2001, their modified
adjusted gross income is $50,000. Toni is at-
Example. Jon and Karen are married andtending the community college (an eligible edu-Illustrated Examplefile a joint tax return. For 2001, they claim ancational institution) to earn credits towards an
exemption for their dependent daughter on theirassociate’s degree in nursing. She already hasDave and Valerie are married and file a joint tax
tax return and their modified adjusted gross in-a bachelor’s degree in history and wants to be-return. For 2001, they claim exemptions for their
come is $70,000. Their daughter is in her sopho-come a nurse. In August 2001, Toni paid $4,000two dependent children on their tax return. Their
more (second) year of studies at the localfor her fall 2001 semester. Bruce and Toni canmodified adjusted gross income is $72,000.
university and Jon and Karen pay qualified tui-claim an $800 (20% × $4,000) lifetime learningTheir tax is $9,475. Their son, Sean, will receivetion and related expenses of $4,300 in 2001.credit on their 2001 joint tax return. his bachelor’s degree in psychology from theJon and Karen, their daughter, and the local state college in May 2002. Their daughter, Co-university meet all of the requirements for theHow to figure the lifetime learning credit.rey, enrolled full-time at that same college inHope credit. Jon and Karen can claim a $1,500The lifetime learning credit is figured in Parts IIAugust 2000 to begin working on her bachelor’sHope credit in 2001. This is 100% of the firstand III of Form 8863. An illustrated exampledegree in physical education. In December$1,000 qualified tuition and related expenses,using Form 8863 appears later. 2000, Dave and Valerie paid $2,000 for eachplus 50% of the next $1,000. child’s tuition for the winter 2001 semester. In
Choosing Which CreditHow to figure the Hope credit.The Hope July 2001, they paid $2,200 in tuition costs for
credit is figured in Parts I and III of Form 8863. each of them for the fall 2001 semester.To ClaimAn illustrated example using Form 8863 ap- Dave and Valerie, their children, and the
pears later. For each student, you can elect for any tax year college meet all of the requirements for the
only one of the credits or a tax-free withdrawalhigher education credits. Because Sean is be-
from a Coverdell ESA. (See Coverdell ESAs in yond the second (sophomore) year of his post-Lifetime Learning Credit
chapter 4, Publication 970, for more informa-secondary education, his expenses do not
tion.)You may be able to claim a lifetime learning qualify for the Hope credit. But, amounts paid for
For example, if you elect to take the Hopecredit of up to $1,000 for qualified tuition and Sean’s expenses in 2001 for academic periods
credit for a child on your 2001 tax return, yourelated expenses paid for all students enrolled after 2000 and before April 1, 2002, qualify for
cannot, for that same child, also claim the life-in eligible educational institutions. the lifetime learning credit. Corey is in her first
time learning credit for 2001 or take a tax-freeThe lifetime learning credit is different than (freshman) year of postsecondary education
withdrawal from a Coverdell ESA for 2001.the Hope credit in the following ways. and expenses paid for her in 2001 for academic
periods beginning after 2000 and before April 1,1) The lifetime learning credit is not based onLifetime learning credit after Hope credit.2002, qualify for the Hope credit.the student’s work load. It is allowed forYou can claim the Hope credit for the first 2Dave and Valerie figure their total higherone or more courses. years of a student’s postsecondary education
education credits for 2001, $1,940, as shown inand claim the lifetime learning credit for that2) Expenses for graduate-level degree work the completed Form 8863. They can claim thesame student in later tax years.are eligible. full amount because their modified adjusted
gross income is not more than $80,000. They3) Expenses related to a course of instructionTax credits for more than one student.If
carry the amount from Form 8863 to line 46 ofor other education that involves sports, you pay qualified expenses for more than one
Form 1040, and they attach the Form 8863 togames, hobbies, or other noncredit student in the same year, you can choose to
courses are eligible if they are part of a take credits on a per-student, per-year basis. their return.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Education Credits

Page 245 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dave and Valerie Jones 987 00 6543
Corey Jones
137 00 9642 2,000 1,000 500
1,500
5001,000
Sean Jones 246 00 9731 2,200
2,200
2,200
440
1,940
1,940
100,000
72,000
20,000
28,000
9,475
1,940
-0-
9,475
OMB No. 1545-1618Education Credits
Form 8863
/H17075See instructions on pages 2 and 3.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 50
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Hope Credit. Caution: The Hope credit may be claimed for no more than 2 tax years for the same student.
1
2
3
Lifetime Learning Credit
Form 8863 (2001)
Part I
Part II
3
(a) Student’s name
(as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
Cat. No. 25379M
Add the amounts in columns (d) and (f)
Tentative Hope credit. Add the amounts on line 2, columns (d) and (f) /H17075
8
Add the amounts on line 4, column (c), and enter the total
9
9
Enter the smaller of line 5 or $5,000
10
Subtract line 10 from line 9. If line 10 is equal to or more than
line 9, stop; you cannot take any education credits
10
12
16
17
4
11
11
15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
First, Last
(f) Enter one-half
of the amount in
column (e)
(e) Subtract
column (d) from
column (c)
(d) Enter the
smaller of the
amount in
column (c) or
$1,000
(c) Qualified
expenses
(but do not
enter more than
$2,000 for each
student). See
instructions
2
Caution: You
cannot take the
Hope credit and
the lifetime learning
credit for the same
student.
(a) Student’s name (as shown on page 1
of your tax return)
First Last
(c) Qualified
expenses. See
instructions
Tentative lifetime learning credit. Multiply line 6 by 20% (.20) /H17075
5
6
7
5
6
7
Part III Allowable Education Credits
Tentative education credits. Add lines 3 and 78
Enter: $100,000 if married filing jointly; $50,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er)
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 34 (or Form 1040A, line 20)*
If line 11 is equal to or more than line 12, enter the amount from line 8 on line 14 and
go to line 15. If line 11 is less than line 12, divide line 11 by line 12. Enter the result as
a decimal (rounded to at least three places)
13
Multiply line 8 by line 13 /H1707514
Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 42 (or Form 1040A, line 26)15
Enter the total, if any, of your credits from Form 1040, lines 43 through 45 (or from
Form 1040A, lines 27 and 28)
16
Subtract line 16 from line 15. If line 16 is equal to or more than line 15, stop; you cannot
take any education credits
17
18 Education credits. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 17 here and on Form 1040,
line 46 (or Form 1040A, line 29) /H1707518
14
13 /H11003.
(Hope and Lifetime Learning Credits)
(b) Student’s
social security
number (as
shown on page 1
of your tax return)
(b) Student’s social security
number (as shown on page
1 of your tax return)
Enter: $20,000 if married filing jointly; $10,000 if single, head of
household, or qualifying widow(er) 12
*See Pub. 970 for the amount to enter if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563 or you are excluding income from Puerto Ric o.
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
2001
Chapter 36 Education Credits Page 243

Page 246 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reduction of EIC by alternative minimum taxdetermine whether you are eligible for the fol-
lowing benefit programs, or how much you caneliminated.For tax years after 2001, your EIC
receive from these programs.will no longer be reduced by the amount of
37. alternative minimum tax shown on your return.• Temporary assistance for needy families
(TANF).
• Medicaid and supplemental security in-Earned Income come (SSI).Important Reminders
• Food stamps.
Credit Certain people must use Publication 596. • Low-income housing.
Certain people must use Publication 596 to see
if they meet the rules to take the EIC and toSocial security numbers.To claim the EIC,figure the amount of the credit. You must useImportant Changes for you must have a valid social security numberPublication 596 if any of the following situations(SSN) for you and your spouse (if filing a jointapplies to you.2001 return) and any qualifying children. If an SSN is
missing or incorrect, you may not get the credit.• The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in-
Earned income amount is more. The See Rule 1, later.cludes an amount from Form 8814,
amount you can earn and still get the credit hasParent’s Election To Report Child’s Inter- Form 8862 to claim EIC after disallowance.increased for 2001. The amount you earn mustest and Dividends. If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orbe less than:
• Your investment income (Rule 5) is $2,450reduced for any reason other than a mathemati-
• $28,281 with one qualifying child, or more and you are filing Form 4797, cal or clerical error, you must attach a completed
Sales of Business Property. Form 8862, Information To Claim Earned In-• $32,121 with more than one qualifying
come Credit After Disallowance, to your nextchild, or • You are filing Schedule E, Supplemental return if you wish to claim the EIC. The date onIncome and Loss, (Form 1040).• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying which your EIC was denied and the date onchild. • You are reporting income or a loss fromwhich you file your 2001 return affect whether
the rental of personal property not used inyou need to attach Form 8862 to your 2001
Investment income amount is more. The a trade or business. return or to a later return. See chapter 5 in
maximum amount of investment income you can Publication 596 for more information.• You are claiming a loss on Form 1040,have and still get the credit has increased forline 12, 13, or 18.2001. You can have investment income up to
$2,450. For most people, investment income is• You (or your spouse if filing a joint return)
taxable interest and dividends, tax-exempt inter-received distributions from a pension, an-Introductionest, and capital gain net income. To get morenuity, or IRA that are not fully taxable.
detailed information, see  Rule 5. The earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit for• You owe alternative minimum tax (AMT),certain people who work and have earned in-found on Form 1040, line 41, or includedKidnapped child. You may be able to claim come under $32,121. A tax credit usually meansthe EIC for persons with a qualifying child evenin the total found on Form 1040A, line 35.more money in your pocket. It reduces thethough your child has been kidnapped. To get amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also givemore detailed information, see Kidnapped child For information on how you can get Publica-you a refund.under Rule 7. tion 596, Earned Income Credit, or other free
IRS publications, see How To Get Tax Help in How do you get the earned income credit?the back of this publication. To claim the EIC, you must:
Modified AGI (adjusted gross income).
Important Changes for 1) Qualify by meeting certain rules, andYour modified AGI used to limit your credit in-
cludes: 2) File a tax return, even if you:2002
1) Tax-exempt interest, and a) Do not owe any tax,
New definition of earned income. For tax 2) The nontaxable part of a pension, annuity,b) Did not earn enough money to file ayears after 2001, earned income will no longeror individual retirement arrangement (IRA) return, orinclude employee compensation that is nontax-distribution, except any amount that isable. This will change Rule 6 and Rule 14. c) Did not have income taxes withheldnontaxable because it was a from your pay.trustee-to-trustee transfer or a rollover dis-Elimination of modified adjusted gross in-
tribution.come (AGI).  For tax years after 2001, you will When you complete your return, you canno longer need to figure modified AGI. Your EIC figure your EIC by using a worksheet in theAlso, the amount of business losses that mustwill be figured using your AGI, not modified AGI. instructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, orbe added back to AGI to figure modified AGI isThis will change Rule 15. Form 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let the75%.
IRS figure the credit for you.See Rule 15 in this chapter or for more de-New rules for persons with same qualifying
child.  For tax years after 2001, new rules will tailed information get Publication 596.
How will this chapter help you?be used to determine which person can claim
Advance payment of the earned incomethe EIC on the basis of a qualifying child when This chapter will explain the following:
credit in your paycheck.If you qualify for thetwo or more persons have the same qualifying
• What rules you must meet to qualify forearned income credit in 2002, you can receivechild. This will change Rule 8. For details, see
the EIC,part of it in each paycheck throughout the year.Publication 553, Highlights of 2001 Tax
See Advance Earned Income Credit, later, forChanges. • How to figure the EIC, and
more information.
• How to get advance payment of the EIC inNew definition of eligible foster child.For
Earned income credit has no effect on cer- your paycheck.tax years after 2001, the definition of an eligible
tain welfare benefits.Any refund you receivefoster child in Rule 7 will change. The child will
because of the EIC and any advance EIC pay-To learn about the rules you must meet, firsthave to live with you only for more than half of
ments you receive generally will not be used tothe year, instead of the whole year. read Do You Qualify for the Credit, later.
Page 244 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 247 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 37–1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
Part B Part CPart A Rules If You Have Rules If You Do NotRules for Everyone a Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying Child
Rule 1. You must have a valid socialRule 7. Your child must meet the relationship,Rule 10. You must be at least age 25 but
security number. age, and residency tests. under age 65.
Rule 2. Your filing status cannot beRule 8. Your qualifying child cannot be theRule 11. You cannot be the dependent of
“Married filing separately.” qualifying child of another person with a higher another person.
modified AGI.
Rule 3. You must be a U.S. citizen orRule 9. You cannot be a qualifying child ofRule 12. You cannot be a qualifying child
resident alien all year. another person. of another person.
Rule 4. You cannot file Form 2555 or Rule 13. You must have lived in the
Form 2555–EZ (relating to foreign United States more than half the year.
earned income).
Rule 5. Your investment income must
be $2,450 or less.
Rule 6. You must have earned income.
Part D
Figuring and Claiming the EIC
Rule 14. Your earned income must be less than:
• $32,121 if you have more than one qualifying child,
• $28,281 if you have one qualifying child, or
• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying child.
Rule 15. Your modified AGI must be less than:
• $32,121 if you have more than one qualifying child,
• $28,281 if you have one qualifying child, or
• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying child.
qualify for the credit if you meet all the rules inUseful Items If Improper Claimeach part that applies to you. For example:You may want to see: Made in Prior Year• If you have a qualifying child, the rules in
Parts A, B, and D apply to you, orPublication You must file Form 8862 if for any year after
1996 your EIC was denied or reduced for any• If you do not have a qualifying child, the❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
reason other than a math or clerical error. But dorules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.❏ 533 Self-Employment Tax not file Form 8862 if, after your EIC was denied
or reduced in an earlier year, you filed Form❏ 596 Earned Income Credit Table 37–1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-8862 (or other documents) and your EIC wasshell. Use Table 37–1 as a guide to Parts A,Form (and Instructions) then allowed.B, C, and D. The table is a summary list of all the
If it was determined that your error was duerules in each part. Each rule listed has a rule❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Credit
to reckless or intentional disregard of the EICnumber. Use the rule number to find a discus-(Qualifying Child Information)
rules or fraud, you cannot claim the EIC for thesion of that rule in this chapter.❏ Schedule SE (Form 1040) next 2 years (10 years in the case of fraud).Do you have a qualifying child?Basically, aSelf-Employment Tax
qualifying child is a child who:❏ W –5 Earned Income Credit Advance More information.See chapter 5 in Publica-Payment Certificate 1) Is your son, daughter, adopted child,tion 596 for more detailed information about the
grandchild, stepchild, or eligible foster❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earned disallowance period and Form 8862.
child, andIncome Credit After Disallowance
2) Was (at the end of 2001) under age 19,
under age 24 and a full-time student, or
any age and permanently and totally dis-Part A. Rules forabled during the year, and
Do You Qualify for the3) Lived with you in the United States forEveryone
more than half of 2001 (for all of 2001 ifCredit? the child is your eligible foster child).This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1
through 6. You must meet all six rules to qualifyTo see if you can claim the EIC, you must first See Rule 7 for more detailed information. for the earned income credit. If you do not meetmeet all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules all six rules, you cannot get the credit and you dofor Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in not need to read the rest of the chapter.Part B, Rules If you Have a Qualifying Child, or
If you meet all six rules in this part, then readPart C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying
either Part B or Part C (whichever applies) forChild. There are two final rules you must meet in
more rules you must meet.Part D, Figuring and Claiming the EIC. You
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 245

Page 248 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Dividend income (line 9 of Form 1040 orRule 1. You Must Have a Rule 2. Your Filing Status 1040A).
Cannot Be “Married FilingValid Social Security • Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form
Separately”Number (SSN) 1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form
1040A).
If you are married, you usually must file a jointTo claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing a
return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotjoint return) must have a valid SSN. Any qualify- However, if you are reporting income from the
be “Married filing separately.”ing child listed on Schedule EIC must also have rental of personal property on Form 1040, line
a valid SSN. (See Rule 7 if you have a qualifying 21, or are filing Schedule E (Form 1040), or
Spouse did not live with you.If you are mar-child.) Form 8814, or are reporting a gain on Form
ried and your spouse did not live in your home at4797, see Rule 5 in chapter 1 of Publication 596
any time during the last 6 months of the year,for more information.Valid SSN. A valid SSN is one that has beenyou may be able to file as head of household,issued by the Social Security Administrationinstead of married filing separately. In that case,(SSA). If your social security card (or your Rule 6. You Must Haveyou may be able to claim the EIC. For detailedspouse’s if filing a joint return) says “Not valid forinformation about filing as head of household,Earned Incomeemployment,” and your SSN was issued so thatsee chapter 2.you (or your spouse) could get a federally This credit is called the “earned income credit”funded benefit, you cannot get the EIC. An ex- because, to qualify, you must work and haveRule 3. You Must Be aample of a federally funded benefit is Medicaid. earned income. If you are married and file a joint
If you have a card with the legend “Not valid U.S. Citizen or Resident return, you meet this rule if at least one spouse
for employment,” and your immigration status works and has earned income. Earned incomeAlien All Yearhas changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen includes all the income you get from working —
or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a new even if it is not taxable.You cannot claim the earned income credit if yousocial security card without the legend. are a nonresident alien for any part of the year,
unless:
U. S. citizen.If you were a U. S. citizen when Taxable Earned Income
you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN.1) You are married to a U.S. citizen or a resi-
Taxable earned income includes:dent alien, and
SSN missing or incorrect.If an SSN for you 2) You choose to be treated as a resident for 1) Wages, salaries, and tips,or your spouse is missing from your tax return orall of 2001 by filing a joint return. If you2) Net earnings from self-employment, andis incorrect, you may not get the EIC. need more information on making this
3) Gross income received as a statutory em-choice, get Publication 519, U.S. Tax
Other taxpayer identification number.You ployee.Guide for Aliens.
cannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (or
For some examples of items that are in-your spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi-
Note. If you make the choice in (2) above, cluded or not included in earned income, seevidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).you and your spouse are taxed on your world-Table 37–2, later. Some of the items listed areITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Ser-wide income. You cannot claim any tax treaty discussed in more detail later.vice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN.benefits as a resident of a foreign country during
a tax year in which the choice is in effect.Wages, salaries, and tips.Wages, salaries,No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put and tips you receive for working are reported to“No ” directly to the right of line 61a (Form 1040), you on Form W –2, box 1. You should reportRule 4. You Cannot Fileline 39a (Form 1040A), or on line 9b (Form these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Forms1040EZ). You cannot claim the EIC. Form 2555 or Form 1040A and 1040).
Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if2555–EZ If you were a household employee whofiling a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can did not receive a Form W–2 becauseapply for one by filing Form SS–5, Application You cannot claim the earned income credit if youyour employer paid you less thanCAUTION
!
for a Social Security Card, with the Social Secur-file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form $1,300 in 2001, be sure to include the amount
ity Administration. 2555–EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.you were paid on line 7 (Form 1040 or 1040A) or
You file these forms to exclude income earned inline 1 (Form 1040EZ).Filing deadline approaching and still noforeign countries from your gross income, or toSSN. If the filing deadline is approaching anddeduct or exclude a foreign housing amount.Self-employed persons and statutory em-you still do not have an SSN, you have twoU.S. possessions are not foreign countries. Seeployees. If you are self-employed or receivedchoices. Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens andincome as a statutory employee, you must useResident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor-Form 1040 or Publication 596 to see if you1) Request an automatic 4-month extensionmation. qualify to get the EIC and to figure the amount ofof time to file your return. You can get this
the EIC.extension by filing Form 4868, Application
Rule 5. Your Investmentfor Automatic Extension of Time to File
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. You Income Must Be $2,450 or Nontaxable Earned Incomecan file a paper Form 4868 or you can file
Lessit electronically. Getting an extension does This includes anything of value (money, goods,not give you extra time to pay any tax or services) that is not taxable that you receivedYou cannot claim the earned income credit un-owed. You should pay any amount you from your employer for your work. Commonless your investment income is $2,450 or less. Ifexpect to owe to avoid interest or penalty types of nontaxable earned income are listed inyour investment income is more than $2,450,charges. For more information, see chap- the following paragraphs.you cannot claim the credit. For most people,ter 1. investment income is the total of the followingSalary deferrals and reductions.2) File the return on time without claiming theamounts.
EIC. After receiving the SSN, file an • Salary deferrals. These are contributions• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 oramended return (Form 1040X, Amended from your pay to certain retirement plans1040A).U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,) claim- (such as a 401(k) plan or the Federal
ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EIC• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 Thrift Savings Plan). These amounts are
if you have a qualifying child. or 1040A). shown in box 12 of your Form W –2. The
Page 246 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 249 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
“Retirement plan” box (box 13) of your cussed in this section in terms of what is or is notthe earned income credit. This includes
Form W –2 should be checked in most earned income for purposes of the EIC. amounts received through a work release pro-
cases. gram or while in a halfway house.
Form 4361. Even if you have an approved• Salary reductions, such as under a cafete-Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-Nonqualified deferred compensation plan orria plan, unless they are included in box 1
ing ministerial duties as an employee count asa section 457 plan pension or annuity.of your Form W–2. A cafeteria plan is a
earned income. This includes wages, salaries,Amounts you received as a pension or annuitybenefit plan offered by your employer that
tips, and “other employee compensation.” from a nonqualified deferred compensation planallows you to choose among two or more
“Other employee compensation” includes non- or a section 457 plan and that were included inbenefits consisting of cash and benefits
taxable compensation such as housing al- the total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) orthat are not taxed. If you choose a benefit
lowances or the rental value of a parsonage thatline 1 (Form 1040EZ) are not earned income.that is not taxed (such as accident and
you receive for services as an employee. (This amount may be reported in box 11 of yourhealth insurance), the amount of the sal-
Amounts you received for performing ministerialary reduction is nontaxable earned income Form W-2. If you received such an amount but
duties, but not as an employee, do not count aswhen figuring the EIC. box 11 is blank, contact your employer for the
earned income. Examples include fees for per-amount of the pension or annuity.)• Mandatory contributions to a state or localforming marriages and honoraria for deliveringretirement plan. speeches. Workfare payments. Nontaxable workfare
payments are not earned income for the EIC.
Meals and lodging. Form 4029. Even if you have an approved These are cash payments certain people re-
Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and otherceive from a state or local agency that adminis-• Military employee basic housing and sub-employee compensation count as earned in-ters public assistance programs funded undersistence allowances, the value of in-kindcome. However, amounts you received as a the federal Temporary Assistance for Needyhousing and subsistence, and combat self-employed individual do not count as earnedFamilies (TANF) program in return for certainzone compensation. These amounts are income. Also, in figuring earned income, do notwork activities such as (1) work experience ac-shown in box 12 of your Form W–2 with subtract losses on Schedule C, C–EZ, or F fromtivities (including remodeling or repairing publiccode “Q.” See Publication 3, Armed wages on line 7 of Form 1040. housing) if sufficient private sector employmentForces’ Tax Guide, for detailed informa-
is not available, or (2) community service pro-tion.
gram activities.Disability Benefits• Meals and lodging provided for the conve-
nience of your employer. Community property. If you are married, butIf you retired on disability, benefits you receive
qualify to file as head of household under special• Housing allowance or rental value of aunder your employer’s disability retirement plan
rules for married taxpayers living apart (seeparsonage for the clergy. are considered earned income until you reach
Rule 2), and live in a state that has communityminimum retirement age. Minimum retirement
property laws, your earned income for the EICage generally is the earliest age at which youExcludable employer-provided benefits. does not include any amount earned by yourcould have received a pension or annuity if you
spouse that is treated as belonging to you underwere not disabled. You must report your taxable• Dependent care benefits (line 18 of Form
those laws. That amount is not earned incomedisability payments on line 7 of either Form 10402441, or Schedule 2 (Form 1040A, )).
for the EIC, even though you must include it inor Form 1040A until you reach minimum retire-• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, Child and your gross income on your income tax return.ment age.Dependent Care Expenses, line 26). Your earned income includes the entire amountBeginning on the day after you reach mini-
• Educational assistance benefits (these you earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-mum retirement age, payments you receive are
may be shown in box 14 of your Form ing to your spouse under your state’s communitytaxable as a pension and are not considered
W –2). property laws.earned income. Report taxable pension pay-
ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (or
Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b).
Native Americans
Disability insurance payments.PaymentsIf you are a Native American and received Part B. Rules
you received from a disability insurance policyamounts for services performed as an employee
that you paid the premiums for are not earnedthat are exempt from federal income tax under If You Have a
income. It does not matter whether you havethe Internal Revenue Code or because of a
reached minimum retirement age. If this policy istreaty, agreement, Act of Congress, or other Qualifying Child
through your employer, the amount may befederal law, these amounts are nontaxable
shown in box 12 of your Form W–2 with codeearned income when figuring the EIC. (How- Use Part B if you:
“J.”ever, any tax-exempt income you received for
performing services as a self-employed individ- 1) Have a qualifying child, and
ual is not earned income when figuring the EIC.) 2) Have met all the rules in Part A.Income That is Not Earned Income
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 7
Examples of items that are NOT earned in-Approved Form 4361 or Form 4029 through 9. You must meet all three of thesecome include interest and dividends, pensionsrules, in addition to the rules in Parts A and D, toand annuities, social security and railroad retire-This section is for persons who have an ap- qualify for the earned income credit with a quali-proved: ment benefits (including disability benefits), ali- fying child.mony and child support, welfare benefits, You must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to• Form 4361, Application for Exemption workers’ compensation benefits, unemploymentclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannotfrom Self-Employment Tax for Use by Min-compensation (insurance), nontaxable fosterfile Form 1040EZ). You must also completeisters, Members of Religious Orders andcare payments, and veterans’ benefits, includ-Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If youChristian Science Practitioners, or ing VA rehabilitation payments. Do NOT include meet all the rules in Part A and this part, readany of these items in your nontaxable or taxable• Form 4029, Application for Exemption Part D to find out what to do next.earned income.from Social Security and Medicare Taxes
If you do not meet Rule 7, you do notand Waiver of Benefits.
Earnings while an inmate.Amounts received have a qualifying child. Read Part C to
for work performed while an inmate in a penal find out if you can get the earned in-Each approved form exempts certain income CAUTION
!
institution are not earned income when figuringcome credit without a qualifying child.from social security taxes. Each form is dis-
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 247

Page 250 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your ...
Son
Daughter
Adopted child
Grandchild
Stepchild
Foster child (See Eligible foster
child.)
was at the end of 2001...
Under age 19
OR
Under age 24 and a student
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year regardless of age.
who...
Lived with you in the United States for more than half
of 2001 (or, if a foster child, for all of 2001).
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Figure 37–1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Child not a dependent.Your child does not 3) The child is your brother, sister, step-Rule 7. Your Child Must have to be your dependent to be a qualifyingbrother, or stepsister; a descendant (in-
Meet the Relationship, child, unless he or she is married. cluding a child or adopted child) of your
brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister;Age, and Residency Tests Married child.If your child was married at
or a child placed with you by an authorizedthe end of the year, he or she does not meet the
Your child is a qualifying child if your child meets placement agency.relationship test unless either of these two situa-
three tests. The three tests are: tions applies to you: 
Example. You and your sister live together.1) Relationship, 1) You can claim the child’s exemption, or You are 30. Your sister is 15. When your parents2) Age, and 2) The reason you cannot claim the child’s died 2 years ago, you took over the care of your
3) Residency. exemption is that you gave that right tosister, but you did not adopt her. She is consid-
your child’s other parent: ered your eligible foster child because she livedThe three tests are illustrated in Figure
with you all year and because you cared for her37–1. The paragraphs that follow contain morea) When you completed Form 8332 or ainformation about each test. as you would your own child.similar written statement, or
b) In a pre-1985 agreement (such as a
separation agreement or divorce de-Relationship Test Age Test
cree).
Your child must be either your son, daughter, Your child must be:
adopted child, grandchild, stepchild, or eligible
foster child. The following definitions clarify the 1) Under age 19 at the end of 2001,Eligible foster child.For the EIC, a person isrelationship test.
your eligible foster child if all the following are2) A full-time student under age 24 at the end
true. of 2001, orAdopted child. Your adopted child includes a
child placed with you for adoption by an author- 3) Permanently and totally disabled at any1) You cared for that child as you would yourized placement agency, even if the adoption is time during 2001, regardless of age.own child.not final. An authorized placement agency in-
The following example and definitions clarify thecludes any person authorized by state law to2) The child lived with you for the whole
age test.place children for legal adoption. year, except for temporary absences (ex-
plained later). (A child who was born or
Example. Your son turned 19 on Decemberdied during the year is considered to haveGrandchild. For the EIC, this means any de-
10. Unless he was disabled or a full-time stu-lived with you for the whole year if yourscendant of your son, daughter, or adopted
dent, he is not a qualifying child because, at thehome was the child’s home for the entirechild. For example, a grandchild includes your
time he or she was alive during the year.)great-grandchild, great-great-grandchild, etc. end of the year, he was not under age 19.
Page 248 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 251 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Full-time student.A full-time student is a stu- 90 days. Once you begin serving your extendedRule 8. Your Qualifyingdent who is enrolled for the number of hours or active duty, you are still considered to have been
Child Cannot Be thecourses the school considers to be full-time at- on extended active duty even if you do not serve
tendance. more than 90 days. Qualifying Child of
Student defined.To qualify as a student,Birth or death of a child.A child who was Another Person With ayour child must be, during some part of each ofborn or died in 2001 is treated as meeting theHigher Modified AGIany 5 calendar months during the calendar year:residency test if your home was the child’s home
the entire time he or she was alive in 2001.1) A full-time student at a school that has a Sometimes a child meets the rules to be a quali-
regular teaching staff, course of study, and fying child of more than one person. However,Temporary absences. Count time that you orregularly enrolled student body, or only one person can claim the EIC using thatyour child is away from home on a temporarychild. The paragraphs that follow will help you2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-absence due to a special circumstance as timedecide who can claim the EIC when more thaning course given by a school described inlived at home. Examples of a special circum-one person has the same qualifying child.(1), or a state, county, or local govern-stance include:
ment. The 5 calendar months need not be Which person can claim the EIC.If you and• Illness,consecutive. someone else have the same qualifying child,• School attendance, the person with the higher modified adjustedSchool defined. A school can be an ele- gross income (AGI) is the only one who may be• Detention in a juvenile facility,mentary school, junior or senior high school, able to claim the EIC using that child. The per-college, university, or technical, trade, or• Business, son with the lower modified AGI cannot use thatmechanical school. However, on-the-job train- child to claim the EIC. This is true even if the• Vacation, anding courses, correspondence schools, and night person with the higher modified AGI does notschools do not count as schools for the EIC. (But• Military service. claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim thesee Night school, later.) EIC. If the other person is your spouse and you
Vocational high school students. Stu- file a joint return, this rule does not apply. If threeKidnapped child.A kidnapped child is treated
dents who work on co-op jobs in private industryas living with you for more than half of the year if or more persons have the same qualifying child,
as a part of a school’s regular course of class-the child lived with you for more than half thethe person with the highest modified AGI is the
room and practical training are consideredpart of the year before the date of the kidnap-only one who may be able to claim the EIC using
full-time students. ping. The child must be presumed by law en-that child.
forcement authorities to have been kidnappedNight school. Your child is not a full-timeby someone who is not a member of your familyNote. For most people modified AGI is thestudent if he or she attends school only at night.or your child’s family. This treatment applies forsame as AGI (line 34, Form 1040, line 20, FormHowever, full-time attendance at a school mayall years that the child remains kidnapped. How-1040A, or line 4, Form 1040EZ). Modified AGI isinclude some attendance at night as part of aever, the last year this treatment can apply is theexplained in Part D.full-time course of study. earlier of: If your qualifying child meets the tests to be a
Permanently and totally disabled. Your qualifying child of any other person for 2001 and1) The year the child is determined to bechild is permanently and totally disabled if both you have the higher modified AGI, you meet thisdead, orof the following apply. rule. If you do not have the higher modified AGI,
STOP . You cannot claim the EIC either with or2) The year the child would have reached1) He or she cannot engage in any substan- without a qualifying child. Put “No ” beside lineage 18.tial gainful activity because of a physical or 61a (Form 1040) or line 39a (Form 1040A).mental condition. If your qualifying child has been kidnapped
and meets these requirements, enter “KC,” in-2) A doctor determines the condition has Example 1. You and your son lived withstead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC.lasted or can be expected to last continu- your mother all year. You are 25 years old. Yourously for at least a year or can lead toSocial security number.Your qualifying child only income was $9,300 from a part-time job.death. must have a valid social security number (SSN) Your mother’s only income was $15,000 from
unless the child was born and died in 2001. You her job. Your son is a qualifying child of both you
cannot claim the EIC on the basis of a qualifying and your mother because he meets the relation-
child if: ship, age, and residency tests for both you and
Residency Test
your mother. However, because you both have
Your child must have lived with you in the United 1) Your qualifying child’s SSN is missing fromthe same qualifying child, only one of you can
States for more than half of 2001 (all of 2001 if your tax return or is incorrect,claim the EIC. Because your mother’s modified
an eligible foster child). The following definitions AGI ($15,000) is more than your modified AGI2) Your qualifying child’s social security cardclarify the residency test. ($9,300), only your mother may be able to claimsays “Not valid for employment” and was
the EIC. You cannot claim the EIC for personsissued only for use in getting a federallyHome. Your home can be any location where either with or without a qualifying child.funded benefit, oryou regularly live within one of the 50 states or
the District of Columbia. 3) Instead of an SSN, your qualifying childExample 2. The facts are the same as in
has:Homeless shelter. You do not need a tradi- Example 1, but your mother had investment
tional home. For example, if your child lived with income of $3,000. Your mother cannot claim thea) An individual taxpayer identificationyou for more than half the year in one or more EIC because her investment income is morenumber (ITIN), which is issued to ahomeless shelters, your child meets the resi- than $2,450. (See Rule 5.) Even though yournoncitizen who cannot get an SSN, ordency test. mother cannot claim the EIC, you cannot claim it
either because your mother’s modified AGI isb) An adoption taxpayer identificationMilitary personnel stationed outside the more than yours.number (ATIN), which is issued toUnited States. U.S. military personnel sta- adopting parents who cannot get antioned outside the United States on extended Example 3. You and your sister shared aSSN for the child being adopted untilactive duty are considered to live in the United household for the entire year. You have threethe adoption is final.States during that duty period for purposes of young children who lived in the household. Yourthe EIC. sister does not have any children. However, sheIf you have two qualifying children and only
cares for your children as if they were her own.Extended active duty. Extended active one has a valid SSN, you can claim the EIC only
You earn $15,000 and she earns $20,000.duty means you are called or ordered to duty for on the basis of that child. For more information
Neither of you had any other income.an indefinite period or for a period of more than about SSNs, see  Rule 1.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 249

Page 252 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The children meet the age and residency If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) areRule 11. You Cannot Bea qualifying child of another person, you cannottests for both you and your sister. They meet the
the Dependent of Anotherclaim the EIC. This is true even if the person forrelationship test for you because they are your
whom you are a qualifying child does not claimchildren. They also meet the relationship test for Personthe EIC or meet all of the rules to claim the EIC.your sister because they lived with her for the
Put “No ” beside line 61a (Form 1040) or line 39awhole year, she cared for them as if they were If you are not filing a joint return, you meet this
(Form 1040A).her own, and they are her sister’s children. rule if:
Therefore, they qualify as her eligible foster chil-
• You checked box 6a on Form 1040 orExample. You and your daughter lived withdren. Your children are qualifying children of
1040A, oryour mother all year. You are 22 years old andboth you and your sister. However, because
attended a trade school full time. You had ayour sister’s modified AGI is higher than yours, • You checked the “No ” box on line 5 of
part-time job and earned $5,700. You had noshe is the only one who can claim the EIC. Form 1040EZ.
other income. Because you meet the relation-You and your sister cannot split theship, age, and residency tests, you are a qualify-If you are filing a joint return, you meet thisthree qualifying children between you.ing child of your mother. She can claim the EIC ifrule if:You cannot claim the EIC even thoughCAUTION
!
she meets all the other requirements. Becauseyour sister enters the names of only two of the • You checked both box 6a and box 6b onyou are your mother’s qualifying child, you can-children on her Schedule EIC. (Schedule EIC Form 1040 or 1040A, ornot claim the EIC. This is so even if your motherhas spaces for the names of only two qualifyingcannot or does not claim the EIC. • You and your spouse checked the “No ”children because the EIC is the same amount for box on line 5 of Form 1040EZ.two or more qualifying children.)
If you are not sure whether someone else can
Example 4. The facts are the same as in claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)Part C. Rules
Example 3, except that your oldest child is 20 as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a
years old and a full-time college student. Your dependent in chapter 3.If You Do Not Have
sister does not care for this child as if the child If someone else can claim you (or your
were her own. Only the two younger children are spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent ona Qualifying Child
qualifying children of both you and your sister. his or her return, but does not, you still cannot
Your sister is the only one who may be able to claim the credit.Use Part C if you:
claim the EIC using these two children because
1) Do not have a qualifying child, andher modified AGI is higher than yours. Your Example 1. In 2001, you were age 25, sin-
oldest child is a qualifying child for you, but not gle, and living at home with your parents. You2) Have met all the rules in Part A.for your sister. Only you may be able to claim the worked and were not a student. You earned
This part of the chapter discusses Rules 10EIC using this child. $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as a
through 13. You must meet all four of thesedependent. When you file your return, you claim
rules, in addition to the rules in Parts A and D, toExample 5. You, your spouse, and your an exemption for yourself by checking the “No ”
qualify for the earned income credit without a10-year-old-son lived together until July 15, box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ. You meet
qualifying child.2001, when your spouse moved out of the this rule.
household. In November 2001, you and your If you have a qualifying child, the rulesspouse were divorced. Your modified AGI was Example 2. The facts are the same as inin this part do not apply to you. You can$13,000. Your former spouse’s modified AGI Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Yourclaim the credit only if you meet all theCAUTION
!
was $18,000. Your son is a qualifying child of parents can claim you as a dependent but de-rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 7 to find outboth you and your former spouse because your cide not to. You do not meet this rule. Youif you have a qualifying child.son lived with each of you for more than half the cannot claim the credit because your parents
year and because he met the relationship and could have claimed you as a dependent.
age tests for both of you. However, becauseRule 10. You Must Be atyour former spouse’s modified AGI ($18,000) Rule 12. You Cannot Be aLeast Age 25 but Underwas more than your modified AGI ($13,000),
only your former spouse can claim the EIC for Qualifying Child ofAge 65
2001. You cannot claim the EIC for persons Another Personeither with or without a qualifying child.You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 at
the end of 2001. If you are married filing a jointYou are a qualifying child of another person
return, either you or your spouse must be at(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allRule 9. You Cannot Be a
least age 25 but under age 65 at the end ofof the following statements are true.Qualifying Child of 2001. It does not matter which spouse meets the
• You are that person’s son, daughter,age test, as long as one of the spouses does.Another Person adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or eli-If neither you nor your spouse meets the age
gible foster child.test, you cannot claim the EIC. Put “No ” directlyYou are a qualifying child of another person
to the right of line 61a (Form 1040), line 39a(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all • At the end of the year you were under age
(Form 1040A), or on line 9b (Form 1040EZ).of the following statements are true. 19, under age 24 and a full-time student,
or any age if you were permanently and• You are that person’s son, daughter, Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried. totally disabled at any time during theadopted child, stepchild, grandchild, or eli-You meet the age test. year.gible foster child.
• You lived with that person in the UnitedExample 2. You are married and filing a• At the end of the year you were under age States for more than half of the year (alljoint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is19, under age 24 and a full-time student, year if you were an eligible foster child).age 27. You meet the age test because youror any age if you were permanently and
spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.totally disabled at any time during the If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) areyear. a qualifying child of another person, you cannot
• You lived with that person in the United claim the EIC. This is true even if the person for
States for more than half of the year (all whom you are a qualifying child does not claim
year if you were an eligible foster child). the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim the EIC.
For more details about the tests to be a Put “No ” beside line 61a (Form 1040), line 39a
qualifying child, see Rule 7. (Form 1040A), or on line 9b (Form 1040EZ).
Page 250 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 253 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any amounts you received as a pension orTable 37–2. Examples of Taxable and Nontaxable Earned Income
annuity from a nonqualified deferred com-
pensation plan or a section 457 plan andTaxable Earned Income Nontaxable Earned Income
that were included in the total on line 7
Wages and salaries. Salary deferrals and reductions. (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1
(Form 1040EZ).
Union strike benefits. Meals and lodging provided for the
• Any amount on line 2 of Schedule SE thatconvenience of your employer.
was also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), if
Taxable long-term disability benefits Excludable dependent care benefits andyou are a member of the clergy.
received before minimum retirement age. excludable adoption benefits. • Any amount you included on both line 5a
of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040).Net earnings from self-employment. Excludable educational assistance
benefits.
Nontaxable earned income. You figure yourTips. Excluded combat pay. nontaxable earned income by adding the
amounts of any nontaxable earned incomeGross income received as a statutory Military basic housing and subsistence
items you had during the year. Examples ofemployee. allowances.
nontaxable earned income items are shown in
Rule 6 andTable 37–2.
Example. You lived with your mother all Total earned income. You figure your total1) Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If youyear. You are age 26 and permanently and to- earned income by adding together your taxablewant to do this, see  IRS Will Figure thetally disabled. Your only income was from a earned income and your nontaxable earned in-EIC for You.community center where you went twice a week come. You will need this amount when you fig-to answer telephones. You earned $1,500 for2) Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to doure the amount of your EIC.the year. Because you meet the relationship,this, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself. If your total earned income is more than:age, and residency tests, you are a qualifying
child of your mother. She can claim the EIC if
• $32,121 if you have more than one quali-she meets all the other requirements. BecauseRule 14. Your Total Earned fying child,you are a qualifying child of your mother, youIncome Must Be Lesscannot claim the EIC. This is so even if your • $28,281 if you have one qualifying child,
mother cannot or does not claim the EIC. orThan:
• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying
Rule 13. You Must Have • $32,121 if you have more than one quali- child,
fying child,Lived in the United States you cannot get the EIC. You do not need to read
• $28,281 if you have one qualifying child,the rest of this chapter. You can go back andMore Than Half of the Year or finish the rest of your tax return.
Your home (and your spouse’s if filing a joint• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying
return) must have been in the United States forchild. Rule 15. Your Modified AGI
more than half the year.
Must Be Less Than:If not, put “No ” directly to the right of line 61aEarned income is explained in Rule 6 in
(Form 1040), line 39a (Form 1040A), or on linePart A and some examples are shown in Table
9b (Form 1040EZ). • $32,121 if you have more than one quali-37–2. You figure your total earned income by
fying child,adding together your taxable earned incomeHome. Your home can be any location whereand your nontaxable earned income. • $28,281 if you have one qualifying child,you regularly live within one of the 50 states or
orthe District of Columbia. Self-employed persons and statutory em-
ployees. If you are self-employed or received• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifyingHomeless shelter. You do not need a tradi-
income as a statutory employee, you must usechild.tional home. If you lived in one or more home-
Form 1040 or Publication 596 to see if youless shelters in the United States for more than
qualify to get the EIC and to figure the amount ofhalf the year, you meet this rule. Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).your total earned income and the amount of EIC.
Modified AGI for most people is the same asMilitary personnel stationed outside the
Church employee. In this publication, thisAGI. AGI is the amount on line 34 (Form 1040),United States. U.S. military personnel sta-
term means an employee (other than a ministerline 20 (Form 1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ).tioned outside the United States on extended
or member of a religious order) of a church orTo find your modified AGI, you must add certainactive duty (defined in Rule 7) are considered to
qualified church-controlled organization that isamounts such as tax-exempt interest and somelive in the United States during that duty period
exempt from employer social security and Medi-other gains and losses. But if you are filingfor the EIC.
care taxes. Schedule C, C–EZ, D, E, or F, or if you claim a
loss from the rental of personal property notTaxable earned income.You figure your tax-used in a trade or business, you must get Publi-able earned income by starting with the amountcation 596 to figure your modified AGI. You mustPart D. Figuring and on the Wages line on your tax return ( line 7,also get Publication 596 if you (or your spouse ifForms 1040 and 1040A, or line 1, Form filing a joint return) received any distributionsClaiming the EIC 1040EZ). You then subtract the following from a pension, annuity, or IRA that are not fullyamounts from the amount on the Wages line on taxable.Use this part if you have met all the rules in Parts your tax return.
A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C. Community property. If you are married,• Any taxable scholarship or fellowshipThis part of the chapter discusses Rules 14 but qualify to file as head of household undergrant not reported on a Form W–2.and 15. You must meet both rules, in addition to special rules for married taxpayers living apart
the rules in Parts A and B, or Parts A and C, to • Any amount you received for work done (see Rule 2), and live in a state that has commu-
qualify for the earned income credit. while an inmate in a penal institution that nity property laws, your adjusted gross income
This part of the chapter also explains how to is included in the total on line 7 (Form (AGI) for the EIC includes that portion of both
figure the amount of your credit. You have two 1040 or Form 1040A) or line 1 (Form your and your spouse’s wages that you are
choices. 1040EZ). required to include in gross income. This is dif-
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 251

Page 254 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ferent from the community property rules that Be sure to enter the child’s social security an amount paid to you for work performed while
apply under Rule 6. number on line 2 of that schedule. If you an inmate, print “PRI” and the amount paid on
do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- the dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040), in the
Example. Bob will file Form 1040A. His AGIallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- space to the left of line 7 (Form 1040A), or in the
(line 20) is $12,000. He will report $300 ofturn. space to the right of the words “W –2 form(s)” on
tax-exempt interest from a municipal bond on line 1 (Form 1040EZ).
line 8b. His modified AGI for the EIC is $12,300
Deferred compensation plans. If you re-($12,000 + $300). Form 1040EZ ceived a pension or annuity from a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan or a section 457If you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS toIRS Will Figure plan, put “DFC ” and the amount subtracted onfigure your credit for you, follow these steps.the dotted line next to line 7 (Form 1040). Thisthe EIC for You
amount may be reported in box 11 of your Form1) Print EIC on line 9b. Also, if you have
The IRS will figure the amount of your EIC for W-2. If you received such an amount but box 11earned income that is not taxed, enter the
you if you follow the steps explained in this is blank, contact your employer for the amount ofamount on line 9b. See Table 37–2 for
section. If you have a qualifying child, complete the pension or annuity.examples of earned income that is not
and attach Schedule EIC. taxed. Then, if you have any of the situa-
tions listed later under Special Instructions,Please do not ask the IRS to figure How To Figure thefollow those instructions.your EIC unless you are eligible for it. EIC YourselfRead the rules in Parts A, B, C, and DCAUTION
!
2) Complete all other parts of your return that
to see if you qualify. apply to you, but do not fill in lines 10, 12a,This part of this chapter explains how to use the
or 13. EIC Worksheet and how to report the credit onIf you want the IRS to also figure the your return. To figure the amount of your earnedamount of your income tax, see chap- income credit, you can use the Earned Incometer 31.
TIP
Credit Worksheet (EIC Worksheet) in the in-Special Instructions struction booklet for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or
Form 1040EZ, and the Earned Income CreditUse the following special instructions, if the situ-
(EIC) Table in the tax form instruction booklet.ation applies to you.Form 1040 However, certain people must use Publication
Qualifying child information (Schedule EIC).596 to see if they meet the rules to take the EICIf you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figureWhether the IRS figures your credit or you figureand to figure the amount of the credit. You mustyour credit for you, follow these steps. it yourself, you must give the IRS informationuse Publication 596 if any of the following situa-
about your qualifying child. To do this, completetions applies to you.1) Print EIC directly to the right of line 61a.Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 orAlso, if you have any earned income that • The amount on Form 1040, line 21, in-Form 1040A.is not taxed, enter the amount of that in- cludes an amount from Form 8814 (relat-The information you enter on Schedule EICcome on line 61b. See Table 37–2 for ing to a child’s interest and dividends).must show that the child meets all the tests for aexamples of earned income that is notqualifying child. (See Rule 7.) The schedule has • Your investment income (Rule 5) is $2,450taxed. Then, if you have any of the situa-space for information about only two qualifyingor more and you are filing Form 4797 (re-tions listed later under Special Instructions,children because the amount of your credit is thelating to the sale of business property).follow those instructions. same whether you have two, three, or more
• You are filing Schedule E, Supplemental2) Complete all other parts of your return thatqualifying children.
Income and Loss, (Form 1040).apply to you (including line 56), but do notDo not file Form 1040EZ if you have afill in lines 66, 67, 68, and 70. If you do not • You are reporting income or a loss fromqualifying child and qualify for thehave a qualifying child, stop here. the rental of personal property not used incredit. You must file Form 1040 orCAUTION
!
a trade or business.3) If you have a qualifying child, completeForm 1040A.
Schedule EIC according to its instructions. • You are claiming a loss on Form 1040,Be sure to enter the child’s social securityMinister or member of a religious order.If line 12, 13, or 18.number on line 2 of that schedule. If youyou are filing Schedule SE and line 2 of that
• You (or your spouse if filing a joint return)do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-schedule includes an amount that is also in-
received distributions from a pension, an-allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-cluded on Form 1040, line 7, print “Clergy” di-
nuity, or IRA that are not fully taxable.turn. rectly to the right of line 61a (Form 1040). Also
show the amount included on both lines (for• You owe alternative minimum tax (AMT),
example, “Clergy $800”). If you received a hous-found on Form 1040, line 41, or included
ing allowance or were provided housing and youin the total found on Form 1040A, line 35.Form 1040A were required to include the allowance or the
rental value of the parsonage on Schedule SE,If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure The amount of your earned income credit de-
line 2, do not include it as nontaxable earnedyour credit for you, follow these steps. pends on:
income on line 61b of Form 1040.
• Whether you have no qualifying child, one1) Print EIC directly to the right of line 39a.Household employee. If you were a house- qualifying child, or two or more qualifyingAlso, if you have earned income that is nothold employee who did not receive a Form W–2 children,taxed, enter the amount of that income onbecause your employer paid you less thanline 39b. See Table 37–2 for examples of • The amount of your earned income (de-$1,300 in 2001, print “HSH ” and the amount paidearned income that is not taxed. Then, if fined in Rule 7) and modified AGI (definedthat was not reported on Form W–2 in the spaceyou have any of the situations listed later in Rule 15), andto the right of the words “W –2 form(s)” on line 1under Special Instructions, follow those in-(Form 1040EZ), or on the dotted line next to line• Whether you owe AMT.structions. 7 (Form 1040), or in the space to the left of line 7
(Form 1040A). Also, be sure to include that2) Complete all other parts of your return that
Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you fileamount in the total for line 1 of Form 1040EZ orapply to you (including line 36), but do not
Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,line 7 of either Form 1040 or Form 1040A.fill in lines 41, 42, 43, and 45. If you do not
follow these steps.have a qualifying child, stop here. Inmates. If you were an inmate in a penal
3) If you have a qualifying child, complete institution and the total on line 7 (Form 1040 or 1) Go to your form instruction booklet and
Schedule EIC according to its instructions. Form 1040A), or line 1 (Form 1040EZ) includes turn to the instructions for Lines 61a and
Page 252 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 255 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
61b and look for Worksheet A or Work- 3) Enter the amount of your earned income Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their total
credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on earned income).sheet B.
Form 1040EZ, line 9a. Line 2. The Smiths go to the Earned In-2) Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies
4) Enter the amount of any nontaxable come Credit Table in the Form 1040A instruc-to your situation according to its instruc-
earned income on Form 1040EZ, line 9b. tions. The Smiths find their income of $11,000tions. If you were self-employed or a
within the range of $10,750 to $13,100. Theychurch employee or used Schedule C or 5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.follow this line across to the column “One child”C –EZ as a statutory employee, complete Do not attach it to your income tax return.and find $2,428 and enter it on this line 2.Worksheet B. Find the amount of your
credit in the EIC Table in your instruction Line 3. The Smiths enter their modified AGI
booklet. of $11,000.
3) Enter the amount of your earned income Line 4. The Smiths check the “Yes” boxExamplescredit from Worksheet A or B on Form because lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000).
1040, line 61a. They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2The following two comprehensive examples ($2,428) on line 6.4) Enter the amount and type of any nontax-(complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful
when figuring the earned income credit. The twoable earned income on Form 1040, line Line 6. The Smiths’ EIC is $2,428.
examples are:61b.
5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. Example 2. Kelly Green1) John and Janet Smith with one qualifying
Do not attach it to your income tax return.child and using Form 1040A, and (Form 1040EZ)If you do not have a qualifying child, stop2) Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with nohere. Kelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student.qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.
She lived with her parents in the United States6) If you have a qualifying child, complete
for all of 2001. She had a part-time job andSchedule EIC according to its instructions.
earned $6,040. She earned $20 interest on aBe sure to enter the child’s social securityExample 1. John and Janet
savings account. She is not eligible to benumber on line 2 of that schedule. If youSmith (Form 1040A) claimed as a dependent on her parents’ return.do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- Although she lived with her parents, she is notallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-John and Janet Smith are married and will file atheir qualifying child because she does not meetturn. joint return. They have one child— Amy, who is the age test. She does not have any children.3 years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for allKelly qualifies for the earned income credit.of 2001. John worked and earned $9,500. JanetKelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete theForm 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you fileworked part of the year and earned $1,500.EIC Worksheet.Form 1040A and want to figure the credit your-Their total earned income and modified AGI isself, follow these steps. $11,000. John and Janet qualify for the earned
income credit and fill out the EIC Worksheet and1) Go to your form instruction booklet and Completing the EIC WorksheetSchedule EIC. The Smiths will attach Scheduleturn to the instructions for Lines 39a and EIC to Form 1040A when they send their com-Kelly figures the amount of her earned income39b and look for the EIC Worksheet. pleted return to the IRS. credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows.
2) Complete the EIC Worksheet according toThey took the following steps to complete
Line 1. She enters $6,040 (her total earnedits instructions. Find the amount of yourSchedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.
income).credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-
tion booklet. Line 2. Kelly goes to the Earned Income
Completing Schedule EIC Credit Table in the forms instruction booklet.3) Enter the amount of your earned income
She finds her earned income of $6,040 in thecredit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet onThe Smiths complete Schedule EIC becauserange of $6,000 to $6,050. Kelly follows this lineForm 1040A, line 39a. they have a qualifying child. They enter “John across to the column “No children” and findsand Janet Smith” and John’s SSN (the SSN that4) Enter the amount of any nontaxable $358. She enters $358 on line 2.appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line atearned income on Form 1040A, line 39b. Line 3. Kelly enters $6,060 (her modifiedthe top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths fill out
5) Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. AGI).Qualifying Child Information (lines 1–6).
Do not attach it to your income tax return. Line 4. Kelly checks the “No ” box becauseLine 1. The Smiths enter the first name andIf you do not have a qualifying child, stop lines 1 and 3 are not the same ($6,040 andlast name for Amy in the column “Child 1.”here. $6,060).Line 2. They enter Amy’s SSN. (See Rule 7,6) If you have a qualifying child, complete Line 5. Kelly checks the “No ” box becauseearlier.)Schedule EIC according to its instructions. the amount on line 3 ($6,060) is not less thanBe sure to enter the child’s social security Line 3. They enter the year of birth for Amy$5,770. She goes to the Earned Income Creditnumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you(1998). Table in the forms instruction booklet. She findsdo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- her modified adjusted gross income of $6,060 inLines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip theseallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- the range of $6,050 to $6,100. Kelly follows thislines because Amy was not born before 1982.turn. line across to the column “No children” and findsLine 5. The Smiths enter “Daughter” for $355. She enters $355 on line 5. She looks atAmy. This column shows Amy’s relationship tothe amounts on lines 5 and 2. $355 is theForm 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you fileJohn and Janet. smaller amount.Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-
Line 6. The Smiths enter “12” for Amy. Thisself, follow these steps. Line 6. She enters $355 here and on Formis how many months Amy lived with them in1040EZ, line 9a. The $355 is Kelly’s earned2001.1) Go to your form instruction booklet and income credit.
turn to the instructions for Lines 9a and
9b and look for the EIC Worksheet.
Completing the EIC Worksheet2) Complete the EIC Worksheet according to
its instructions. Find the amount of yourNext, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-
credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-sheet to figure their earned income credit
tion booklet. amount.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 253

Page 256 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John and Janet Smith 0 2
Amy
98
Daughter
1
Smith
2
04 22200 00
022 2222
91
/H17076 OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE EIC Earned Income Credit(Form 1040A or 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 43
Qualifying Child Information
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A
or 1040 instructions.
Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2001Cat. No. 13339M
Before you begin: See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 39a and 39b, or Form 1040, lines 61a and 61b,
to make sure that (a) you can take the EIC and (b) you have a qualifying child.
Qualifying Child Information
● It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply
for each qualifying child.
3
4
2
5
6
1 Child ’s name
Child’s year of birth
Child’s SSN
If the child was born before 1983 —
Child’s relationship to you
Number of months child lived with
you in the United States during 2001
months
Yes.
months
Was the child under age 24 at the end
of 2001 and a student?
Was the child permanently and totally
disabled during any part of 2001?
a
b
Yes.
First name Last name First name Last name
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
(99)
EIC
1040A
1040
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040
only if you have a qualifying child.
● Be sure the child ’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child ’s
social security card. Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your
EIC. If the name or SSN on the child ’s social security card is not correct, call the Social Security
Administration at 1-800-772-1213.
Child 1 Child 2
If you have more than two qualifying children, you
only have to list two to get the maximum credit.
The child must have an SSN as defined on page 42
of the Form 1040A instructions or page 44 of the
Form 1040 instructions unless the child was born and
died in 2001. If your child was born and died in 2001
and did not have an SSN, enter“Died” on this line
and attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate.
Year
If born after 1982, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
Year
No. No.
Go to line 5. Go to line 5.Continue Continue
Yes. Yes. No. No.
Continue ContinueThe child is not a
qualifying child.
The child is not a
qualifying child.
● If the child lived with you for more than half of
2001 but less than 7 months, enter“7”.
● If the child was born or died in 2001 and your
home was the child’s home for the entire time he
or she was alive during 2001, enter“12”.
Do not enter more than 12 months. Do not enter more than 12 months.
Y ou may also be able to take the additional child tax credit if your child (a) was under age 17 at the end of 2001, (b) is
claimed as your dependent on line 6c of Form 1040A or Form 1040, and (c) is a U.S. citizen or resident alien. For more
details, see the instructions for line 40 of Form 1040A or line 63 of Form 1040.
. . . . . . . . . .
● If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up
to 10 years. See back of schedule for details.
If born after 1982, skip lines 4a
and 4b; go to line 5.
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,
foster child, etc.)
2001
Filled-in Schedule EIC— John and Janet Smith
(Page references are to the Schedule EIC instructions.)
Page 254 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 257 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filled-in EIC Worksheet— John and Janet Smith
(Page references are to the Form 1040A Instructions)
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet — Lines 39a and 39b
1040A
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your total earned income from Step 8,
Box D, on page 41.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on pages 44–46
to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter your modified adjusted gross income from
Step 6, Box A, on page 40.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than:
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on
pages 44–46 to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 39a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Put “No” directly to the right of line 39a.
● $5,950 if you do not have a qualifying child or
● $13,100 if you have one or more qualifying children?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
/H12011
Reminder—
Be sure you entered the amount of any nontaxable earned income (Step
7, Box B, on page 41) on Form 1040A, line 39b.
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 42 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the
credit for 2001.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
11,000
2,428
11,000
2,428
/H12011
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 255

Page 258 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not be entitled to get EIC. If your wages are not EIC, you will have to pay back any advance
subject to federal income tax, social security tax, payment you are not entitled to when you fileAdvance Earned or Medicare tax withholding, you cannot get the your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
advance payment of the earned income credit. If
Income Credit When to give your employer a new Formyou are a farm worker and are paid on a dailyW –5. The 2002 Form W–5 you give to yourbasis, your employer is not required to pay youWould you like to get part of your earned income employer is valid until December 31, 2002. If youthe advance amount of the credit.credit now instead of waiting until after the end of expect to qualify for the earned income credit in
the year? If you work for someone and expect to 2003 and you want to receive advance pay-
qualify for the earned income credit in 2002, youHow To Get Advance ments, you must give your employer a new
can choose to get part of the credit in advance. Form W –5 in 2003. Do this each year you thinkPayments for 2002Give your employer a 2002 Form W –5, Earned you are eligible for the credit.
Income Credit Advance Payment Certificate, If you no longer want to get advance pay-To get part of the credit in advance, you must filland your employer will include part of the credit ments or if your situation changes and you noout a 2002 Form W–5. After you have read theregularly in your pay. The advance payment is longer qualify for the earned income credit, youinstructions and answered the questions ononly available if you have at least one qualifying must give your employer a new Form W–5.Form W –5, give the lower part of the form tochild. Check the No box on line 1 of the new form.your employer. Keep the top part for your rec-
If your spouse files a Form W–5 with his orords.Who can get the advance payment of the her employer, you must file a new Form W–5earned income credit? To get part of the More than one employer. If you have more with your employer. Check the Yes box on lineearned income credit paid to you throughout thethan one employer, give a certificate to only one4.year in your paycheck, you must meet all theof them. If you are married and both you andfollowing rules. your spouse are employed and expect to qualifyAdvance Paymentsfor the credit, you may give a Form W–5 to your1) You must expect that your earned income
employer and your spouse may give one to hisReceived in 2001and modified AGI will each be less than a
or her employer.certain amount. The amount in 2001 was
If you received advance payments of the earned$28,281. The amount for 2002 will be If you receive advance earned incomeincome credit in 2001, you must file a tax returnhigher. (See the 2002 Form W–5 for the credit payments in 2002, you must fileto report the payments. Report the amount on2002 amount.) Form 1040 or Form 1040A for tax yearCAUTION
!
line 56 (Form 1040), or line 35 (Form 1040A).2002. You must file a return to report what you2) You must have a qualifying child. Your Form W –2, box 9, will show the amountalready received and to take advantage of anyyou received.3) You must expect to meet all the rules inadditional earned income credit that you may
Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in thequalify for. You cannot use Form 1040EZ to report
instructions for Form W–5. your advance payments.
Receipt of advance payments you do not CAUTION
!
Persons who are not entitled to receive ad-qualify for.If you receive advance payments
vance payments.  Under certain circum- and later find out that you do not qualify for the
stances, even if you meet these rules, you may
Page 256 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 259 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist
You may claim the EIC if you answer YES to all the following questions.*
YES NO
1. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 1.)❏❏
2. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? (See
Rule 2.)
Caution: If you are a nonresident alien, answer YES  only if your filing status is married filing
jointly and you are married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien. (See Rule 3.) ❏❏
3. Answer YES  if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ. Otherwise, answer NO . (See
Rule 4.) ❏❏
4. Is your investment income $2,450 or less? (See Rule 5.) ❏❏
5.Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than:
• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying child.
• $28,281 if you have one qualifying child, or
• $32,121 if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rules 6 and 14.) ❏❏
6.Is your modified AGI less than:
• $10,710 if you do not have a qualifying child.
• $28,281 if you have one qualifying child, or
• $32,121 if you have more than one qualifying child?
(See Rule 15.) ❏❏
7. Answer YES  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another
person. (See Rules 9 and 12.) ❏❏
STOP If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10–12. If you
do not have a qualifying child, skip answers 8 and 9 and answer 10–12.*
8. Does your child meet the age, residency, and relationship tests for a qualifying child? (See Rule
7.) ❏❏
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer YES  if your qualified child is also a
qualifying child for another person but your modified AGI is higher than the other person’s. (See
Rule 8.) ❏❏
10. Was your main home (and your spouse’s if filing a joint return) in the United States for more
than half the year? (See Rule 13.) ❏❏
11. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2001?
(See Rule 10.) ❏❏
12. Answer YES  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on
anyone else’s return. Answer NO  if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed
as a dependent on someone else’s return. (See Rule 11.) ❏❏
*PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered YES  to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the
EIC. Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form
1040EZ.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD:  If you answered YES  to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through
12, you can claim the EIC.
If you answered NO to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit Page 257

Page 260 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filled-in EIC Worksheet — Kelly Green
(Page references are to the Form 1040EZ instructions.)
6,040
6,060
358
355
355
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet — Lines 9a and 9b
1040EZ
Yes. Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your total earned income from Step 4,
Box D, on page 16.
Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC T able on page 19 to
find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter your modified adjusted gross income from
Step 2, Box A, on page 15.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
No. Go to line 5.
Is the amount on line 3 less than $5,950?
Yes. Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC T able on page 19
to find the credit. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040EZ, line 9a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
If line 2 is zero, Y ou cannot take the credit.
Print“No ” to the right of the words“page 15” on line 9a.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
/H12011
Reminder—
Be sure you entered the amount of any nontaxable earned income (Step
3, Box B, on page 16) on Form 1040EZ, line 9b.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see page 16
to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit for 2001.
/H17076
Page 258 Chapter 37 Earned Income Credit

Page 261 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ments you made. If this total is more than your If your advance payment does not equal the
total tax, the excess will be refunded to you. amount shown, you may be able to claim the
rate reduction credit.
38. Useful Items Offsets. You are considered to have re-
You may want to see: ceived the full amount of the advance payment
even though all or part of that amount was used
Publication to offset (pay) certain past-due amounts. ForOther Credits
information on offsets, see Offsets against❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for
debts, in chapter 1.Individuals
How to figure the credit.Use the Rate Re-Important Change ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
duction Credit Worksheet in your form instruc-❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest tions to figure your credit based on your 2001 taxRate reduction credit.You may qualify for Deduction return. If the credit is more than your advancethe rate reduction credit if you did not receive the payment, you can claim the difference as the❏ 968 Tax Benefits of Adoptionmaximum advance payment in 2001. See Rate rate reduction credit. If the credit is not moreReduction Credit, later. than your advance payment, you cannot claimForm (and Instructions)
the rate reduction credit. You do not have to payExcess withholding of social security tax ❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual, back the advance payment that is more thanand tier 1 railroad retirement tax.Social se- Estate, Trust, or Nonresident Alienyour credit.curity and tier 1 railroad retirement tax (RRTA) Individual)are both withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. If you are filing a joint return for 2001,The maximum wages subject to this tax in- ❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credit you must add your and your spouse’screased to $80,400 in 2001. If you had two or advance payments (before offsets) to❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum
CAUTION
!
more employers and they withheld too much determine the total advance payment received.Tax— Individuals, Estates, andsocial security or RRTA tax during 2001, you Trustsmay be entitled to a credit of the excess with-
Example 1. For 2001, you are single and,holding. For more information about the credit,❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
based on your 2001 tax return, you qualify for asee Credit for Excess Social Security Tax or Subsidy
rate reduction credit of $250. During 2001, youRailroad Retirement Tax Withheld under Re- ❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Creditreceived $300 as an advance payment of in-fundable Credits, later.
come tax. Since the advance payment is more❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses
than your rate reduction credit, you cannot claim
the credit. You do not have to pay back any of
your advance payment.Introduction
Example 2. You get married during 2001This chapter discusses the following credits.Nonrefundable Credits
and file a joint return for that year. Based on your• Rate reduction credit. 2001 tax return, you qualify for the maximumThe following credits are discussed in this part.
rate reduction credit of $600. During 2001, you• Adoption credit. • Rate reduction credit. received $225 and your spouse received $300• Foreign tax credit. as advance payments of income tax based on• Adoption credit.
your individual tax returns for 2000. You must• Mortgage interest credit. • Foreign tax credit. reduce your maximum rate reduction credit by• Credit for prior year minimum tax. • Mortgage interest credit. the advance payments you and your spouse
received. Your credit for 2001 is $75.• Credit for electric vehicles. • Credit for prior year minimum tax.
Dependents. If you, or your spouse if filing• Credit for excess social security tax or rail-• Credit for electric vehicles. a joint return, can be claimed as a dependent onroad retirement tax withheld.
someone else’s return, you cannot claim the• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. credit. Figure your tax using the Tax Computa-Rate Reduction Credit tion Worksheet for Certain Dependents in yourSeveral other credits are discussed in other form instructions unless you, or your spouse ifFor 2001, the lowest tax rate is 10%. Most indi-chapters in this publication. filing a joint return, received an advance pay-viduals received the benefits of the new 10%
ment of income tax during 2001.• Child and dependent care credit (chapterrate in an advance payment of income tax based
33). on their 2000 tax returns. You can use the work-Nonresident alien.If you were a nonresi-
sheet in your form instructions to determinedent alien at the end of the year you cannot• Credit for the elderly or the disabled
whether you can claim the rate reduction creditclaim the credit. See your Form 1040NR instruc-(chapter 34).
based on your 2001 return. tions for how to figure your tax.• Child tax credit (chapter 35).
Advance payment. Any advance payment of• Education credits (chapter 36). Adoption Creditincome tax that you received (before offset) dur-
ing 2001 was based on your 2000 tax return.• Earned income credit (chapter 37).
You may be able to take a tax credit of up toThis payment is not subject to federal income
$5,000 for qualifying expenses paid to adopt antax. If you filed a joint return for 2000, you andNonrefundable credits.The first part of this eligible child. The credit can be as much asyour spouse are each considered to have re-chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers six $6,000 if the expenses are for the adoption of aceived one-half of the advance payment.credits that you subtract directly from your tax. child with special needs.This advance payment reduces your rateThese credits may reduce your tax to zero. If If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI)reduction credit. You cannot claim the credit ifthese credits are more than your tax, the excess is more than $75,000, your credit is reduced. Ifthe advance payment is equal to the amountis not refunded to you. your modified AGI is $115,000 or more, youshown for your 2001 filing status.
cannot claim the credit.Refundable credits.The second part of this • Single or married filing separately— $300.
chapter, Refundable Credits, covers two credits Qualifying expenses.Qualifying adoption ex-• Head of household— $500.that are treated as payments and are refundable penses are reasonable and necessary adoption
to you. These credits are added to the federal• Married filing jointly or qualifying fees, court costs, attorney fees, traveling ex-
income tax withheld and any estimated tax pay- widow(er)— $600. penses (including amounts spent for meals and
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 259

Page 262 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lodging) while away from home, and other ex- You cannot take a credit (or deduction) forCarryforward. If your allowable credit is more
penses directly related to, and whose principal foreign income taxes paid on income that is than your tax liability reduced by certain credits,
purpose is for, the legal adoption of an eligible exempt from U.S. tax under the foreign earned you can carry forward the unused portion of the
child. income exclusion or the foreign housing exclu- credit to your next 3 tax years or until used,
sion. whichever comes first.Nonqualifying expenses.Qualifying adop- If you are subject to the $2,000 limit becausetion expenses do not include expenses: Limit on the credit.Your foreign tax credityour certificate credit rate is more than 20%, nocannot be more than your U.S. tax liability (line• That violate state or federal law, amount over the $2,000 (or your prorated share40, Form 1040) multiplied by a fraction. Theof the $2,000 if you must allocate the credit) may• For carrying out any surrogate parentingnumerator of the fraction is your taxable incomebe carried forward.arrangement, from sources outside the United States. The
denominator is your total taxable income fromReduced home mortgage interest deduction.• For the adoption of your spouse’s child, U.S. and foreign sources. See Publication 514If you claim the credit and itemize your deduc-
• Paid using funds received from any fed-for more information. tions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you must
eral, state, or local program, reduce your home mortgage interest deduction.How to claim the credit. Complete Form Reduce your deduction by the amount on line 3• Allowed as a credit or deduction under any1116 and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter theof Form 8396, even if part of that amount is to beother federal income tax rule, or credit on line 43, Form 1040. carried forward to 2002. For more information
• Paid or reimbursed by your employer or about the home mortgage interest deduction,Election not to file Form 1116.You will not
any other person or organization. see chapter 25.be subject to the limit and may be able to claim
the credit without using Form 1116 if all the
Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy.Iffollowing requirements are met.Eligible child.The term “eligible child” means your home was financed with a mortgage from aany individual: 1) You are an individual. qualified mortgage bond program or you re-
ceived an MCC, you may be subject to a recap-1) Under 18 years old, or 2) Your only foreign source income for theture rule. The recapture would generally occur iftax year is passive income (dividends, in-2) Physically or mentally incapable of caring you sold or disposed of your home during theterest, royalties, etc.) that is reported tofor himself or herself. first 9 years after the date you closed your mort-you on a payee statement (such as a Formgage loan. See Publication 523, Selling Your1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orChild with special needs.An eligible child Home, for more information.1099–INT, Interest Income).is a child with special needs if:
How to claim the credit.Figure your 20013) Your qualified foreign taxes for the tax1) He or she is a citizen or resident of the credit and any carryforward to 2002 on Formyear are not more than $300 ($600 if filingUnited States (including the District of Co- 8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be surea joint return) and are reported on a payeelumbia and U.S. possessions) and to include any credit carryforward from 1998,statement.
1999, and 2000.2) A state determines that the child cannot or4) You elect this procedure for the tax year.Include the credit in your total for line 50,should not be returned to his or her par-
Form 1040, and check box b.ents’ home and probably will not be If you qualify and elect not to file Form 1116,
adopted unless adoption assistance is pro-enter the amount of your foreign taxes paid on
vided to the adoptive parents. line 43, Form 1040. Credit for Prior Year
Factors used by states to determine if a child If you make this election, you cannotMinimum Tax
has special needs could include: carry back or carry over any unused
foreign tax to or from this tax year.The tax laws give special treatment to someCAUTION
!
• The child’s ethnic background,
kinds of income and allow special deductions
• The child’s age, and credits for some kinds of expenses. If you
benefit from these laws, you may have to pay atMortgage Interest Credit• Whether the child is a member of a minor-
least a minimum amount of tax in addition to anyity or sibling group, or Mortgage credit certificates issued by state andother tax on these items. This is called the alter-
• Whether the child has a medical conditionlocal governments may entitle a certificatenative minimum tax.
or physical, mental, or emotional handi-holder to a mortgage interest credit. The certifi-The special treatment of some items of in-
cap. cate must be used in connection with the come and expenses only allows you to postpone
purchase, qualified rehabilitation, or qualifiedpaying tax until a later year. If in prior years you
home improvement of the certificate holder’s paid alternative minimum tax because of theseA foreign child cannot be treated as a
main home. tax postponement items, you may be able tochild with special needs.
claim a credit for prior year minimum tax againstCAUTION
!
Who qualifies. You may be able to claim ayour current year’s regular tax. The amount ofmortgage interest credit if you were issued athe credit cannot reduce your current year’s taxmortgage credit certificate (MCC) under aWhen to claim the credit. Generally, you below your current year’s tentative alternativequalified MCC program. The MCC must relate tocannot take any credit before the year the adop- minimum tax.your main home.tion becomes final. See Publication 968 for infor- You may be able to take a credit against your
mation on when to claim expenses paid before regular tax if you:Amount of credit.If your mortgage is equal tothe year the adoption becomes final. (or smaller than) the certified indebtedness1) Paid alternative minimum tax in 2000,amount (loan) shown on your MCC, you multiplyHow to claim the credit.To claim the credit,the certified credit rate, shown on your MCC, by 2) Had an unused minimum tax credit thatyou must complete Form 8839 and attach it toall the interest you paid on your mortgage during you are carrying forward from 2000 toyour Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Enter the creditthe year. 2001, oron line 49, Form 1040, or line 31, Form 1040A.If your mortgage is larger than the certified3) Had unallowed qualified electric vehicleindebtedness amount shown on your MCC, you credits in 2000.Foreign Tax Credit multiply the certified credit rate, shown on your
MCC, by only the interest allocated to the certi-
You generally can choose to claim income taxes How to claim the credit.Figure your 2001fied indebtedness amount shown on your MCC.
you paid or accrued during the year to a foreign credit and any carryforward to 2002 on Form
If the certificate credit rate is more thancountry or U.S. possession as a credit against 8801, and attach it to your Form 1040. Include
20%, the credit cannot be more thanyour U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct them the credit in your total for line 50, Form 1040,
$2,000.as an itemized deduction (see chapter 24).
CAUTION
!
and check box c. You can carry forward any
Page 260 Chapter 38 Other Credits

Page 263 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
unused credit for prior year minimum tax to later ity tax or RRTA withheld from your pay. You can1. Add all social security tax withheldyears until it is completely used. claim the excess as a credit against your income(but not more than $4,984.80 forFor additional information about the credit, tax. The following table shows the maximumeach employer). Enter the totalsee the instructions for Form 8801. amount of wages subject to tax and the maxi- here..................... $5,270.00
mum amount of tax that should have been with-
2. Enter any uncollected socialheld in 2001.Credit for Electric Vehicles security tax on tips or group-term
life insurance included in the totalMaximum taxYou may be allowed a tax credit if you placed a on Form 1040, line 58......... –0–Maximum that shouldqualified electric vehicle in service during the wages have 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,984.80 oryear. Type of Tax subject to tax been withheld less, stop here. You cannot claim
the credit................. 5,270.00Qualified electric vehicle.This is a motor ve-Social
hicle that: Security or 4. Social security tax limit........ 4,984.80
RRTA tier 1 $80,400 $4,984.80 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.1) Has at least four wheels and is manufac-
RRTA tier 2 $59,700 $2,925.30 Enter the result here and on Formtured primarily for use on public streets,
1040, line 62 (or Form 1040A, lineroads, and highways,
All wages are subject to Medicare tax4 1 ) ..................... $ 285.20
2) Is powered primarily by an electric motor withholding.
that draws its power from rechargeable How to figure the credit if you worked for aCAUTION
!
batteries, fuel cells, or other portable railroad.If you were a railroad employee dur-
sources of electrical current, ing 2001, figure the credit as follows:One employer. If any one employer withheld
3) Is originally used by you, and social security or RRTA tax that exceeded the
amounts in the preceding table, you cannot1. Add all social security and tier 14) Is acquired for your own use, not for re- RRTA tax withheld (but not moreclaim the extra amount withheld by that em-sale. than $4,984.80 for eachployer as a credit against your income tax. Your
employer). Enter the total here . .employer must adjust this for you.Amount of credit.The credit is equal to 10%
2. Enter any uncollected socialof the cost of the vehicle. However, if the vehicleJoint return.If you are filing a joint return, yousecurity and tier 1 RRTA tax onis a depreciable business asset, you must re-cannot add the social security or RRTA tax with-tips or group-term life insuranceduce the cost by any section 179 deductionheld from your spouse’s wages to the amount included in the total on Form 1040,before figuring the credit. Get Publication 463,withheld from your wages. Figure the credit sep-line 58...................Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses,arately for both you and your spouse to deter-
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,984.80 orfor information on the section 179 deduction.mine if either of you has excess withholding.
less, enter –0– on line 5 and goThe credit is limited to $4,000 for each vehi-
How to claim the credit.If you file Form 1040,to line 6..................cle placed in service in 2001.
4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA taxenter the credit on line 62. If you file Form
Special rules.You cannot take the credit if limit.................... 4,984.801040A, include the credit in the total on line 41
you use the vehicle predominately outside theand put “Excess SST” and the amount of the 5. Subtract line 4 from line 3......United States. credit in the space to the left of the line.
6. Add all tier 2 RRTA tax withheldThe credit will be subject to recapture if,
How to figure the credit if you did not work(but not more than $2,925.30 forwithin 3 years after the date you place the vehi-
each employer). Enter the totalfor a railroad.If you did not work for a railroadcle in service, the vehicle is used predominately
here ....................during 2001, figure the credit as follows:outside the United States or is modified so that it
is no longer eligible for the credit. 7. Enter any uncollected tier 2
railroad retirement tax on tips or1. Add all social security tax withheldHow to claim the credit.To claim the credit, group-term life insurance included(but not more than $4,984.80 forcomplete Form 8834, and attach it to your Form in the total on Form 1040, line 58each employer). Enter the total1040. Include the credit in your total for line 50,here..................... 8. Add lines 6 and 7. If $2,925.30 orForm 1040. Check box d, and print “8834” on the
less, enter –0– on line 10 and go2. Enter any uncollected socialline next to box d. to line 11.................security tax on tips or group-term
9. RRTA tier 2 limit............ 2,925.30life insurance included in the total
on Form 1040, line 58......... 10. Subtract line 9 from line 8......
3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $4,984.80 orRefundable Credits 11. Credit. Add lines 5 and 10. Enterless, stop here. You cannot claim the result here and on Form 1040,the credit.................The following credits are refundable and are line 62 (or Form 1040A, line 41)
treated as payments of tax. 4. Social security tax limit........ 4,984.80
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.• Credit for excess social security tax or rail- Credit for Tax onEnter the result here and on Formroad retirement tax withheld.
1040, line 62 (or Form 1040A, line Undistributed• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain.4 1 ) ..................... Capital Gain
Example. You are married and file a joint You must include in your income any amountsCredit for Excess Social
return with your spouse who had no gross in-that regulated investment companies (com-Security Tax or Railroad come in 2001. During 2001 you worked for the monly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-
Brown Shoe Company and earned $45,000 in ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capitalRetirement Tax Withheld
wages. Social security tax of $2,790 was with- gain distributions, even if you did not actually
Most employers must withhold social security held. You also worked for another employer in receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid a
tax from your wages. If you work for a railroad 2001 and earned $40,000 in wages. $2,480 of tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a credit
employer, that employer must withhold tier 1 social security tax was withheld from these for the tax since it is considered paid by you. The
railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA wages. Because you worked for more than one mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439,
tax. employer and your total wages were more than Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed
If you worked for two or more employers in $80,400 you can claim a credit of $285.20 for theLong-Term Capital Gains, showing the undis-
2001, you may have had too much social secur- excess social security tax withheld. tributed capital gains and the tax paid, if any.
Chapter 38 Other Credits Page 261

Page 264 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Claim the credit for the tax paid by entering the box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your 9 for more information on undistributed capital
amount on line 65, Form 1040, and checking return. See Capital Gain Distributions in chapter gains.
Page 262 Chapter 38 Other Credits

Page 265 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001
Tax Table
Use if your taxable income is less than $100,000.
If $100,000 or more, use the Tax Rate Schedules.
Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on line 39 of Form 1040 is $25,300. First,
they find the $25,300–25,350 income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the
column. The amount shown where the income line and filing
status column meet is $3,799. This is the tax amount they
should enter on line 40 of their Form 1040.
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
(Continued on next page)
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
4,112
4,126
4,139
4,153
3,784
3,791
3,799
3,806
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
0 1,300 2,70005 00 0
51 5 22 2 2
15 25 33 3 3
25 50 66 6 6
50 75 99 9 9
75 100 13 13 13 13
100 125 17 17 17 17
125 150 21 21 21 21
150 175 24 24 24 24
175 200 28 28 28 28
200 225 32 32 32 32
225 250 36 36 36 36
250 275 39 39 39 39
275 300 43 43 43 43
300 325 47 47 47 47
325 350 51 51 51 51
350 375 54 54 54 54
375 400 58 58 58 58
400 425 62 62 62 62
425 450 66 66 66 66
450 475 69 69 69 69
475 500 73 73 73 73
500 525 77 77 77 77
525 550 81 81 81 81
550 575 84 84 84 84
575 600 88 88 88 88
600 625 92 92 92 92
625 650 96 96 96 96
650 675 99 99 99 99
675 700 103 103 103 103
700 725 107 107 107 107
725 750 111 111 111 111
750 775 114 114 114 114
775 800 118 118 118 118
800 825 122 122 122 122
825 850 126 126 126 126
850 875 129 129 129 129
875 900 133 133 133 133
900 925 137 137 137 137
925 950 141 141 141 141
950 975 144 144 144 144
975 1,000 148 148 148 148
1,000 1,025 152 152 152 152
1,025 1,050 156 156 156 156
1,050 1,075 159 159 159 159
1,075 1,100 163 163 163 163
1,100 1,125 167 167 167 167
1,125 1,150 171 171 171 171
1,150 1,175 174 174 174 174
1,175 1,200 178 178 178 178
1,200 1,225 182 182 182 182
1,225 1,250 186 186 186 186
1,250 1,275 189 189 189 189
1,275 1,300 193 193 193 193
1,325 197 197 197 197
1,325 1,350 201 201 201 201
1,350 1,375 204 204 204 204
1,375 1,400 208 208 208 208
1,400 1,425 212 212 212 212
1,425 1,450 216 216 216 216
1,450 1,475 219 219 219 219
1,475 1,500 223 223 223 223
1,500 1,525 227 227 227 227
1,525 1,550 231 231 231 231
1,550 1,575 234 234 234 234
1,575 1,600 238 238 238 238
1,600 1,625 242 242 242 242
1,625 1,650 246 246 246 246
1,650 1,675 249 249 249 249
1,675 1,700 253 253 253 253
1,700 1,725 257 257 257 257
1,725 1,750 261 261 261 261
1,750 1,775 264 264 264 264
1,775 1,800 268 268 268 268
1,800 1,825 272 272 272 272
1,825 1,850 276 276 276 276
1,850 1,875 279 279 279 279
1,875 1,900 283 283 283 283
1,900 1,925 287 287 287 287
1,925 1,950 291 291 291 291
1,950 1,975 294 294 294 294
1,975 2,000 298 298 298 298
2,000 2,025 302 302 302 302
2,025 2,050 306 306 306 306
2,050 2,075 309 309 309 309
2,075 2,100 313 313 313 313
2,100 2,125 317 317 317 317
2,125 2,150 321 321 321 321
2,150 2,175 324 324 324 324
2,175 2,200 328 328 328 328
2,200 2,225 332 332 332 332
2,225 2,250 336 336 336 336
2,250 2,275 339 339 339 339
2,275 2,300 343 343 343 343
2,300 2,325 347 347 347 347
2,325 2,350 351 351 351 351
2,350 2,375 354 354 354 354
2,375 2,400 358 358 358 358
2,400 2,425 362 362 362 362
2,425 2,450 366 366 366 366
2,450 2,475 369 369 369 369
2,475 2,500 373 373 373 373
2,500 2,525 377 377 377 377
2,525 2,550 381 381 381 381
2,550 2,575 384 384 384 384
2,575 2,600 388 388 388 388
2,600 2,625 392 392 392 392
2,625 2,650 396 396 396 396
2,650 2,675 399 399 399 399
2,675 2,700 403 403 403 403
2,725 407 407 407 407
2,725 2,750 411 411 411 411
2,750 2,775 414 414 414 414
2,775 2,800 418 418 418 418
2,800 2,825 422 422 422 422
2,825 2,850 426 426 426 426
2,850 2,875 429 429 429 429
2,875 2,900 433 433 433 433
2,900 2,925 437 437 437 437
2,925 2,950 441 441 441 441
2,950 2,975 444 444 444 444
2,975 3,000 448 448 448 448
3,000 3,050 454 454 454 454
3,050 3,100 461 461 461 461
3,100 3,150 469 469 469 469
3,150 3,200 476 476 476 476
3,200 3,250 484 484 484 484
3,250 3,300 491 491 491 491
3,300 3,350 499 499 499 499
3,350 3,400 506 506 506 506
3,400 3,450 514 514 514 514
3,450 3,500 521 521 521 521
3,500 3,550 529 529 529 529
3,550 3,600 536 536 536 536
3,600 3,650 544 544 544 544
3,650 3,700 551 551 551 551
3,700 3,750 559 559 559 559
3,750 3,800 566 566 566 566
3,800 3,850 574 574 574 574
3,850 3,900 581 581 581 581
3,900 3,950 589 589 589 589
3,950 4,000 596 596 596 596
4,000 4,050 604 604 604 604
4,050 4,100 611 611 611 611
4,100 4,150 619 619 619 619
4,150 4,200 626 626 626 626
4,200 4,250 634 634 634 634
4,250 4,300 641 641 641 641
4,300 4,350 649 649 649 649
4,350 4,400 656 656 656 656
4,400 4,450 664 664 664 664
4,450 4,500 671 671 671 671
4,500 4,550 679 679 679 679
4,550 4,600 686 686 686 686
4,600 4,650 694 694 694 694
4,650 4,700 701 701 701 701
4,700 4,750 709 709 709 709
4,750 4,800 716 716 716 716
4,800 4,850 724 724 724 724
4,850 4,900 731 731 731 731
4,900 4,950 739 739 739 739
4,950 5,000 746 746 746 746
Caution. Dependents, see Tax
Computation W orksheet for
Certain Dependents in your
tax form package.
Page 263

Page 266 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
5,000 8,000 11,0005,050 754 754 754 754
5,050 5,100 761 761 761 761
5,100 5,150 769 769 769 769
5,150 5,200 776 776 776 776
5,200 5,250 784 784 784 784
5,250 5,300 791 791 791 791
5,300 5,350 799 799 799 799
5,350 5,400 806 806 806 806
5,400 5,450 814 814 814 814
5,450 5,500 821 821 821 821
5,500 5,550 829 829 829 829
5,550 5,600 836 836 836 836
5,600 5,650 844 844 844 844
5,650 5,700 851 851 851 851
5,700 5,750 859 859 859 859
5,750 5,800 866 866 866 866
5,800 5,850 874 874 874 874
5,850 5,900 881 881 881 881
5,900 5,950 889 889 889 889
5,950 6,000 896 896 896 896
6,000 6,050 904 904 904 904
6,050 6,100 911 911 911 911
6,100 6,150 919 919 919 919
6,150 6,200 926 926 926 926
6,200 6,250 934 934 934 934
6,250 6,300 941 941 941 941
6,300 6,350 949 949 949 949
6,350 6,400 956 956 956 956
6,400 6,450 964 964 964 964
6,450 6,500 971 971 971 971
6,500 6,550 979 979 979 979
6,550 6,600 986 986 986 986
6,600 6,650 994 994 994 994
6,650 6,700 1,001 1,001 1,001 1,001
6,700 6,750 1,009 1,009 1,009 1,009
6,750 6,800 1,016 1,016 1,016 1,016
6,800 6,850 1,024 1,024 1,024 1,024
6,850 6,900 1,031 1,031 1,031 1,031
6,900 6,950 1,039 1,039 1,039 1,039
6,950 7,000 1,046 1,046 1,046 1,046
7,000 7,050 1,054 1,054 1,054 1,054
7,050 7,100 1,061 1,061 1,061 1,061
7,100 7,150 1,069 1,069 1,069 1,069
7,150 7,200 1,076 1,076 1,076 1,076
7,200 7,250 1,084 1,084 1,084 1,084
7,250 7,300 1,091 1,091 1,091 1,091
7,300 7,350 1,099 1,099 1,099 1,099
7,350 7,400 1,106 1,106 1,106 1,106
7,400 7,450 1,114 1,114 1,114 1,114
7,450 7,500 1,121 1,121 1,121 1,121
7,500 7,550 1,129 1,129 1,129 1,129
7,550 7,600 1,136 1,136 1,136 1,136
7,600 7,650 1,144 1,144 1,144 1,144
7,650 7,700 1,151 1,151 1,151 1,151
7,700 7,750 1,159 1,159 1,159 1,159
7,750 7,800 1,166 1,166 1,166 1,166
7,800 7,850 1,174 1,174 1,174 1,174
7,850 7,900 1,181 1,181 1,181 1,181
7,900 7,950 1,189 1,189 1,189 1,189
7,950 8,000 1,196 1,196 1,196 1,196
8,050 1,204 1,204 1,204 1,204
8,050 8,100 1,211 1,211 1,211 1,211
8,100 8,150 1,219 1,219 1,219 1,219
8,150 8,200 1,226 1,226 1,226 1,226
8,200 8,250 1,234 1,234 1,234 1,234
8,250 8,300 1,241 1,241 1,241 1,241
8,300 8,350 1,249 1,249 1,249 1,249
8,350 8,400 1,256 1,256 1,256 1,256
8,400 8,450 1,264 1,264 1,264 1,264
8,450 8,500 1,271 1,271 1,271 1,271
8,500 8,550 1,279 1,279 1,279 1,279
8,550 8,600 1,286 1,286 1,286 1,286
8,600 8,650 1,294 1,294 1,294 1,294
8,650 8,700 1,301 1,301 1,301 1,301
8,700 8,750 1,309 1,309 1,309 1,309
8,750 8,800 1,316 1,316 1,316 1,316
8,800 8,850 1,324 1,324 1,324 1,324
8,850 8,900 1,331 1,331 1,331 1,331
8,900 8,950 1,339 1,339 1,339 1,339
8,950 9,000 1,346 1,346 1,346 1,346
9,000 9,050 1,354 1,354 1,354 1,354
9,050 9,100 1,361 1,361 1,361 1,361
9,100 9,150 1,369 1,369 1,369 1,369
9,150 9,200 1,376 1,376 1,376 1,376
9,200 9,250 1,384 1,384 1,384 1,384
9,250 9,300 1,391 1,391 1,391 1,391
9,300 9,350 1,399 1,399 1,399 1,399
9,350 9,400 1,406 1,406 1,406 1,406
9,400 9,450 1,414 1,414 1,414 1,414
9,450 9,500 1,421 1,421 1,421 1,421
9,500 9,550 1,429 1,429 1,429 1,429
9,550 9,600 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436
9,600 9,650 1,444 1,444 1,444 1,444
9,650 9,700 1,451 1,451 1,451 1,451
9,700 9,750 1,459 1,459 1,459 1,459
9,750 9,800 1,466 1,466 1,466 1,466
9,800 9,850 1,474 1,474 1,474 1,474
9,850 9,900 1,481 1,481 1,481 1,481
9,900 9,950 1,489 1,489 1,489 1,489
9,950 10,000 1,496 1,496 1,496 1,496
10,000 10,050 1,504 1,504 1,504 1,504
10,050 10,100 1,511 1,511 1,511 1,511
10,100 10,150 1,519 1,519 1,519 1,519
10,150 10,200 1,526 1,526 1,526 1,526
10,200 10,250 1,534 1,534 1,534 1,534
10,250 10,300 1,541 1,541 1,541 1,541
10,300 10,350 1,549 1,549 1,549 1,549
10,350 10,400 1,556 1,556 1,556 1,556
10,400 10,450 1,564 1,564 1,564 1,564
10,450 10,500 1,571 1,571 1,571 1,571
10,500 10,550 1,579 1,579 1,579 1,579
10,550 10,600 1,586 1,586 1,586 1,586
10,600 10,650 1,594 1,594 1,594 1,594
10,650 10,700 1,601 1,601 1,601 1,601
10,700 10,750 1,609 1,609 1,609 1,609
10,750 10,800 1,616 1,616 1,616 1,616
10,800 10,850 1,624 1,624 1,624 1,624
10,850 10,900 1,631 1,631 1,631 1,631
10,900 10,950 1,639 1,639 1,639 1,639
10,950 11,000 1,646 1,646 1,646 1,646
11,050 1,654 1,654 1,654 1,654
11,050 11,100 1,661 1,661 1,661 1,661
11,100 11,150 1,669 1,669 1,669 1,669
11,150 11,200 1,676 1,676 1,676 1,676
11,200 11,250 1,684 1,684 1,684 1,684
11,250 11,300 1,691 1,691 1,691 1,691
11,300 11,350 1,699 1,699 1,699 1,699
11,350 11,400 1,706 1,706 1,706 1,706
11,400 11,450 1,714 1,714 1,714 1,714
11,450 11,500 1,721 1,721 1,721 1,721
11,500 11,550 1,729 1,729 1,729 1,729
11,550 11,600 1,736 1,736 1,736 1,736
11,600 11,650 1,744 1,744 1,744 1,744
11,650 11,700 1,751 1,751 1,751 1,751
11,700 11,750 1,759 1,759 1,759 1,759
11,750 11,800 1,766 1,766 1,766 1,766
11,800 11,850 1,774 1,774 1,774 1,774
11,850 11,900 1,781 1,781 1,781 1,781
11,900 11,950 1,789 1,789 1,789 1,789
11,950 12,000 1,796 1,796 1,796 1,796
12,000 12,050 1,804 1,804 1,804 1,804
12,050 12,100 1,811 1,811 1,811 1,811
12,100 12,150 1,819 1,819 1,819 1,819
12,150 12,200 1,826 1,826 1,826 1,826
12,200 12,250 1,834 1,834 1,834 1,834
12,250 12,300 1,841 1,841 1,841 1,841
12,300 12,350 1,849 1,849 1,849 1,849
12,350 12,400 1,856 1,856 1,856 1,856
12,400 12,450 1,864 1,864 1,864 1,864
12,450 12,500 1,871 1,871 1,871 1,871
12,500 12,550 1,879 1,879 1,879 1,879
12,550 12,600 1,886 1,886 1,886 1,886
12,600 12,650 1,894 1,894 1,894 1,894
12,650 12,700 1,901 1,901 1,901 1,901
12,700 12,750 1,909 1,909 1,909 1,909
12,750 12,800 1,916 1,916 1,916 1,916
12,800 12,850 1,924 1,924 1,924 1,924
12,850 12,900 1,931 1,931 1,931 1,931
12,900 12,950 1,939 1,939 1,939 1,939
12,950 13,000 1,946 1,946 1,946 1,946
13,000 13,050 1,954 1,954 1,954 1,954
13,050 13,100 1,961 1,961 1,961 1,961
13,100 13,150 1,969 1,969 1,969 1,969
13,150 13,200 1,976 1,976 1,976 1,976
13,200 13,250 1,984 1,984 1,984 1,984
13,250 13,300 1,991 1,991 1,991 1,991
13,300 13,350 1,999 1,999 1,999 1,999
13,350 13,400 2,006 2,006 2,006 2,006
13,400 13,450 2,014 2,014 2,014 2,014
13,450 13,500 2,021 2,021 2,021 2,021
13,500 13,550 2,029 2,029 2,029 2,029
13,550 13,600 2,036 2,036 2,036 2,036
13,600 13,650 2,044 2,044 2,044 2,044
13,650 13,700 2,051 2,051 2,051 2,051
13,700 13,750 2,059 2,059 2,059 2,059
13,750 13,800 2,066 2,066 2,066 2,066
13,800 13,850 2,074 2,074 2,074 2,074
13,850 13,900 2,081 2,081 2,081 2,081
13,900 13,950 2,089 2,089 2,089 2,089
13,950 14,000 2,096 2,096 2,096 2,096
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 264

Page 267 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
14,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
18,000
19,000
20,000
21,000
22,000
14,000 17,000 20,00014,050 2,104 2,104 2,104 2,104
14,050 14,100 2,111 2,111 2,111 2,111
14,100 14,150 2,119 2,119 2,119 2,119
14,150 14,200 2,126 2,126 2,126 2,126
14,200 14,250 2,134 2,134 2,134 2,134
14,250 14,300 2,141 2,141 2,141 2,141
14,300 14,350 2,149 2,149 2,149 2,149
14,350 14,400 2,156 2,156 2,156 2,156
14,400 14,450 2,164 2,164 2,164 2,164
14,450 14,500 2,171 2,171 2,171 2,171
14,500 14,550 2,179 2,179 2,179 2,179
14,550 14,600 2,186 2,186 2,186 2,186
14,600 14,650 2,194 2,194 2,194 2,194
14,650 14,700 2,201 2,201 2,201 2,201
14,700 14,750 2,209 2,209 2,209 2,209
14,750 14,800 2,216 2,216 2,216 2,216
14,800 14,850 2,224 2,224 2,224 2,224
14,850 14,900 2,231 2,231 2,231 2,231
14,900 14,950 2,239 2,239 2,239 2,239
14,950 15,000 2,246 2,246 2,246 2,246
15,000 15,050 2,254 2,254 2,254 2,254
15,050 15,100 2,261 2,261 2,261 2,261
15,100 15,150 2,269 2,269 2,269 2,269
15,150 15,200 2,276 2,276 2,276 2,276
15,200 15,250 2,284 2,284 2,284 2,284
15,250 15,300 2,291 2,291 2,291 2,291
15,300 15,350 2,299 2,299 2,299 2,299
15,350 15,400 2,306 2,306 2,306 2,306
15,400 15,450 2,314 2,314 2,314 2,314
15,450 15,500 2,321 2,321 2,321 2,321
15,500 15,550 2,329 2,329 2,329 2,329
15,550 15,600 2,336 2,336 2,336 2,336
15,600 15,650 2,344 2,344 2,344 2,344
15,650 15,700 2,351 2,351 2,351 2,351
15,700 15,750 2,359 2,359 2,359 2,359
15,750 15,800 2,366 2,366 2,366 2,366
15,800 15,850 2,374 2,374 2,374 2,374
15,850 15,900 2,381 2,381 2,381 2,381
15,900 15,950 2,389 2,389 2,389 2,389
15,950 16,000 2,396 2,396 2,396 2,396
16,000 16,050 2,404 2,404 2,404 2,404
16,050 16,100 2,411 2,411 2,411 2,411
16,100 16,150 2,419 2,419 2,419 2,419
16,150 16,200 2,426 2,426 2,426 2,426
16,200 16,250 2,434 2,434 2,434 2,434
16,250 16,300 2,441 2,441 2,441 2,441
16,300 16,350 2,449 2,449 2,449 2,449
16,350 16,400 2,456 2,456 2,456 2,456
16,400 16,450 2,464 2,464 2,464 2,464
16,450 16,500 2,471 2,471 2,471 2,471
16,500 16,550 2,479 2,479 2,479 2,479
16,550 16,600 2,486 2,486 2,486 2,486
16,600 16,650 2,494 2,494 2,494 2,494
16,650 16,700 2,501 2,501 2,501 2,501
16,700 16,750 2,509 2,509 2,509 2,509
16,750 16,800 2,516 2,516 2,516 2,516
16,800 16,850 2,524 2,524 2,524 2,524
16,850 16,900 2,531 2,531 2,531 2,531
16,900 16,950 2,539 2,539 2,539 2,539
16,950 17,000 2,546 2,546 2,546 2,546
17,050 2,554 2,554 2,554 2,554
17,050 17,100 2,561 2,561 2,561 2,561
17,100 17,150 2,569 2,569 2,569 2,569
17,150 17,200 2,576 2,576 2,576 2,576
17,200 17,250 2,584 2,584 2,584 2,584
17,250 17,300 2,591 2,591 2,591 2,591
17,300 17,350 2,599 2,599 2,599 2,599
17,350 17,400 2,606 2,606 2,606 2,606
17,400 17,450 2,614 2,614 2,614 2,614
17,450 17,500 2,621 2,621 2,621 2,621
17,500 17,550 2,629 2,629 2,629 2,629
17,550 17,600 2,636 2,636 2,636 2,636
17,600 17,650 2,644 2,644 2,644 2,644
17,650 17,700 2,651 2,651 2,651 2,651
17,700 17,750 2,659 2,659 2,659 2,659
17,750 17,800 2,666 2,666 2,666 2,666
17,800 17,850 2,674 2,674 2,674 2,674
17,850 17,900 2,681 2,681 2,681 2,681
17,900 17,950 2,689 2,689 2,689 2,689
17,950 18,000 2,696 2,696 2,696 2,696
18,000 18,050 2,704 2,704 2,704 2,704
18,050 18,100 2,711 2,711 2,711 2,711
18,100 18,150 2,719 2,719 2,719 2,719
18,150 18,200 2,726 2,726 2,726 2,726
18,200 18,250 2,734 2,734 2,734 2,734
18,250 18,300 2,741 2,741 2,741 2,741
18,300 18,350 2,749 2,749 2,749 2,749
18,350 18,400 2,756 2,756 2,756 2,756
18,400 18,450 2,764 2,764 2,764 2,764
18,450 18,500 2,771 2,771 2,771 2,771
18,500 18,550 2,779 2,779 2,779 2,779
18,550 18,600 2,786 2,786 2,786 2,786
18,600 18,650 2,794 2,794 2,794 2,794
18,650 18,700 2,801 2,801 2,801 2,801
18,700 18,750 2,809 2,809 2,809 2,809
18,750 18,800 2,816 2,816 2,816 2,816
18,800 18,850 2,824 2,824 2,824 2,824
18,850 18,900 2,831 2,831 2,831 2,831
18,900 18,950 2,839 2,839 2,839 2,839
18,950 19,000 2,846 2,846 2,846 2,846
19,000 19,050 2,854 2,854 2,854 2,854
19,050 19,100 2,861 2,861 2,861 2,861
19,100 19,150 2,869 2,869 2,869 2,869
19,150 19,200 2,876 2,876 2,876 2,876
19,200 19,250 2,884 2,884 2,884 2,884
19,250 19,300 2,891 2,891 2,891 2,891
19,300 19,350 2,899 2,899 2,899 2,899
19,350 19,400 2,906 2,906 2,906 2,906
19,400 19,450 2,914 2,914 2,914 2,914
19,450 19,500 2,921 2,921 2,921 2,921
19,500 19,550 2,929 2,929 2,929 2,929
19,550 19,600 2,936 2,936 2,936 2,936
19,600 19,650 2,944 2,944 2,944 2,944
19,650 19,700 2,951 2,951 2,951 2,951
19,700 19,750 2,959 2,959 2,959 2,959
19,750 19,800 2,966 2,966 2,966 2,966
19,800 19,850 2,974 2,974 2,974 2,974
19,850 19,900 2,981 2,981 2,981 2,981
19,900 19,950 2,989 2,989 2,989 2,989
19,950 20,000 2,996 2,996 2,996 2,996
20,050 3,004 3,004 3,004 3,004
20,050 20,100 3,011 3,011 3,011 3,011
20,100 20,150 3,019 3,019 3,019 3,019
20,150 20,200 3,026 3,026 3,026 3,026
20,200 20,250 3,034 3,034 3,034 3,034
20,250 20,300 3,041 3,041 3,041 3,041
20,300 20,350 3,049 3,049 3,049 3,049
20,350 20,400 3,056 3,056 3,056 3,056
20,400 20,450 3,064 3,064 3,064 3,064
20,450 20,500 3,071 3,071 3,071 3,071
20,500 20,550 3,079 3,079 3,079 3,079
20,550 20,600 3,086 3,086 3,086 3,086
20,600 20,650 3,094 3,094 3,094 3,094
20,650 20,700 3,101 3,101 3,101 3,101
20,700 20,750 3,109 3,109 3,109 3,109
20,750 20,800 3,116 3,116 3,116 3,116
20,800 20,850 3,124 3,124 3,124 3,124
20,850 20,900 3,131 3,131 3,131 3,131
20,900 20,950 3,139 3,139 3,139 3,139
20,950 21,000 3,146 3,146 3,146 3,146
21,000 21,050 3,154 3,154 3,154 3,154
21,050 21,100 3,161 3,161 3,161 3,161
21,100 21,150 3,169 3,169 3,169 3,169
21,150 21,200 3,176 3,176 3,176 3,176
21,200 21,250 3,184 3,184 3,184 3,184
21,250 21,300 3,191 3,191 3,191 3,191
21,300 21,350 3,199 3,199 3,199 3,199
21,350 21,400 3,206 3,206 3,206 3,206
21,400 21,450 3,214 3,214 3,214 3,214
21,450 21,500 3,221 3,221 3,221 3,221
21,500 21,550 3,229 3,229 3,229 3,229
21,550 21,600 3,236 3,236 3,236 3,236
21,600 21,650 3,244 3,244 3,244 3,244
21,650 21,700 3,251 3,251 3,251 3,251
21,700 21,750 3,259 3,259 3,259 3,259
21,750 21,800 3,266 3,266 3,266 3,266
21,800 21,850 3,274 3,274 3,274 3,274
21,850 21,900 3,281 3,281 3,281 3,281
21,900 21,950 3,289 3,289 3,289 3,289
21,950 22,000 3,296 3,296 3,296 3,296
22,000 22,050 3,304 3,304 3,304 3,304
22,050 22,100 3,311 3,311 3,311 3,311
22,100 22,150 3,319 3,319 3,319 3,319
22,150 22,200 3,326 3,326 3,326 3,326
22,200 22,250 3,334 3,334 3,334 3,334
22,250 22,300 3,341 3,341 3,341 3,341
22,300 22,350 3,349 3,349 3,349 3,349
22,350 22,400 3,356 3,356 3,356 3,356
22,400 22,450 3,364 3,364 3,364 3,364
22,450 22,500 3,371 3,371 3,371 3,371
22,500 22,550 3,379 3,379 3,379 3,379
22,550 22,600 3,386 3,386 3,386 3,386
22,600 22,650 3,394 3,394 3,397 3,394
22,650 22,700 3,401 3,401 3,411 3,401
22,700 22,750 3,409 3,409 3,424 3,409
22,750 22,800 3,416 3,416 3,438 3,416
22,800 22,850 3,424 3,424 3,452 3,424
22,850 22,900 3,431 3,431 3,466 3,431
22,900 22,950 3,439 3,439 3,479 3,439
22,950 23,000 3,446 3,446 3,493 3,446
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 265

Page 268 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
23,000 26,000 29,00023,050 3,454 3,454 3,507 3,454
23,050 23,100 3,461 3,461 3,521 3,461
23,100 23,150 3,469 3,469 3,534 3,469
23,150 23,200 3,476 3,476 3,548 3,476
23,200 23,250 3,484 3,484 3,562 3,484
23,250 23,300 3,491 3,491 3,576 3,491
23,300 23,350 3,499 3,499 3,589 3,499
23,350 23,400 3,506 3,506 3,603 3,506
23,400 23,450 3,514 3,514 3,617 3,514
23,450 23,500 3,521 3,521 3,631 3,521
23,500 23,550 3,529 3,529 3,644 3,529
23,550 23,600 3,536 3,536 3,658 3,536
23,600 23,650 3,544 3,544 3,672 3,544
23,650 23,700 3,551 3,551 3,686 3,551
23,700 23,750 3,559 3,559 3,699 3,559
23,750 23,800 3,566 3,566 3,713 3,566
23,800 23,850 3,574 3,574 3,727 3,574
23,850 23,900 3,581 3,581 3,741 3,581
23,900 23,950 3,589 3,589 3,754 3,589
23,950 24,000 3,596 3,596 3,768 3,596
24,000 24,050 3,604 3,604 3,782 3,604
24,050 24,100 3,611 3,611 3,796 3,611
24,100 24,150 3,619 3,619 3,809 3,619
24,150 24,200 3,626 3,626 3,823 3,626
24,200 24,250 3,634 3,634 3,837 3,634
24,250 24,300 3,641 3,641 3,851 3,641
24,300 24,350 3,649 3,649 3,864 3,649
24,350 24,400 3,656 3,656 3,878 3,656
24,400 24,450 3,664 3,664 3,892 3,664
24,450 24,500 3,671 3,671 3,906 3,671
24,500 24,550 3,679 3,679 3,919 3,679
24,550 24,600 3,686 3,686 3,933 3,686
24,600 24,650 3,694 3,694 3,947 3,694
24,650 24,700 3,701 3,701 3,961 3,701
24,700 24,750 3,709 3,709 3,974 3,709
24,750 24,800 3,716 3,716 3,988 3,716
24,800 24,850 3,724 3,724 4,002 3,724
24,850 24,900 3,731 3,731 4,016 3,731
24,900 24,950 3,739 3,739 4,029 3,739
24,950 25,000 3,746 3,746 4,043 3,746
25,000 25,050 3,754 3,754 4,057 3,754
25,050 25,100 3,761 3,761 4,071 3,761
25,100 25,150 3,769 3,769 4,084 3,769
25,150 25,200 3,776 3,776 4,098 3,776
25,200 25,250 3,784 3,784 4,112 3,784
25,250 25,300 3,791 3,791 4,126 3,791
25,300 25,350 3,799 3,799 4,139 3,799
25,350 25,400 3,806 3,806 4,153 3,806
25,400 25,450 3,814 3,814 4,167 3,814
25,450 25,500 3,821 3,821 4,181 3,821
25,500 25,550 3,829 3,829 4,194 3,829
25,550 25,600 3,836 3,836 4,208 3,836
25,600 25,650 3,844 3,844 4,222 3,844
25,650 25,700 3,851 3,851 4,236 3,851
25,700 25,750 3,859 3,859 4,249 3,859
25,750 25,800 3,866 3,866 4,263 3,866
25,800 25,850 3,874 3,874 4,277 3,874
25,850 25,900 3,881 3,881 4,291 3,881
25,900 25,950 3,889 3,889 4,304 3,889
25,950 26,000 3,896 3,896 4,318 3,896
26,050 3,904 3,904 4,332 3,904
26,050 26,100 3,911 3,911 4,346 3,911
26,100 26,150 3,919 3,919 4,359 3,919
26,150 26,200 3,926 3,926 4,373 3,926
26,200 26,250 3,934 3,934 4,387 3,934
26,250 26,300 3,941 3,941 4,401 3,941
26,300 26,350 3,949 3,949 4,414 3,949
26,350 26,400 3,956 3,956 4,428 3,956
26,400 26,450 3,964 3,964 4,442 3,964
26,450 26,500 3,971 3,971 4,456 3,971
26,500 26,550 3,979 3,979 4,469 3,979
26,550 26,600 3,986 3,986 4,483 3,986
26,600 26,650 3,994 3,994 4,497 3,994
26,650 26,700 4,001 4,001 4,511 4,001
26,700 26,750 4,009 4,009 4,524 4,009
26,750 26,800 4,016 4,016 4,538 4,016
26,800 26,850 4,024 4,024 4,552 4,024
26,850 26,900 4,031 4,031 4,566 4,031
26,900 26,950 4,039 4,039 4,579 4,039
26,950 27,000 4,046 4,046 4,593 4,046
27,000 27,050 4,054 4,054 4,607 4,054
27,050 27,100 4,064 4,061 4,621 4,061
27,100 27,150 4,078 4,069 4,634 4,069
27,150 27,200 4,092 4,076 4,648 4,076
27,200 27,250 4,106 4,084 4,662 4,084
27,250 27,300 4,119 4,091 4,676 4,091
27,300 27,350 4,133 4,099 4,689 4,099
27,350 27,400 4,147 4,106 4,703 4,106
27,400 27,450 4,161 4,114 4,717 4,114
27,450 27,500 4,174 4,121 4,731 4,121
27,500 27,550 4,188 4,129 4,744 4,129
27,550 27,600 4,202 4,136 4,758 4,136
27,600 27,650 4,216 4,144 4,772 4,144
27,650 27,700 4,229 4,151 4,786 4,151
27,700 27,750 4,243 4,159 4,799 4,159
27,750 27,800 4,257 4,166 4,813 4,166
27,800 27,850 4,271 4,174 4,827 4,174
27,850 27,900 4,284 4,181 4,841 4,181
27,900 27,950 4,298 4,189 4,854 4,189
27,950 28,000 4,312 4,196 4,868 4,196
28,000 28,050 4,326 4,204 4,882 4,204
28,050 28,100 4,339 4,211 4,896 4,211
28,100 28,150 4,353 4,219 4,909 4,219
28,150 28,200 4,367 4,226 4,923 4,226
28,200 28,250 4,381 4,234 4,937 4,234
28,250 28,300 4,394 4,241 4,951 4,241
28,300 28,350 4,408 4,249 4,964 4,249
28,350 28,400 4,422 4,256 4,978 4,256
28,400 28,450 4,436 4,264 4,992 4,264
28,450 28,500 4,449 4,271 5,006 4,271
28,500 28,550 4,463 4,279 5,019 4,279
28,550 28,600 4,477 4,286 5,033 4,286
28,600 28,650 4,491 4,294 5,047 4,294
28,650 28,700 4,504 4,301 5,061 4,301
28,700 28,750 4,518 4,309 5,074 4,309
28,750 28,800 4,532 4,316 5,088 4,316
28,800 28,850 4,546 4,324 5,102 4,324
28,850 28,900 4,559 4,331 5,116 4,331
28,900 28,950 4,573 4,339 5,129 4,339
28,950 29,000 4,587 4,346 5,143 4,346
29,050 4,601 4,354 5,157 4,354
29,050 29,100 4,614 4,361 5,171 4,361
29,100 29,150 4,628 4,369 5,184 4,369
29,150 29,200 4,642 4,376 5,198 4,376
29,200 29,250 4,656 4,384 5,212 4,384
29,250 29,300 4,669 4,391 5,226 4,391
29,300 29,350 4,683 4,399 5,239 4,399
29,350 29,400 4,697 4,406 5,253 4,406
29,400 29,450 4,711 4,414 5,267 4,414
29,450 29,500 4,724 4,421 5,281 4,421
29,500 29,550 4,738 4,429 5,294 4,429
29,550 29,600 4,752 4,436 5,308 4,436
29,600 29,650 4,766 4,444 5,322 4,444
29,650 29,700 4,779 4,451 5,336 4,451
29,700 29,750 4,793 4,459 5,349 4,459
29,750 29,800 4,807 4,466 5,363 4,466
29,800 29,850 4,821 4,474 5,377 4,474
29,850 29,900 4,834 4,481 5,391 4,481
29,900 29,950 4,848 4,489 5,404 4,489
29,950 30,000 4,862 4,496 5,418 4,496
30,000 30,050 4,876 4,504 5,432 4,504
30,050 30,100 4,889 4,511 5,446 4,511
30,100 30,150 4,903 4,519 5,459 4,519
30,150 30,200 4,917 4,526 5,473 4,526
30,200 30,250 4,931 4,534 5,487 4,534
30,250 30,300 4,944 4,541 5,501 4,541
30,300 30,350 4,958 4,549 5,514 4,549
30,350 30,400 4,972 4,556 5,528 4,556
30,400 30,450 4,986 4,564 5,542 4,564
30,450 30,500 4,999 4,571 5,556 4,571
30,500 30,550 5,013 4,579 5,569 4,579
30,550 30,600 5,027 4,586 5,583 4,586
30,600 30,650 5,041 4,594 5,597 4,594
30,650 30,700 5,054 4,601 5,611 4,601
30,700 30,750 5,068 4,609 5,624 4,609
30,750 30,800 5,082 4,616 5,638 4,616
30,800 30,850 5,096 4,624 5,652 4,624
30,850 30,900 5,109 4,631 5,666 4,631
30,900 30,950 5,123 4,639 5,679 4,639
30,950 31,000 5,137 4,646 5,693 4,646
31,000 31,050 5,151 4,654 5,707 4,654
31,050 31,100 5,164 4,661 5,721 4,661
31,100 31,150 5,178 4,669 5,734 4,669
31,150 31,200 5,192 4,676 5,748 4,676
31,200 31,250 5,206 4,684 5,762 4,684
31,250 31,300 5,219 4,691 5,776 4,691
31,300 31,350 5,233 4,699 5,789 4,699
31,350 31,400 5,247 4,706 5,803 4,706
31,400 31,450 5,261 4,714 5,817 4,714
31,450 31,500 5,274 4,721 5,831 4,721
31,500 31,550 5,288 4,729 5,844 4,729
31,550 31,600 5,302 4,736 5,858 4,736
31,600 31,650 5,316 4,744 5,872 4,744
31,650 31,700 5,329 4,751 5,886 4,751
31,700 31,750 5,343 4,759 5,899 4,759
31,750 31,800 5,357 4,766 5,913 4,766
31,800 31,850 5,371 4,774 5,927 4,774
31,850 31,900 5,384 4,781 5,941 4,781
31,900 31,950 5,398 4,789 5,954 4,789
31,950 32,000 5,412 4,796 5,968 4,796
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 266

Page 269 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
32,000 35,000 38,00032,050 5,426 4,804 5,982 4,804
32,050 32,100 5,439 4,811 5,996 4,811
32,100 32,150 5,453 4,819 6,009 4,819
32,150 32,200 5,467 4,826 6,023 4,826
32,200 32,250 5,481 4,834 6,037 4,834
32,250 32,300 5,494 4,841 6,051 4,841
32,300 32,350 5,508 4,849 6,064 4,849
32,350 32,400 5,522 4,856 6,078 4,856
32,400 32,450 5,536 4,864 6,092 4,864
32,450 32,500 5,549 4,871 6,106 4,871
32,500 32,550 5,563 4,879 6,119 4,879
32,550 32,600 5,577 4,886 6,133 4,886
32,600 32,650 5,591 4,894 6,147 4,894
32,650 32,700 5,604 4,901 6,161 4,901
32,700 32,750 5,618 4,909 6,174 4,909
32,750 32,800 5,632 4,916 6,188 4,916
32,800 32,850 5,646 4,924 6,202 4,924
32,850 32,900 5,659 4,931 6,216 4,931
32,900 32,950 5,673 4,939 6,229 4,939
32,950 33,000 5,687 4,946 6,243 4,946
33,000 33,050 5,701 4,954 6,257 4,954
33,050 33,100 5,714 4,961 6,271 4,961
33,100 33,150 5,728 4,969 6,284 4,969
33,150 33,200 5,742 4,976 6,298 4,976
33,200 33,250 5,756 4,984 6,312 4,984
33,250 33,300 5,769 4,991 6,326 4,991
33,300 33,350 5,783 4,999 6,339 4,999
33,350 33,400 5,797 5,006 6,353 5,006
33,400 33,450 5,811 5,014 6,367 5,014
33,450 33,500 5,824 5,021 6,381 5,021
33,500 33,550 5,838 5,029 6,394 5,029
33,550 33,600 5,852 5,036 6,408 5,036
33,600 33,650 5,866 5,044 6,422 5,044
33,650 33,700 5,879 5,051 6,436 5,051
33,700 33,750 5,893 5,059 6,449 5,059
33,750 33,800 5,907 5,066 6,463 5,066
33,800 33,850 5,921 5,074 6,477 5,074
33,850 33,900 5,934 5,081 6,491 5,081
33,900 33,950 5,948 5,089 6,504 5,089
33,950 34,000 5,962 5,096 6,518 5,096
34,000 34,050 5,976 5,104 6,532 5,104
34,050 34,100 5,989 5,111 6,546 5,111
34,100 34,150 6,003 5,119 6,559 5,119
34,150 34,200 6,017 5,126 6,573 5,126
34,200 34,250 6,031 5,134 6,587 5,134
34,250 34,300 6,044 5,141 6,601 5,141
34,300 34,350 6,058 5,149 6,614 5,149
34,350 34,400 6,072 5,156 6,628 5,156
34,400 34,450 6,086 5,164 6,642 5,164
34,450 34,500 6,099 5,171 6,656 5,171
34,500 34,550 6,113 5,179 6,669 5,179
34,550 34,600 6,127 5,186 6,683 5,186
34,600 34,650 6,141 5,194 6,697 5,194
34,650 34,700 6,154 5,201 6,711 5,201
34,700 34,750 6,168 5,209 6,724 5,209
34,750 34,800 6,182 5,216 6,738 5,216
34,800 34,850 6,196 5,224 6,752 5,224
34,850 34,900 6,209 5,231 6,766 5,231
34,900 34,950 6,223 5,239 6,779 5,239
34,950 35,000 6,237 5,246 6,793 5,246
35,050 6,251 5,254 6,807 5,254
35,050 35,100 6,264 5,261 6,821 5,261
35,100 35,150 6,278 5,269 6,834 5,269
35,150 35,200 6,292 5,276 6,848 5,276
35,200 35,250 6,306 5,284 6,862 5,284
35,250 35,300 6,319 5,291 6,876 5,291
35,300 35,350 6,333 5,299 6,889 5,299
35,350 35,400 6,347 5,306 6,903 5,306
35,400 35,450 6,361 5,314 6,917 5,314
35,450 35,500 6,374 5,321 6,931 5,321
35,500 35,550 6,388 5,329 6,944 5,329
35,550 35,600 6,402 5,336 6,958 5,336
35,600 35,650 6,416 5,344 6,972 5,344
35,650 35,700 6,429 5,351 6,986 5,351
35,700 35,750 6,443 5,359 6,999 5,359
35,750 35,800 6,457 5,366 7,013 5,366
35,800 35,850 6,471 5,374 7,027 5,374
35,850 35,900 6,484 5,381 7,041 5,381
35,900 35,950 6,498 5,389 7,054 5,389
35,950 36,000 6,512 5,396 7,068 5,396
36,000 36,050 6,526 5,404 7,082 5,404
36,050 36,100 6,539 5,411 7,096 5,411
36,100 36,150 6,553 5,419 7,109 5,419
36,150 36,200 6,567 5,426 7,123 5,426
36,200 36,250 6,581 5,434 7,137 5,434
36,250 36,300 6,594 5,441 7,151 5,444
36,300 36,350 6,608 5,449 7,164 5,458
36,350 36,400 6,622 5,456 7,178 5,472
36,400 36,450 6,636 5,464 7,192 5,486
36,450 36,500 6,649 5,471 7,206 5,499
36,500 36,550 6,663 5,479 7,219 5,513
36,550 36,600 6,677 5,486 7,233 5,527
36,600 36,650 6,691 5,494 7,247 5,541
36,650 36,700 6,704 5,501 7,261 5,554
36,700 36,750 6,718 5,509 7,274 5,568
36,750 36,800 6,732 5,516 7,288 5,582
36,800 36,850 6,746 5,524 7,302 5,596
36,850 36,900 6,759 5,531 7,316 5,609
36,900 36,950 6,773 5,539 7,329 5,623
36,950 37,000 6,787 5,546 7,343 5,637
37,000 37,050 6,801 5,554 7,357 5,651
37,050 37,100 6,814 5,561 7,371 5,664
37,100 37,150 6,828 5,569 7,384 5,678
37,150 37,200 6,842 5,576 7,398 5,692
37,200 37,250 6,856 5,584 7,412 5,706
37,250 37,300 6,869 5,591 7,426 5,719
37,300 37,350 6,883 5,599 7,439 5,733
37,350 37,400 6,897 5,606 7,453 5,747
37,400 37,450 6,911 5,614 7,467 5,761
37,450 37,500 6,924 5,621 7,481 5,774
37,500 37,550 6,938 5,629 7,494 5,788
37,550 37,600 6,952 5,636 7,508 5,802
37,600 37,650 6,966 5,644 7,522 5,816
37,650 37,700 6,979 5,651 7,536 5,829
37,700 37,750 6,993 5,659 7,549 5,843
37,750 37,800 7,007 5,666 7,563 5,857
37,800 37,850 7,021 5,674 7,577 5,871
37,850 37,900 7,034 5,681 7,591 5,884
37,900 37,950 7,048 5,689 7,604 5,898
37,950 38,000 7,062 5,696 7,618 5,912
38,050 7,076 5,704 7,632 5,926
38,050 38,100 7,089 5,711 7,646 5,939
38,100 38,150 7,103 5,719 7,659 5,953
38,150 38,200 7,117 5,726 7,673 5,967
38,200 38,250 7,131 5,734 7,687 5,981
38,250 38,300 7,144 5,741 7,701 5,994
38,300 38,350 7,158 5,749 7,714 6,008
38,350 38,400 7,172 5,756 7,728 6,022
38,400 38,450 7,186 5,764 7,742 6,036
38,450 38,500 7,199 5,771 7,756 6,049
38,500 38,550 7,213 5,779 7,769 6,063
38,550 38,600 7,227 5,786 7,783 6,077
38,600 38,650 7,241 5,794 7,797 6,091
38,650 38,700 7,254 5,801 7,811 6,104
38,700 38,750 7,268 5,809 7,824 6,118
38,750 38,800 7,282 5,816 7,838 6,132
38,800 38,850 7,296 5,824 7,852 6,146
38,850 38,900 7,309 5,831 7,866 6,159
38,900 38,950 7,323 5,839 7,879 6,173
38,950 39,000 7,337 5,846 7,893 6,187
39,000 39,050 7,351 5,854 7,907 6,201
39,050 39,100 7,364 5,861 7,921 6,214
39,100 39,150 7,378 5,869 7,934 6,228
39,150 39,200 7,392 5,876 7,948 6,242
39,200 39,250 7,406 5,884 7,962 6,256
39,250 39,300 7,419 5,891 7,976 6,269
39,300 39,350 7,433 5,899 7,989 6,283
39,350 39,400 7,447 5,906 8,003 6,297
39,400 39,450 7,461 5,914 8,017 6,311
39,450 39,500 7,474 5,921 8,031 6,324
39,500 39,550 7,488 5,929 8,044 6,338
39,550 39,600 7,502 5,936 8,058 6,352
39,600 39,650 7,516 5,944 8,072 6,366
39,650 39,700 7,529 5,951 8,086 6,379
39,700 39,750 7,543 5,959 8,099 6,393
39,750 39,800 7,557 5,966 8,113 6,407
39,800 39,850 7,571 5,974 8,127 6,421
39,850 39,900 7,584 5,981 8,141 6,434
39,900 39,950 7,598 5,989 8,154 6,448
39,950 40,000 7,612 5,996 8,168 6,462
40,000 40,050 7,626 6,004 8,182 6,476
40,050 40,100 7,639 6,011 8,196 6,489
40,100 40,150 7,653 6,019 8,209 6,503
40,150 40,200 7,667 6,026 8,223 6,517
40,200 40,250 7,681 6,034 8,237 6,531
40,250 40,300 7,694 6,041 8,251 6,544
40,300 40,350 7,708 6,049 8,264 6,558
40,350 40,400 7,722 6,056 8,278 6,572
40,400 40,450 7,736 6,064 8,292 6,586
40,450 40,500 7,749 6,071 8,306 6,599
40,500 40,550 7,763 6,079 8,319 6,613
40,550 40,600 7,777 6,086 8,333 6,627
40,600 40,650 7,791 6,094 8,347 6,641
40,650 40,700 7,804 6,101 8,361 6,654
40,700 40,750 7,818 6,109 8,374 6,668
40,750 40,800 7,832 6,116 8,388 6,682
40,800 40,850 7,846 6,124 8,402 6,696
40,850 40,900 7,859 6,131 8,416 6,709
40,900 40,950 7,873 6,139 8,429 6,723
40,950 41,000 7,887 6,146 8,443 6,737
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 267

Page 270 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
41,000 44,000 47,00041,050 7,901 6,154 8,457 6,751
41,050 41,100 7,914 6,161 8,471 6,764
41,100 41,150 7,928 6,169 8,484 6,778
41,150 41,200 7,942 6,176 8,498 6,792
41,200 41,250 7,956 6,184 8,512 6,806
41,250 41,300 7,969 6,191 8,526 6,819
41,300 41,350 7,983 6,199 8,539 6,833
41,350 41,400 7,997 6,206 8,553 6,847
41,400 41,450 8,011 6,214 8,567 6,861
41,450 41,500 8,024 6,221 8,581 6,874
41,500 41,550 8,038 6,229 8,594 6,888
41,550 41,600 8,052 6,236 8,608 6,902
41,600 41,650 8,066 6,244 8,622 6,916
41,650 41,700 8,079 6,251 8,636 6,929
41,700 41,750 8,093 6,259 8,649 6,943
41,750 41,800 8,107 6,266 8,663 6,957
41,800 41,850 8,121 6,274 8,677 6,971
41,850 41,900 8,134 6,281 8,691 6,984
41,900 41,950 8,148 6,289 8,704 6,998
41,950 42,000 8,162 6,296 8,718 7,012
42,000 42,050 8,176 6,304 8,732 7,026
42,050 42,100 8,189 6,311 8,746 7,039
42,100 42,150 8,203 6,319 8,759 7,053
42,150 42,200 8,217 6,326 8,773 7,067
42,200 42,250 8,231 6,334 8,787 7,081
42,250 42,300 8,244 6,341 8,801 7,094
42,300 42,350 8,258 6,349 8,814 7,108
42,350 42,400 8,272 6,356 8,828 7,122
42,400 42,450 8,286 6,364 8,842 7,136
42,450 42,500 8,299 6,371 8,856 7,149
42,500 42,550 8,313 6,379 8,869 7,163
42,550 42,600 8,327 6,386 8,883 7,177
42,600 42,650 8,341 6,394 8,897 7,191
42,650 42,700 8,354 6,401 8,911 7,204
42,700 42,750 8,368 6,409 8,924 7,218
42,750 42,800 8,382 6,416 8,938 7,232
42,800 42,850 8,396 6,424 8,952 7,246
42,850 42,900 8,409 6,431 8,966 7,259
42,900 42,950 8,423 6,439 8,979 7,273
42,950 43,000 8,437 6,446 8,993 7,287
43,000 43,050 8,451 6,454 9,007 7,301
43,050 43,100 8,464 6,461 9,021 7,314
43,100 43,150 8,478 6,469 9,034 7,328
43,150 43,200 8,492 6,476 9,048 7,342
43,200 43,250 8,506 6,484 9,062 7,356
43,250 43,300 8,519 6,491 9,076 7,369
43,300 43,350 8,533 6,499 9,089 7,383
43,350 43,400 8,547 6,506 9,103 7,397
43,400 43,450 8,561 6,514 9,117 7,411
43,450 43,500 8,574 6,521 9,131 7,424
43,500 43,550 8,588 6,529 9,144 7,438
43,550 43,600 8,602 6,536 9,158 7,452
43,600 43,650 8,616 6,544 9,172 7,466
43,650 43,700 8,629 6,551 9,186 7,479
43,700 43,750 8,643 6,559 9,199 7,493
43,750 43,800 8,657 6,566 9,213 7,507
43,800 43,850 8,671 6,574 9,227 7,521
43,850 43,900 8,684 6,581 9,241 7,534
43,900 43,950 8,698 6,589 9,254 7,548
43,950 44,000 8,712 6,596 9,268 7,562
44,050 8,726 6,604 9,282 7,576
44,050 44,100 8,739 6,611 9,296 7,589
44,100 44,150 8,753 6,619 9,309 7,603
44,150 44,200 8,767 6,626 9,323 7,617
44,200 44,250 8,781 6,634 9,337 7,631
44,250 44,300 8,794 6,641 9,351 7,644
44,300 44,350 8,808 6,649 9,364 7,658
44,350 44,400 8,822 6,656 9,378 7,672
44,400 44,450 8,836 6,664 9,392 7,686
44,450 44,500 8,849 6,671 9,406 7,699
44,500 44,550 8,863 6,679 9,419 7,713
44,550 44,600 8,877 6,686 9,433 7,727
44,600 44,650 8,891 6,694 9,447 7,741
44,650 44,700 8,904 6,701 9,461 7,754
44,700 44,750 8,918 6,709 9,474 7,768
44,750 44,800 8,932 6,716 9,488 7,782
44,800 44,850 8,946 6,724 9,502 7,796
44,850 44,900 8,959 6,731 9,516 7,809
44,900 44,950 8,973 6,739 9,529 7,823
44,950 45,000 8,987 6,746 9,543 7,837
45,000 45,050 9,001 6,754 9,557 7,851
45,050 45,100 9,014 6,761 9,571 7,864
45,100 45,150 9,028 6,769 9,584 7,878
45,150 45,200 9,042 6,776 9,598 7,892
45,200 45,250 9,056 6,787 9,612 7,906
45,250 45,300 9,069 6,801 9,626 7,919
45,300 45,350 9,083 6,814 9,639 7,933
45,350 45,400 9,097 6,828 9,653 7,947
45,400 45,450 9,111 6,842 9,667 7,961
45,450 45,500 9,124 6,856 9,681 7,974
45,500 45,550 9,138 6,869 9,694 7,988
45,550 45,600 9,152 6,883 9,708 8,002
45,600 45,650 9,166 6,897 9,722 8,016
45,650 45,700 9,179 6,911 9,736 8,029
45,700 45,750 9,193 6,924 9,749 8,043
45,750 45,800 9,207 6,938 9,763 8,057
45,800 45,850 9,221 6,952 9,777 8,071
45,850 45,900 9,234 6,966 9,791 8,084
45,900 45,950 9,248 6,979 9,804 8,098
45,950 46,000 9,262 6,993 9,818 8,112
46,000 46,050 9,276 7,007 9,832 8,126
46,050 46,100 9,289 7,021 9,846 8,139
46,100 46,150 9,303 7,034 9,859 8,153
46,150 46,200 9,317 7,048 9,873 8,167
46,200 46,250 9,331 7,062 9,887 8,181
46,250 46,300 9,344 7,076 9,901 8,194
46,300 46,350 9,358 7,089 9,914 8,208
46,350 46,400 9,372 7,103 9,928 8,222
46,400 46,450 9,386 7,117 9,942 8,236
46,450 46,500 9,399 7,131 9,956 8,249
46,500 46,550 9,413 7,144 9,969 8,263
46,550 46,600 9,427 7,158 9,983 8,277
46,600 46,650 9,441 7,172 9,997 8,291
46,650 46,700 9,454 7,186 10,011 8,304
46,700 46,750 9,468 7,199 10,024 8,318
46,750 46,800 9,482 7,213 10,038 8,332
46,800 46,850 9,496 7,227 10,052 8,346
46,850 46,900 9,509 7,241 10,066 8,359
46,900 46,950 9,523 7,254 10,079 8,373
46,950 47,000 9,537 7,268 10,093 8,387
47,050 9,551 7,282 10,107 8,401
47,050 47,100 9,564 7,296 10,121 8,414
47,100 47,150 9,578 7,309 10,134 8,428
47,150 47,200 9,592 7,323 10,148 8,442
47,200 47,250 9,606 7,337 10,162 8,456
47,250 47,300 9,619 7,351 10,176 8,469
47,300 47,350 9,633 7,364 10,189 8,483
47,350 47,400 9,647 7,378 10,203 8,497
47,400 47,450 9,661 7,392 10,217 8,511
47,450 47,500 9,674 7,406 10,231 8,524
47,500 47,550 9,688 7,419 10,244 8,538
47,550 47,600 9,702 7,433 10,258 8,552
47,600 47,650 9,716 7,447 10,272 8,566
47,650 47,700 9,729 7,461 10,286 8,579
47,700 47,750 9,743 7,474 10,299 8,593
47,750 47,800 9,757 7,488 10,313 8,607
47,800 47,850 9,771 7,502 10,327 8,621
47,850 47,900 9,784 7,516 10,341 8,634
47,900 47,950 9,798 7,529 10,354 8,648
47,950 48,000 9,812 7,543 10,368 8,662
48,000 48,050 9,826 7,557 10,382 8,676
48,050 48,100 9,839 7,571 10,396 8,689
48,100 48,150 9,853 7,584 10,409 8,703
48,150 48,200 9,867 7,598 10,423 8,717
48,200 48,250 9,881 7,612 10,437 8,731
48,250 48,300 9,894 7,626 10,451 8,744
48,300 48,350 9,908 7,639 10,464 8,758
48,350 48,400 9,922 7,653 10,478 8,772
48,400 48,450 9,936 7,667 10,492 8,786
48,450 48,500 9,949 7,681 10,506 8,799
48,500 48,550 9,963 7,694 10,519 8,813
48,550 48,600 9,977 7,708 10,533 8,827
48,600 48,650 9,991 7,722 10,547 8,841
48,650 48,700 10,004 7,736 10,561 8,854
48,700 48,750 10,018 7,749 10,574 8,868
48,750 48,800 10,032 7,763 10,588 8,882
48,800 48,850 10,046 7,777 10,602 8,896
48,850 48,900 10,059 7,791 10,616 8,909
48,900 48,950 10,073 7,804 10,629 8,923
48,950 49,000 10,087 7,818 10,643 8,937
49,000 49,050 10,101 7,832 10,657 8,951
49,050 49,100 10,114 7,846 10,671 8,964
49,100 49,150 10,128 7,859 10,684 8,978
49,150 49,200 10,142 7,873 10,698 8,992
49,200 49,250 10,156 7,887 10,712 9,006
49,250 49,300 10,169 7,901 10,726 9,019
49,300 49,350 10,183 7,914 10,739 9,033
49,350 49,400 10,197 7,928 10,753 9,047
49,400 49,450 10,211 7,942 10,767 9,061
49,450 49,500 10,224 7,956 10,781 9,074
49,500 49,550 10,238 7,969 10,794 9,088
49,550 49,600 10,252 7,983 10,808 9,102
49,600 49,650 10,266 7,997 10,822 9,116
49,650 49,700 10,279 8,011 10,836 9,129
49,700 49,750 10,293 8,024 10,849 9,143
49,750 49,800 10,307 8,038 10,863 9,157
49,800 49,850 10,321 8,052 10,877 9,171
49,850 49,900 10,334 8,066 10,891 9,184
49,900 49,950 10,348 8,079 10,904 9,198
49,950 50,000 10,362 8,093 10,918 9,212
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 268

Page 271 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
50,000 53,000 56,00050,050 10,376 8,107 10,932 9,226
50,050 50,100 10,389 8,121 10,946 9,239
50,100 50,150 10,403 8,134 10,959 9,253
50,150 50,200 10,417 8,148 10,973 9,267
50,200 50,250 10,431 8,162 10,987 9,281
50,250 50,300 10,444 8,176 11,001 9,294
50,300 50,350 10,458 8,189 11,014 9,308
50,350 50,400 10,472 8,203 11,028 9,322
50,400 50,450 10,486 8,217 11,042 9,336
50,450 50,500 10,499 8,231 11,056 9,349
50,500 50,550 10,513 8,244 11,069 9,363
50,550 50,600 10,527 8,258 11,083 9,377
50,600 50,650 10,541 8,272 11,097 9,391
50,650 50,700 10,554 8,286 11,111 9,404
50,700 50,750 10,568 8,299 11,124 9,418
50,750 50,800 10,582 8,313 11,138 9,432
50,800 50,850 10,596 8,327 11,152 9,446
50,850 50,900 10,609 8,341 11,166 9,459
50,900 50,950 10,623 8,354 11,179 9,473
50,950 51,000 10,637 8,368 11,193 9,487
51,000 51,050 10,651 8,382 11,207 9,501
51,050 51,100 10,664 8,396 11,221 9,514
51,100 51,150 10,678 8,409 11,234 9,528
51,150 51,200 10,692 8,423 11,248 9,542
51,200 51,250 10,706 8,437 11,262 9,556
51,250 51,300 10,719 8,451 11,276 9,569
51,300 51,350 10,733 8,464 11,289 9,583
51,350 51,400 10,747 8,478 11,303 9,597
51,400 51,450 10,761 8,492 11,317 9,611
51,450 51,500 10,774 8,506 11,331 9,624
51,500 51,550 10,788 8,519 11,344 9,638
51,550 51,600 10,802 8,533 11,358 9,652
51,600 51,650 10,816 8,547 11,372 9,666
51,650 51,700 10,829 8,561 11,386 9,679
51,700 51,750 10,843 8,574 11,399 9,693
51,750 51,800 10,857 8,588 11,413 9,707
51,800 51,850 10,871 8,602 11,427 9,721
51,850 51,900 10,884 8,616 11,441 9,734
51,900 51,950 10,898 8,629 11,454 9,748
51,950 52,000 10,912 8,643 11,468 9,762
52,000 52,050 10,926 8,657 11,482 9,776
52,050 52,100 10,939 8,671 11,496 9,789
52,100 52,150 10,953 8,684 11,509 9,803
52,150 52,200 10,967 8,698 11,523 9,817
52,200 52,250 10,981 8,712 11,537 9,831
52,250 52,300 10,994 8,726 11,551 9,844
52,300 52,350 11,008 8,739 11,564 9,858
52,350 52,400 11,022 8,753 11,578 9,872
52,400 52,450 11,036 8,767 11,592 9,886
52,450 52,500 11,049 8,781 11,606 9,899
52,500 52,550 11,063 8,794 11,619 9,913
52,550 52,600 11,077 8,808 11,633 9,927
52,600 52,650 11,091 8,822 11,647 9,941
52,650 52,700 11,104 8,836 11,661 9,954
52,700 52,750 11,118 8,849 11,674 9,968
52,750 52,800 11,132 8,863 11,688 9,982
52,800 52,850 11,146 8,877 11,702 9,996
52,850 52,900 11,159 8,891 11,716 10,009
52,900 52,950 11,173 8,904 11,729 10,023
52,950 53,000 11,187 8,918 11,743 10,037
53,050 11,201 8,932 11,757 10,051
53,050 53,100 11,214 8,946 11,771 10,064
53,100 53,150 11,228 8,959 11,784 10,078
53,150 53,200 11,242 8,973 11,798 10,092
53,200 53,250 11,256 8,987 11,812 10,106
53,250 53,300 11,269 9,001 11,826 10,119
53,300 53,350 11,283 9,014 11,839 10,133
53,350 53,400 11,297 9,028 11,853 10,147
53,400 53,450 11,311 9,042 11,867 10,161
53,450 53,500 11,324 9,056 11,881 10,174
53,500 53,550 11,338 9,069 11,894 10,188
53,550 53,600 11,352 9,083 11,908 10,202
53,600 53,650 11,366 9,097 11,922 10,216
53,650 53,700 11,379 9,111 11,936 10,229
53,700 53,750 11,393 9,124 11,949 10,243
53,750 53,800 11,407 9,138 11,963 10,257
53,800 53,850 11,421 9,152 11,977 10,271
53,850 53,900 11,434 9,166 11,991 10,284
53,900 53,950 11,448 9,179 12,004 10,298
53,950 54,000 11,462 9,193 12,018 10,312
54,000 54,050 11,476 9,207 12,032 10,326
54,050 54,100 11,489 9,221 12,046 10,339
54,100 54,150 11,503 9,234 12,059 10,353
54,150 54,200 11,517 9,248 12,073 10,367
54,200 54,250 11,531 9,262 12,087 10,381
54,250 54,300 11,544 9,276 12,101 10,394
54,300 54,350 11,558 9,289 12,114 10,408
54,350 54,400 11,572 9,303 12,128 10,422
54,400 54,450 11,586 9,317 12,142 10,436
54,450 54,500 11,599 9,331 12,156 10,449
54,500 54,550 11,613 9,344 12,169 10,463
54,550 54,600 11,627 9,358 12,183 10,477
54,600 54,650 11,641 9,372 12,197 10,491
54,650 54,700 11,654 9,386 12,212 10,504
54,700 54,750 11,668 9,399 12,227 10,518
54,750 54,800 11,682 9,413 12,243 10,532
54,800 54,850 11,696 9,427 12,258 10,546
54,850 54,900 11,709 9,441 12,273 10,559
54,900 54,950 11,723 9,454 12,288 10,573
54,950 55,000 11,737 9,468 12,304 10,587
55,000 55,050 11,751 9,482 12,319 10,601
55,050 55,100 11,764 9,496 12,334 10,614
55,100 55,150 11,778 9,509 12,349 10,628
55,150 55,200 11,792 9,523 12,365 10,642
55,200 55,250 11,806 9,537 12,380 10,656
55,250 55,300 11,819 9,551 12,395 10,669
55,300 55,350 11,833 9,564 12,410 10,683
55,350 55,400 11,847 9,578 12,426 10,697
55,400 55,450 11,861 9,592 12,441 10,711
55,450 55,500 11,874 9,606 12,456 10,724
55,500 55,550 11,888 9,619 12,471 10,738
55,550 55,600 11,902 9,633 12,487 10,752
55,600 55,650 11,916 9,647 12,502 10,766
55,650 55,700 11,929 9,661 12,517 10,779
55,700 55,750 11,943 9,674 12,532 10,793
55,750 55,800 11,957 9,688 12,548 10,807
55,800 55,850 11,971 9,702 12,563 10,821
55,850 55,900 11,984 9,716 12,578 10,834
55,900 55,950 11,998 9,729 12,593 10,848
55,950 56,000 12,012 9,743 12,609 10,862
56,050 12,026 9,757 12,624 10,876
56,050 56,100 12,039 9,771 12,639 10,889
56,100 56,150 12,053 9,784 12,654 10,903
56,150 56,200 12,067 9,798 12,670 10,917
56,200 56,250 12,081 9,812 12,685 10,931
56,250 56,300 12,094 9,826 12,700 10,944
56,300 56,350 12,108 9,839 12,715 10,958
56,350 56,400 12,122 9,853 12,731 10,972
56,400 56,450 12,136 9,867 12,746 10,986
56,450 56,500 12,149 9,881 12,761 10,999
56,500 56,550 12,163 9,894 12,776 11,013
56,550 56,600 12,177 9,908 12,792 11,027
56,600 56,650 12,191 9,922 12,807 11,041
56,650 56,700 12,204 9,936 12,822 11,054
56,700 56,750 12,218 9,949 12,837 11,068
56,750 56,800 12,232 9,963 12,853 11,082
56,800 56,850 12,246 9,977 12,868 11,096
56,850 56,900 12,259 9,991 12,883 11,109
56,900 56,950 12,273 10,004 12,898 11,123
56,950 57,000 12,287 10,018 12,914 11,137
57,000 57,050 12,301 10,032 12,929 11,151
57,050 57,100 12,314 10,046 12,944 11,164
57,100 57,150 12,328 10,059 12,959 11,178
57,150 57,200 12,342 10,073 12,975 11,192
57,200 57,250 12,356 10,087 12,990 11,206
57,250 57,300 12,369 10,101 13,005 11,219
57,300 57,350 12,383 10,114 13,020 11,233
57,350 57,400 12,397 10,128 13,036 11,247
57,400 57,450 12,411 10,142 13,051 11,261
57,450 57,500 12,424 10,156 13,066 11,274
57,500 57,550 12,438 10,169 13,081 11,288
57,550 57,600 12,452 10,183 13,097 11,302
57,600 57,650 12,466 10,197 13,112 11,316
57,650 57,700 12,479 10,211 13,127 11,329
57,700 57,750 12,493 10,224 13,142 11,343
57,750 57,800 12,507 10,238 13,158 11,357
57,800 57,850 12,521 10,252 13,173 11,371
57,850 57,900 12,534 10,266 13,188 11,384
57,900 57,950 12,548 10,279 13,203 11,398
57,950 58,000 12,562 10,293 13,219 11,412
58,000 58,050 12,576 10,307 13,234 11,426
58,050 58,100 12,589 10,321 13,249 11,439
58,100 58,150 12,603 10,334 13,264 11,453
58,150 58,200 12,617 10,348 13,280 11,467
58,200 58,250 12,631 10,362 13,295 11,481
58,250 58,300 12,644 10,376 13,310 11,494
58,300 58,350 12,658 10,389 13,325 11,508
58,350 58,400 12,672 10,403 13,341 11,522
58,400 58,450 12,686 10,417 13,356 11,536
58,450 58,500 12,699 10,431 13,371 11,549
58,500 58,550 12,713 10,444 13,386 11,563
58,550 58,600 12,727 10,458 13,402 11,577
58,600 58,650 12,741 10,472 13,417 11,591
58,650 58,700 12,754 10,486 13,432 11,604
58,700 58,750 12,768 10,499 13,447 11,618
58,750 58,800 12,782 10,513 13,463 11,632
58,800 58,850 12,796 10,527 13,478 11,646
58,850 58,900 12,809 10,541 13,493 11,659
58,900 58,950 12,823 10,554 13,508 11,673
58,950 59,000 12,837 10,568 13,524 11,687
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 269

Page 272 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
59,000
60,000
61,000
62,000
63,000
64,000
65,000
66,000
67,000
59,000 62,000 65,00059,050 12,851 10,582 13,539 11,701
59,050 59,100 12,864 10,596 13,554 11,714
59,100 59,150 12,878 10,609 13,569 11,728
59,150 59,200 12,892 10,623 13,585 11,742
59,200 59,250 12,906 10,637 13,600 11,756
59,250 59,300 12,919 10,651 13,615 11,769
59,300 59,350 12,933 10,664 13,630 11,783
59,350 59,400 12,947 10,678 13,646 11,797
59,400 59,450 12,961 10,692 13,661 11,811
59,450 59,500 12,974 10,706 13,676 11,824
59,500 59,550 12,988 10,719 13,691 11,838
59,550 59,600 13,002 10,733 13,707 11,852
59,600 59,650 13,016 10,747 13,722 11,866
59,650 59,700 13,029 10,761 13,737 11,879
59,700 59,750 13,043 10,774 13,752 11,893
59,750 59,800 13,057 10,788 13,768 11,907
59,800 59,850 13,071 10,802 13,783 11,921
59,850 59,900 13,084 10,816 13,798 11,934
59,900 59,950 13,098 10,829 13,813 11,948
59,950 60,000 13,112 10,843 13,829 11,962
60,000 60,050 13,126 10,857 13,844 11,976
60,050 60,100 13,139 10,871 13,859 11,989
60,100 60,150 13,153 10,884 13,874 12,003
60,150 60,200 13,167 10,898 13,890 12,017
60,200 60,250 13,181 10,912 13,905 12,031
60,250 60,300 13,194 10,926 13,920 12,044
60,300 60,350 13,208 10,939 13,935 12,058
60,350 60,400 13,222 10,953 13,951 12,072
60,400 60,450 13,236 10,967 13,966 12,086
60,450 60,500 13,249 10,981 13,981 12,099
60,500 60,550 13,263 10,994 13,996 12,113
60,550 60,600 13,277 11,008 14,012 12,127
60,600 60,650 13,291 11,022 14,027 12,141
60,650 60,700 13,304 11,036 14,042 12,154
60,700 60,750 13,318 11,049 14,057 12,168
60,750 60,800 13,332 11,063 14,073 12,182
60,800 60,850 13,346 11,077 14,088 12,196
60,850 60,900 13,359 11,091 14,103 12,209
60,900 60,950 13,373 11,104 14,118 12,223
60,950 61,000 13,387 11,118 14,134 12,237
61,000 61,050 13,401 11,132 14,149 12,251
61,050 61,100 13,414 11,146 14,164 12,264
61,100 61,150 13,428 11,159 14,179 12,278
61,150 61,200 13,442 11,173 14,195 12,292
61,200 61,250 13,456 11,187 14,210 12,306
61,250 61,300 13,469 11,201 14,225 12,319
61,300 61,350 13,483 11,214 14,240 12,333
61,350 61,400 13,497 11,228 14,256 12,347
61,400 61,450 13,511 11,242 14,271 12,361
61,450 61,500 13,524 11,256 14,286 12,374
61,500 61,550 13,538 11,269 14,301 12,388
61,550 61,600 13,552 11,283 14,317 12,402
61,600 61,650 13,566 11,297 14,332 12,416
61,650 61,700 13,579 11,311 14,347 12,429
61,700 61,750 13,593 11,324 14,362 12,443
61,750 61,800 13,607 11,338 14,378 12,457
61,800 61,850 13,621 11,352 14,393 12,471
61,850 61,900 13,634 11,366 14,408 12,484
61,900 61,950 13,648 11,379 14,423 12,498
61,950 62,000 13,662 11,393 14,439 12,512
62,050 13,676 11,407 14,454 12,526
62,050 62,100 13,689 11,421 14,469 12,539
62,100 62,150 13,703 11,434 14,484 12,553
62,150 62,200 13,717 11,448 14,500 12,567
62,200 62,250 13,731 11,462 14,515 12,581
62,250 62,300 13,744 11,476 14,530 12,594
62,300 62,350 13,758 11,489 14,545 12,608
62,350 62,400 13,772 11,503 14,561 12,622
62,400 62,450 13,786 11,517 14,576 12,636
62,450 62,500 13,799 11,531 14,591 12,649
62,500 62,550 13,813 11,544 14,606 12,663
62,550 62,600 13,827 11,558 14,622 12,677
62,600 62,650 13,841 11,572 14,637 12,691
62,650 62,700 13,854 11,586 14,652 12,704
62,700 62,750 13,868 11,599 14,667 12,718
62,750 62,800 13,882 11,613 14,683 12,732
62,800 62,850 13,896 11,627 14,698 12,746
62,850 62,900 13,909 11,641 14,713 12,759
62,900 62,950 13,923 11,654 14,728 12,773
62,950 63,000 13,937 11,668 14,744 12,787
63,000 63,050 13,951 11,682 14,759 12,801
63,050 63,100 13,964 11,696 14,774 12,814
63,100 63,150 13,978 11,709 14,789 12,828
63,150 63,200 13,992 11,723 14,805 12,842
63,200 63,250 14,006 11,737 14,820 12,856
63,250 63,300 14,019 11,751 14,835 12,869
63,300 63,350 14,033 11,764 14,850 12,883
63,350 63,400 14,047 11,778 14,866 12,897
63,400 63,450 14,061 11,792 14,881 12,911
63,450 63,500 14,074 11,806 14,896 12,924
63,500 63,550 14,088 11,819 14,911 12,938
63,550 63,600 14,102 11,833 14,927 12,952
63,600 63,650 14,116 11,847 14,942 12,966
63,650 63,700 14,129 11,861 14,957 12,979
63,700 63,750 14,143 11,874 14,972 12,993
63,750 63,800 14,157 11,888 14,988 13,007
63,800 63,850 14,171 11,902 15,003 13,021
63,850 63,900 14,184 11,916 15,018 13,034
63,900 63,950 14,198 11,929 15,033 13,048
63,950 64,000 14,212 11,943 15,049 13,062
64,000 64,050 14,226 11,957 15,064 13,076
64,050 64,100 14,239 11,971 15,079 13,089
64,100 64,150 14,253 11,984 15,094 13,103
64,150 64,200 14,267 11,998 15,110 13,117
64,200 64,250 14,281 12,012 15,125 13,131
64,250 64,300 14,294 12,026 15,140 13,144
64,300 64,350 14,308 12,039 15,155 13,158
64,350 64,400 14,322 12,053 15,171 13,172
64,400 64,450 14,336 12,067 15,186 13,186
64,450 64,500 14,349 12,081 15,201 13,199
64,500 64,550 14,363 12,094 15,216 13,213
64,550 64,600 14,377 12,108 15,232 13,227
64,600 64,650 14,391 12,122 15,247 13,241
64,650 64,700 14,404 12,136 15,262 13,254
64,700 64,750 14,418 12,149 15,277 13,268
64,750 64,800 14,432 12,163 15,293 13,282
64,800 64,850 14,446 12,177 15,308 13,296
64,850 64,900 14,459 12,191 15,323 13,309
64,900 64,950 14,473 12,204 15,338 13,323
64,950 65,000 14,487 12,218 15,354 13,337
65,050 14,501 12,232 15,369 13,351
65,050 65,100 14,514 12,246 15,384 13,364
65,100 65,150 14,528 12,259 15,399 13,378
65,150 65,200 14,542 12,273 15,415 13,392
65,200 65,250 14,556 12,287 15,430 13,406
65,250 65,300 14,569 12,301 15,445 13,419
65,300 65,350 14,583 12,314 15,460 13,433
65,350 65,400 14,597 12,328 15,476 13,447
65,400 65,450 14,611 12,342 15,491 13,461
65,450 65,500 14,624 12,356 15,506 13,474
65,500 65,550 14,638 12,369 15,521 13,488
65,550 65,600 14,653 12,383 15,537 13,502
65,600 65,650 14,668 12,397 15,552 13,516
65,650 65,700 14,683 12,411 15,567 13,529
65,700 65,750 14,698 12,424 15,582 13,543
65,750 65,800 14,714 12,438 15,598 13,557
65,800 65,850 14,729 12,452 15,613 13,571
65,850 65,900 14,744 12,466 15,628 13,584
65,900 65,950 14,759 12,479 15,643 13,598
65,950 66,000 14,775 12,493 15,659 13,612
66,000 66,050 14,790 12,507 15,674 13,626
66,050 66,100 14,805 12,521 15,689 13,639
66,100 66,150 14,820 12,534 15,704 13,653
66,150 66,200 14,836 12,548 15,720 13,667
66,200 66,250 14,851 12,562 15,735 13,681
66,250 66,300 14,866 12,576 15,750 13,694
66,300 66,350 14,881 12,589 15,765 13,708
66,350 66,400 14,897 12,603 15,781 13,722
66,400 66,450 14,912 12,617 15,796 13,736
66,450 66,500 14,927 12,631 15,811 13,749
66,500 66,550 14,942 12,644 15,826 13,763
66,550 66,600 14,958 12,658 15,842 13,777
66,600 66,650 14,973 12,672 15,857 13,791
66,650 66,700 14,988 12,686 15,872 13,804
66,700 66,750 15,003 12,699 15,887 13,818
66,750 66,800 15,019 12,713 15,903 13,832
66,800 66,850 15,034 12,727 15,918 13,846
66,850 66,900 15,049 12,741 15,933 13,859
66,900 66,950 15,064 12,754 15,948 13,873
66,950 67,000 15,080 12,768 15,964 13,887
67,000 67,050 15,095 12,782 15,979 13,901
67,050 67,100 15,110 12,796 15,994 13,914
67,100 67,150 15,125 12,809 16,009 13,928
67,150 67,200 15,141 12,823 16,025 13,942
67,200 67,250 15,156 12,837 16,040 13,956
67,250 67,300 15,171 12,851 16,055 13,969
67,300 67,350 15,186 12,864 16,070 13,983
67,350 67,400 15,202 12,878 16,086 13,997
67,400 67,450 15,217 12,892 16,101 14,011
67,450 67,500 15,232 12,906 16,116 14,024
67,500 67,550 15,247 12,919 16,131 14,038
67,550 67,600 15,263 12,933 16,147 14,052
67,600 67,650 15,278 12,947 16,162 14,066
67,650 67,700 15,293 12,961 16,177 14,079
67,700 67,750 15,308 12,974 16,192 14,093
67,750 67,800 15,324 12,988 16,208 14,107
67,800 67,850 15,339 13,002 16,223 14,121
67,850 67,900 15,354 13,016 16,238 14,134
67,900 67,950 15,369 13,029 16,253 14,148
67,950 68,000 15,385 13,043 16,269 14,162
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 270

Page 273 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
68,000
69,000
70,000
71,000
72,000
73,000
74,000
75,000
76,000
68,000 71,000 74,00068,050 15,400 13,057 16,284 14,176
68,050 68,100 15,415 13,071 16,299 14,189
68,100 68,150 15,430 13,084 16,314 14,203
68,150 68,200 15,446 13,098 16,330 14,217
68,200 68,250 15,461 13,112 16,345 14,231
68,250 68,300 15,476 13,126 16,360 14,244
68,300 68,350 15,491 13,139 16,375 14,258
68,350 68,400 15,507 13,153 16,391 14,272
68,400 68,450 15,522 13,167 16,406 14,286
68,450 68,500 15,537 13,181 16,421 14,299
68,500 68,550 15,552 13,194 16,436 14,313
68,550 68,600 15,568 13,208 16,452 14,327
68,600 68,650 15,583 13,222 16,467 14,341
68,650 68,700 15,598 13,236 16,482 14,354
68,700 68,750 15,613 13,249 16,497 14,368
68,750 68,800 15,629 13,263 16,513 14,382
68,800 68,850 15,644 13,277 16,528 14,396
68,850 68,900 15,659 13,291 16,543 14,409
68,900 68,950 15,674 13,304 16,558 14,423
68,950 69,000 15,690 13,318 16,574 14,437
69,000 69,050 15,705 13,332 16,589 14,451
69,050 69,100 15,720 13,346 16,604 14,464
69,100 69,150 15,735 13,359 16,619 14,478
69,150 69,200 15,751 13,373 16,635 14,492
69,200 69,250 15,766 13,387 16,650 14,506
69,250 69,300 15,781 13,401 16,665 14,519
69,300 69,350 15,796 13,414 16,680 14,533
69,350 69,400 15,812 13,428 16,696 14,547
69,400 69,450 15,827 13,442 16,711 14,561
69,450 69,500 15,842 13,456 16,726 14,574
69,500 69,550 15,857 13,469 16,741 14,588
69,550 69,600 15,873 13,483 16,757 14,602
69,600 69,650 15,888 13,497 16,772 14,616
69,650 69,700 15,903 13,511 16,787 14,629
69,700 69,750 15,918 13,524 16,802 14,643
69,750 69,800 15,934 13,538 16,818 14,657
69,800 69,850 15,949 13,552 16,833 14,671
69,850 69,900 15,964 13,566 16,848 14,684
69,900 69,950 15,979 13,579 16,863 14,698
69,950 70,000 15,995 13,593 16,879 14,712
70,000 70,050 16,010 13,607 16,894 14,726
70,050 70,100 16,025 13,621 16,909 14,739
70,100 70,150 16,040 13,634 16,924 14,753
70,150 70,200 16,056 13,648 16,940 14,767
70,200 70,250 16,071 13,662 16,955 14,781
70,250 70,300 16,086 13,676 16,970 14,794
70,300 70,350 16,101 13,689 16,985 14,808
70,350 70,400 16,117 13,703 17,001 14,822
70,400 70,450 16,132 13,717 17,016 14,836
70,450 70,500 16,147 13,731 17,031 14,849
70,500 70,550 16,162 13,744 17,046 14,863
70,550 70,600 16,178 13,758 17,062 14,877
70,600 70,650 16,193 13,772 17,077 14,891
70,650 70,700 16,208 13,786 17,092 14,904
70,700 70,750 16,223 13,799 17,107 14,918
70,750 70,800 16,239 13,813 17,123 14,932
70,800 70,850 16,254 13,827 17,138 14,946
70,850 70,900 16,269 13,841 17,153 14,959
70,900 70,950 16,284 13,854 17,168 14,973
70,950 71,000 16,300 13,868 17,184 14,987
71,050 16,315 13,882 17,199 15,001
71,050 71,100 16,330 13,896 17,214 15,014
71,100 71,150 16,345 13,909 17,229 15,028
71,150 71,200 16,361 13,923 17,245 15,042
71,200 71,250 16,376 13,937 17,260 15,056
71,250 71,300 16,391 13,951 17,275 15,069
71,300 71,350 16,406 13,964 17,290 15,083
71,350 71,400 16,422 13,978 17,306 15,097
71,400 71,450 16,437 13,992 17,321 15,111
71,450 71,500 16,452 14,006 17,336 15,124
71,500 71,550 16,467 14,019 17,351 15,138
71,550 71,600 16,483 14,033 17,367 15,152
71,600 71,650 16,498 14,047 17,382 15,166
71,650 71,700 16,513 14,061 17,397 15,179
71,700 71,750 16,528 14,074 17,412 15,193
71,750 71,800 16,544 14,088 17,428 15,207
71,800 71,850 16,559 14,102 17,443 15,221
71,850 71,900 16,574 14,116 17,458 15,234
71,900 71,950 16,589 14,129 17,473 15,248
71,950 72,000 16,605 14,143 17,489 15,262
72,000 72,050 16,620 14,157 17,504 15,276
72,050 72,100 16,635 14,171 17,519 15,289
72,100 72,150 16,650 14,184 17,534 15,303
72,150 72,200 16,666 14,198 17,550 15,317
72,200 72,250 16,681 14,212 17,565 15,331
72,250 72,300 16,696 14,226 17,580 15,344
72,300 72,350 16,711 14,239 17,595 15,358
72,350 72,400 16,727 14,253 17,611 15,372
72,400 72,450 16,742 14,267 17,626 15,386
72,450 72,500 16,757 14,281 17,641 15,399
72,500 72,550 16,772 14,294 17,656 15,413
72,550 72,600 16,788 14,308 17,672 15,427
72,600 72,650 16,803 14,322 17,687 15,441
72,650 72,700 16,818 14,336 17,702 15,454
72,700 72,750 16,833 14,349 17,717 15,468
72,750 72,800 16,849 14,363 17,733 15,482
72,800 72,850 16,864 14,377 17,748 15,496
72,850 72,900 16,879 14,391 17,763 15,509
72,900 72,950 16,894 14,404 17,778 15,523
72,950 73,000 16,910 14,418 17,794 15,537
73,000 73,050 16,925 14,432 17,809 15,551
73,050 73,100 16,940 14,446 17,824 15,564
73,100 73,150 16,955 14,459 17,839 15,578
73,150 73,200 16,971 14,473 17,855 15,592
73,200 73,250 16,986 14,487 17,870 15,606
73,250 73,300 17,001 14,501 17,885 15,619
73,300 73,350 17,016 14,514 17,900 15,633
73,350 73,400 17,032 14,528 17,916 15,647
73,400 73,450 17,047 14,542 17,931 15,661
73,450 73,500 17,062 14,556 17,946 15,674
73,500 73,550 17,077 14,569 17,961 15,688
73,550 73,600 17,093 14,583 17,977 15,702
73,600 73,650 17,108 14,597 17,992 15,716
73,650 73,700 17,123 14,611 18,007 15,729
73,700 73,750 17,138 14,624 18,022 15,743
73,750 73,800 17,154 14,638 18,038 15,757
73,800 73,850 17,169 14,652 18,053 15,771
73,850 73,900 17,184 14,666 18,068 15,784
73,900 73,950 17,199 14,679 18,083 15,798
73,950 74,000 17,215 14,693 18,099 15,812
74,050 17,230 14,707 18,114 15,826
74,050 74,100 17,245 14,721 18,129 15,839
74,100 74,150 17,260 14,734 18,144 15,853
74,150 74,200 17,276 14,748 18,160 15,867
74,200 74,250 17,291 14,762 18,175 15,881
74,250 74,300 17,306 14,776 18,190 15,894
74,300 74,350 17,321 14,789 18,205 15,908
74,350 74,400 17,337 14,803 18,221 15,922
74,400 74,450 17,352 14,817 18,236 15,936
74,450 74,500 17,367 14,831 18,251 15,949
74,500 74,550 17,382 14,844 18,266 15,963
74,550 74,600 17,398 14,858 18,282 15,977
74,600 74,650 17,413 14,872 18,297 15,991
74,650 74,700 17,428 14,886 18,312 16,004
74,700 74,750 17,443 14,899 18,327 16,018
74,750 74,800 17,459 14,913 18,343 16,032
74,800 74,850 17,474 14,927 18,358 16,046
74,850 74,900 17,489 14,941 18,373 16,059
74,900 74,950 17,504 14,954 18,388 16,073
74,950 75,000 17,520 14,968 18,404 16,087
75,000 75,050 17,535 14,982 18,419 16,101
75,050 75,100 17,550 14,996 18,434 16,114
75,100 75,150 17,565 15,009 18,449 16,128
75,150 75,200 17,581 15,023 18,465 16,142
75,200 75,250 17,596 15,037 18,480 16,156
75,250 75,300 17,611 15,051 18,495 16,169
75,300 75,350 17,626 15,064 18,510 16,183
75,350 75,400 17,642 15,078 18,526 16,197
75,400 75,450 17,657 15,092 18,541 16,211
75,450 75,500 17,672 15,106 18,556 16,224
75,500 75,550 17,687 15,119 18,571 16,238
75,550 75,600 17,703 15,133 18,587 16,252
75,600 75,650 17,718 15,147 18,602 16,266
75,650 75,700 17,733 15,161 18,617 16,279
75,700 75,750 17,748 15,174 18,632 16,293
75,750 75,800 17,764 15,188 18,648 16,307
75,800 75,850 17,779 15,202 18,663 16,321
75,850 75,900 17,794 15,216 18,678 16,334
75,900 75,950 17,809 15,229 18,693 16,348
75,950 76,000 17,825 15,243 18,709 16,362
76,000 76,050 17,840 15,257 18,724 16,376
76,050 76,100 17,855 15,271 18,739 16,389
76,100 76,150 17,870 15,284 18,754 16,403
76,150 76,200 17,886 15,298 18,770 16,417
76,200 76,250 17,901 15,312 18,785 16,431
76,250 76,300 17,916 15,326 18,800 16,444
76,300 76,350 17,931 15,339 18,815 16,458
76,350 76,400 17,947 15,353 18,831 16,472
76,400 76,450 17,962 15,367 18,846 16,486
76,450 76,500 17,977 15,381 18,861 16,499
76,500 76,550 17,992 15,394 18,876 16,513
76,550 76,600 18,008 15,408 18,892 16,527
76,600 76,650 18,023 15,422 18,907 16,541
76,650 76,700 18,038 15,436 18,922 16,554
76,700 76,750 18,053 15,449 18,937 16,568
76,750 76,800 18,069 15,463 18,953 16,582
76,800 76,850 18,084 15,477 18,968 16,596
76,850 76,900 18,099 15,491 18,983 16,609
76,900 76,950 18,114 15,504 18,998 16,623
76,950 77,000 18,130 15,518 19,014 16,637
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 271

Page 274 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
77,000
78,000
79,000
80,000
81,000
82,000
83,000
84,000
85,000
77,000 80,000 83,00077,050 18,145 15,532 19,029 16,651
77,050 77,100 18,160 15,546 19,044 16,664
77,100 77,150 18,175 15,559 19,059 16,678
77,150 77,200 18,191 15,573 19,075 16,692
77,200 77,250 18,206 15,587 19,090 16,706
77,250 77,300 18,221 15,601 19,105 16,719
77,300 77,350 18,236 15,614 19,120 16,733
77,350 77,400 18,252 15,628 19,136 16,747
77,400 77,450 18,267 15,642 19,151 16,761
77,450 77,500 18,282 15,656 19,166 16,774
77,500 77,550 18,297 15,669 19,181 16,788
77,550 77,600 18,313 15,683 19,197 16,802
77,600 77,650 18,328 15,697 19,212 16,816
77,650 77,700 18,343 15,711 19,227 16,829
77,700 77,750 18,358 15,724 19,242 16,843
77,750 77,800 18,374 15,738 19,258 16,857
77,800 77,850 18,389 15,752 19,273 16,871
77,850 77,900 18,404 15,766 19,288 16,884
77,900 77,950 18,419 15,779 19,303 16,898
77,950 78,000 18,435 15,793 19,319 16,912
78,000 78,050 18,450 15,807 19,334 16,926
78,050 78,100 18,465 15,821 19,349 16,939
78,100 78,150 18,480 15,834 19,364 16,953
78,150 78,200 18,496 15,848 19,380 16,967
78,200 78,250 18,511 15,862 19,395 16,981
78,250 78,300 18,526 15,876 19,410 16,994
78,300 78,350 18,541 15,889 19,425 17,008
78,350 78,400 18,557 15,903 19,441 17,022
78,400 78,450 18,572 15,917 19,456 17,036
78,450 78,500 18,587 15,931 19,471 17,049
78,500 78,550 18,602 15,944 19,486 17,063
78,550 78,600 18,618 15,958 19,502 17,077
78,600 78,650 18,633 15,972 19,517 17,091
78,650 78,700 18,648 15,986 19,532 17,104
78,700 78,750 18,663 15,999 19,547 17,118
78,750 78,800 18,679 16,013 19,563 17,132
78,800 78,850 18,694 16,027 19,578 17,146
78,850 78,900 18,709 16,041 19,593 17,159
78,900 78,950 18,724 16,054 19,608 17,173
78,950 79,000 18,740 16,068 19,624 17,187
79,000 79,050 18,755 16,082 19,639 17,201
79,050 79,100 18,770 16,096 19,654 17,214
79,100 79,150 18,785 16,109 19,669 17,228
79,150 79,200 18,801 16,123 19,685 17,242
79,200 79,250 18,816 16,137 19,700 17,256
79,250 79,300 18,831 16,151 19,715 17,269
79,300 79,350 18,846 16,164 19,730 17,283
79,350 79,400 18,862 16,178 19,746 17,297
79,400 79,450 18,877 16,192 19,761 17,311
79,450 79,500 18,892 16,206 19,776 17,324
79,500 79,550 18,907 16,219 19,791 17,338
79,550 79,600 18,923 16,233 19,807 17,352
79,600 79,650 18,938 16,247 19,822 17,366
79,650 79,700 18,953 16,261 19,837 17,379
79,700 79,750 18,968 16,274 19,852 17,393
79,750 79,800 18,984 16,288 19,868 17,407
79,800 79,850 18,999 16,302 19,883 17,421
79,850 79,900 19,014 16,316 19,898 17,434
79,900 79,950 19,029 16,329 19,913 17,448
79,950 80,000 19,045 16,343 19,929 17,462
80,050 19,060 16,357 19,944 17,476
80,050 80,100 19,075 16,371 19,959 17,489
80,100 80,150 19,090 16,384 19,974 17,503
80,150 80,200 19,106 16,398 19,990 17,517
80,200 80,250 19,121 16,412 20,005 17,531
80,250 80,300 19,136 16,426 20,020 17,544
80,300 80,350 19,151 16,439 20,035 17,558
80,350 80,400 19,167 16,453 20,051 17,572
80,400 80,450 19,182 16,467 20,066 17,586
80,450 80,500 19,197 16,481 20,081 17,599
80,500 80,550 19,212 16,494 20,096 17,613
80,550 80,600 19,228 16,508 20,112 17,627
80,600 80,650 19,243 16,522 20,127 17,641
80,650 80,700 19,258 16,536 20,142 17,654
80,700 80,750 19,273 16,549 20,157 17,668
80,750 80,800 19,289 16,563 20,173 17,682
80,800 80,850 19,304 16,577 20,188 17,696
80,850 80,900 19,319 16,591 20,203 17,709
80,900 80,950 19,334 16,604 20,218 17,723
80,950 81,000 19,350 16,618 20,234 17,737
81,000 81,050 19,365 16,632 20,249 17,751
81,050 81,100 19,380 16,646 20,264 17,764
81,100 81,150 19,395 16,659 20,279 17,778
81,150 81,200 19,411 16,673 20,295 17,792
81,200 81,250 19,426 16,687 20,310 17,806
81,250 81,300 19,441 16,701 20,325 17,819
81,300 81,350 19,456 16,714 20,340 17,833
81,350 81,400 19,472 16,728 20,356 17,847
81,400 81,450 19,487 16,742 20,371 17,861
81,450 81,500 19,502 16,756 20,386 17,874
81,500 81,550 19,517 16,769 20,401 17,888
81,550 81,600 19,533 16,783 20,417 17,902
81,600 81,650 19,548 16,797 20,432 17,916
81,650 81,700 19,563 16,811 20,447 17,929
81,700 81,750 19,578 16,824 20,462 17,943
81,750 81,800 19,594 16,838 20,478 17,957
81,800 81,850 19,609 16,852 20,493 17,971
81,850 81,900 19,624 16,866 20,508 17,984
81,900 81,950 19,639 16,879 20,523 17,998
81,950 82,000 19,655 16,893 20,539 18,012
82,000 82,050 19,670 16,907 20,554 18,026
82,050 82,100 19,685 16,921 20,569 18,039
82,100 82,150 19,700 16,934 20,584 18,053
82,150 82,200 19,716 16,948 20,600 18,067
82,200 82,250 19,731 16,962 20,615 18,081
82,250 82,300 19,746 16,976 20,630 18,094
82,300 82,350 19,761 16,989 20,645 18,108
82,350 82,400 19,777 17,003 20,661 18,122
82,400 82,450 19,792 17,017 20,676 18,136
82,450 82,500 19,807 17,031 20,691 18,149
82,500 82,550 19,822 17,044 20,706 18,163
82,550 82,600 19,838 17,058 20,722 18,177
82,600 82,650 19,853 17,072 20,737 18,191
82,650 82,700 19,868 17,086 20,752 18,204
82,700 82,750 19,883 17,099 20,767 18,218
82,750 82,800 19,899 17,113 20,783 18,232
82,800 82,850 19,914 17,127 20,798 18,246
82,850 82,900 19,929 17,141 20,813 18,259
82,900 82,950 19,944 17,154 20,828 18,273
82,950 83,000 19,960 17,168 20,844 18,287
83,050 19,975 17,182 20,859 18,301
83,050 83,100 19,990 17,196 20,874 18,314
83,100 83,150 20,005 17,209 20,889 18,328
83,150 83,200 20,021 17,223 20,905 18,342
83,200 83,250 20,036 17,237 20,920 18,356
83,250 83,300 20,051 17,251 20,936 18,369
83,300 83,350 20,066 17,264 20,954 18,383
83,350 83,400 20,082 17,278 20,972 18,397
83,400 83,450 20,097 17,292 20,990 18,411
83,450 83,500 20,112 17,306 21,007 18,424
83,500 83,550 20,127 17,319 21,025 18,438
83,550 83,600 20,143 17,333 21,043 18,452
83,600 83,650 20,158 17,347 21,061 18,466
83,650 83,700 20,173 17,361 21,078 18,479
83,700 83,750 20,188 17,374 21,096 18,493
83,750 83,800 20,204 17,388 21,114 18,507
83,800 83,850 20,219 17,402 21,132 18,521
83,850 83,900 20,234 17,416 21,149 18,534
83,900 83,950 20,249 17,429 21,167 18,548
83,950 84,000 20,265 17,443 21,185 18,562
84,000 84,050 20,280 17,457 21,203 18,576
84,050 84,100 20,295 17,471 21,220 18,589
84,100 84,150 20,310 17,484 21,238 18,603
84,150 84,200 20,326 17,498 21,256 18,617
84,200 84,250 20,341 17,512 21,274 18,631
84,250 84,300 20,356 17,526 21,291 18,644
84,300 84,350 20,371 17,539 21,309 18,658
84,350 84,400 20,387 17,553 21,327 18,672
84,400 84,450 20,402 17,567 21,345 18,686
84,450 84,500 20,417 17,581 21,362 18,699
84,500 84,550 20,432 17,594 21,380 18,713
84,550 84,600 20,448 17,608 21,398 18,727
84,600 84,650 20,463 17,622 21,416 18,741
84,650 84,700 20,478 17,636 21,433 18,754
84,700 84,750 20,493 17,649 21,451 18,768
84,750 84,800 20,509 17,663 21,469 18,782
84,800 84,850 20,524 17,677 21,487 18,796
84,850 84,900 20,539 17,691 21,504 18,809
84,900 84,950 20,554 17,704 21,522 18,823
84,950 85,000 20,570 17,718 21,540 18,837
85,000 85,050 20,585 17,732 21,558 18,851
85,050 85,100 20,600 17,746 21,575 18,864
85,100 85,150 20,615 17,759 21,593 18,878
85,150 85,200 20,631 17,773 21,611 18,892
85,200 85,250 20,646 17,787 21,629 18,906
85,250 85,300 20,661 17,801 21,646 18,919
85,300 85,350 20,676 17,814 21,664 18,933
85,350 85,400 20,692 17,828 21,682 18,947
85,400 85,450 20,707 17,842 21,700 18,961
85,450 85,500 20,722 17,856 21,717 18,974
85,500 85,550 20,737 17,869 21,735 18,988
85,550 85,600 20,753 17,883 21,753 19,002
85,600 85,650 20,768 17,897 21,771 19,016
85,650 85,700 20,783 17,911 21,788 19,029
85,700 85,750 20,798 17,924 21,806 19,043
85,750 85,800 20,814 17,938 21,824 19,057
85,800 85,850 20,829 17,952 21,842 19,071
85,850 85,900 20,844 17,966 21,859 19,084
85,900 85,950 20,859 17,979 21,877 19,098
85,950 86,000 20,875 17,993 21,895 19,112
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 272

Page 275 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—Your tax is—
(Continued on next page)* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
86,000
87,000
88,000
89,000
90,000
91,000
92,000
93,000
94,000
86,000 89,000 92,00086,050 20,890 18,007 21,913 19,126
86,050 86,100 20,905 18,021 21,930 19,139
86,100 86,150 20,920 18,034 21,948 19,153
86,150 86,200 20,936 18,048 21,966 19,167
86,200 86,250 20,951 18,062 21,984 19,181
86,250 86,300 20,966 18,076 22,001 19,194
86,300 86,350 20,981 18,089 22,019 19,208
86,350 86,400 20,997 18,103 22,037 19,222
86,400 86,450 21,012 18,117 22,055 19,236
86,450 86,500 21,027 18,131 22,072 19,249
86,500 86,550 21,042 18,144 22,090 19,263
86,550 86,600 21,058 18,158 22,108 19,277
86,600 86,650 21,073 18,172 22,126 19,291
86,650 86,700 21,088 18,186 22,143 19,304
86,700 86,750 21,103 18,199 22,161 19,318
86,750 86,800 21,119 18,213 22,179 19,332
86,800 86,850 21,134 18,227 22,197 19,346
86,850 86,900 21,149 18,241 22,214 19,359
86,900 86,950 21,164 18,254 22,232 19,373
86,950 87,000 21,180 18,268 22,250 19,387
87,000 87,050 21,195 18,282 22,268 19,401
87,050 87,100 21,210 18,296 22,285 19,414
87,100 87,150 21,225 18,309 22,303 19,428
87,150 87,200 21,241 18,323 22,321 19,442
87,200 87,250 21,256 18,337 22,339 19,456
87,250 87,300 21,271 18,351 22,356 19,469
87,300 87,350 21,286 18,364 22,374 19,483
87,350 87,400 21,302 18,378 22,392 19,497
87,400 87,450 21,317 18,392 22,410 19,511
87,450 87,500 21,332 18,406 22,427 19,524
87,500 87,550 21,347 18,419 22,445 19,538
87,550 87,600 21,363 18,433 22,463 19,552
87,600 87,650 21,378 18,447 22,481 19,566
87,650 87,700 21,393 18,461 22,498 19,579
87,700 87,750 21,408 18,474 22,516 19,593
87,750 87,800 21,424 18,488 22,534 19,607
87,800 87,850 21,439 18,502 22,552 19,621
87,850 87,900 21,454 18,516 22,569 19,634
87,900 87,950 21,469 18,529 22,587 19,648
87,950 88,000 21,485 18,543 22,605 19,662
88,000 88,050 21,500 18,557 22,623 19,676
88,050 88,100 21,515 18,571 22,640 19,689
88,100 88,150 21,530 18,584 22,658 19,703
88,150 88,200 21,546 18,598 22,676 19,717
88,200 88,250 21,561 18,612 22,694 19,731
88,250 88,300 21,576 18,626 22,711 19,744
88,300 88,350 21,591 18,639 22,729 19,758
88,350 88,400 21,607 18,653 22,747 19,772
88,400 88,450 21,622 18,667 22,765 19,786
88,450 88,500 21,637 18,681 22,782 19,799
88,500 88,550 21,652 18,694 22,800 19,813
88,550 88,600 21,668 18,708 22,818 19,827
88,600 88,650 21,683 18,722 22,836 19,841
88,650 88,700 21,698 18,736 22,853 19,854
88,700 88,750 21,713 18,749 22,871 19,868
88,750 88,800 21,729 18,763 22,889 19,882
88,800 88,850 21,744 18,777 22,907 19,896
88,850 88,900 21,759 18,791 22,924 19,909
88,900 88,950 21,774 18,804 22,942 19,923
88,950 89,000 21,790 18,818 22,960 19,937
89,050 21,805 18,832 22,978 19,951
89,050 89,100 21,820 18,846 22,995 19,964
89,100 89,150 21,835 18,859 23,013 19,978
89,150 89,200 21,851 18,873 23,031 19,992
89,200 89,250 21,866 18,887 23,049 20,006
89,250 89,300 21,881 18,901 23,066 20,019
89,300 89,350 21,896 18,914 23,084 20,033
89,350 89,400 21,912 18,928 23,102 20,047
89,400 89,450 21,927 18,942 23,120 20,061
89,450 89,500 21,942 18,956 23,137 20,074
89,500 89,550 21,957 18,969 23,155 20,088
89,550 89,600 21,973 18,983 23,173 20,102
89,600 89,650 21,988 18,997 23,191 20,116
89,650 89,700 22,003 19,011 23,208 20,129
89,700 89,750 22,018 19,024 23,226 20,143
89,750 89,800 22,034 19,038 23,244 20,157
89,800 89,850 22,049 19,052 23,262 20,171
89,850 89,900 22,064 19,066 23,279 20,184
89,900 89,950 22,079 19,079 23,297 20,198
89,950 90,000 22,095 19,093 23,315 20,212
90,000 90,050 22,110 19,107 23,333 20,226
90,050 90,100 22,125 19,121 23,350 20,239
90,100 90,150 22,140 19,134 23,368 20,253
90,150 90,200 22,156 19,148 23,386 20,267
90,200 90,250 22,171 19,162 23,404 20,281
90,250 90,300 22,186 19,176 23,421 20,294
90,300 90,350 22,201 19,189 23,439 20,308
90,350 90,400 22,217 19,203 23,457 20,322
90,400 90,450 22,232 19,217 23,475 20,336
90,450 90,500 22,247 19,231 23,492 20,349
90,500 90,550 22,262 19,244 23,510 20,363
90,550 90,600 22,278 19,258 23,528 20,377
90,600 90,650 22,293 19,272 23,546 20,391
90,650 90,700 22,308 19,286 23,563 20,404
90,700 90,750 22,323 19,299 23,581 20,418
90,750 90,800 22,339 19,313 23,599 20,432
90,800 90,850 22,354 19,327 23,617 20,446
90,850 90,900 22,369 19,341 23,634 20,459
90,900 90,950 22,384 19,354 23,652 20,473
90,950 91,000 22,400 19,368 23,670 20,487
91,000 91,050 22,415 19,382 23,688 20,501
91,050 91,100 22,430 19,396 23,705 20,514
91,100 91,150 22,445 19,409 23,723 20,528
91,150 91,200 22,461 19,423 23,741 20,542
91,200 91,250 22,476 19,437 23,759 20,556
91,250 91,300 22,491 19,451 23,776 20,569
91,300 91,350 22,506 19,464 23,794 20,583
91,350 91,400 22,522 19,478 23,812 20,597
91,400 91,450 22,537 19,492 23,830 20,611
91,450 91,500 22,552 19,506 23,847 20,624
91,500 91,550 22,567 19,519 23,865 20,638
91,550 91,600 22,583 19,533 23,883 20,652
91,600 91,650 22,598 19,547 23,901 20,666
91,650 91,700 22,613 19,561 23,918 20,679
91,700 91,750 22,628 19,574 23,936 20,693
91,750 91,800 22,644 19,588 23,954 20,707
91,800 91,850 22,659 19,602 23,972 20,721
91,850 91,900 22,674 19,616 23,989 20,734
91,900 91,950 22,689 19,629 24,007 20,748
91,950 92,000 22,705 19,643 24,025 20,762
92,050 22,720 19,657 24,043 20,776
92,050 92,100 22,735 19,671 24,060 20,789
92,100 92,150 22,750 19,684 24,078 20,803
92,150 92,200 22,766 19,698 24,096 20,817
92,200 92,250 22,781 19,712 24,114 20,831
92,250 92,300 22,796 19,726 24,131 20,844
92,300 92,350 22,811 19,739 24,149 20,858
92,350 92,400 22,827 19,753 24,167 20,872
92,400 92,450 22,842 19,767 24,185 20,886
92,450 92,500 22,857 19,781 24,202 20,899
92,500 92,550 22,872 19,794 24,220 20,913
92,550 92,600 22,888 19,808 24,238 20,927
92,600 92,650 22,903 19,822 24,256 20,941
92,650 92,700 22,918 19,836 24,273 20,954
92,700 92,750 22,933 19,849 24,291 20,968
92,750 92,800 22,949 19,863 24,309 20,982
92,800 92,850 22,964 19,877 24,327 20,996
92,850 92,900 22,979 19,891 24,344 21,009
92,900 92,950 22,994 19,904 24,362 21,023
92,950 93,000 23,010 19,918 24,380 21,037
93,000 93,050 23,025 19,932 24,398 21,051
93,050 93,100 23,040 19,946 24,415 21,064
93,100 93,150 23,055 19,959 24,433 21,078
93,150 93,200 23,071 19,973 24,451 21,092
93,200 93,250 23,086 19,987 24,469 21,106
93,250 93,300 23,101 20,001 24,486 21,119
93,300 93,350 23,116 20,014 24,504 21,133
93,350 93,400 23,132 20,028 24,522 21,147
93,400 93,450 23,147 20,042 24,540 21,161
93,450 93,500 23,162 20,056 24,557 21,174
93,500 93,550 23,177 20,069 24,575 21,188
93,550 93,600 23,193 20,083 24,593 21,202
93,600 93,650 23,208 20,097 24,611 21,216
93,650 93,700 23,223 20,111 24,628 21,230
93,700 93,750 23,238 20,124 24,646 21,245
93,750 93,800 23,254 20,138 24,664 21,261
93,800 93,850 23,269 20,152 24,682 21,276
93,850 93,900 23,284 20,166 24,699 21,291
93,900 93,950 23,299 20,179 24,717 21,306
93,950 94,000 23,315 20,193 24,735 21,322
94,000 94,050 23,330 20,207 24,753 21,337
94,050 94,100 23,345 20,221 24,770 21,352
94,100 94,150 23,360 20,234 24,788 21,367
94,150 94,200 23,376 20,248 24,806 21,383
94,200 94,250 23,391 20,262 24,824 21,398
94,250 94,300 23,406 20,276 24,841 21,413
94,300 94,350 23,421 20,289 24,859 21,428
94,350 94,400 23,437 20,303 24,877 21,444
94,400 94,450 23,452 20,317 24,895 21,459
94,450 94,500 23,467 20,331 24,912 21,474
94,500 94,550 23,482 20,344 24,930 21,489
94,550 94,600 23,498 20,358 24,948 21,505
94,600 94,650 23,513 20,372 24,966 21,520
94,650 94,700 23,528 20,386 24,983 21,535
94,700 94,750 23,543 20,399 25,001 21,550
94,750 94,800 23,559 20,413 25,019 21,566
94,800 94,850 23,574 20,427 25,037 21,581
94,850 94,900 23,589 20,441 25,054 21,596
94,900 94,950 23,604 20,454 25,072 21,611
94,950 95,000 23,620 20,468 25,090 21,627
Caution. Dependents, see Tax Computation Worksheet for Certain Dependents in your tax form package.
Page 273

Page 276 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 Tax Table— Continued
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—And you are—
Married
filing
jointly
*
SingleMarried
filing
jointly
*
Single Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Head
of a
house-
hold
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
But
less
than
At
least
Your tax is—Your tax is—
If line 39
(taxable
income) is—
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er).
95,000
96,000
97,000
98,000
99,000
● $100,000 or over —  use the
Tax Rate Schedules
95,000 98,00095,050 23,635 20,482 25,108 21,642
95,050 95,100 23,650 20,496 25,125 21,657
95,100 95,150 23,665 20,509 25,143 21,672
95,150 95,200 23,681 20,523 25,161 21,688
95,200 95,250 23,696 20,537 25,179 21,703
95,250 95,300 23,711 20,551 25,196 21,718
95,300 95,350 23,726 20,564 25,214 21,733
95,350 95,400 23,742 20,578 25,232 21,749
95,400 95,450 23,757 20,592 25,250 21,764
95,450 95,500 23,772 20,606 25,267 21,779
95,500 95,550 23,787 20,619 25,285 21,794
95,550 95,600 23,803 20,633 25,303 21,810
95,600 95,650 23,818 20,647 25,321 21,825
95,650 95,700 23,833 20,661 25,338 21,840
95,700 95,750 23,848 20,674 25,356 21,855
95,750 95,800 23,864 20,688 25,374 21,871
95,800 95,850 23,879 20,702 25,392 21,886
95,850 95,900 23,894 20,716 25,409 21,901
95,900 95,950 23,909 20,729 25,427 21,916
95,950 96,000 23,925 20,743 25,445 21,932
96,000 96,050 23,940 20,757 25,463 21,947
96,050 96,100 23,955 20,771 25,480 21,962
96,100 96,150 23,970 20,784 25,498 21,977
96,150 96,200 23,986 20,798 25,516 21,993
96,200 96,250 24,001 20,812 25,534 22,008
96,250 96,300 24,016 20,826 25,551 22,023
96,300 96,350 24,031 20,839 25,569 22,038
96,350 96,400 24,047 20,853 25,587 22,054
96,400 96,450 24,062 20,867 25,605 22,069
96,450 96,500 24,077 20,881 25,622 22,084
96,500 96,550 24,092 20,894 25,640 22,099
96,550 96,600 24,108 20,908 25,658 22,115
96,600 96,650 24,123 20,922 25,676 22,130
96,650 96,700 24,138 20,936 25,693 22,145
96,700 96,750 24,153 20,949 25,711 22,160
96,750 96,800 24,169 20,963 25,729 22,176
96,800 96,850 24,184 20,977 25,747 22,191
96,850 96,900 24,199 20,991 25,764 22,206
96,900 96,950 24,214 21,004 25,782 22,221
96,950 97,000 24,230 21,018 25,800 22,237
97,000 97,050 24,245 21,032 25,818 22,252
97,050 97,100 24,260 21,046 25,835 22,267
97,100 97,150 24,275 21,059 25,853 22,282
97,150 97,200 24,291 21,073 25,871 22,298
97,200 97,250 24,306 21,087 25,889 22,313
97,250 97,300 24,321 21,101 25,906 22,328
97,300 97,350 24,336 21,114 25,924 22,343
97,350 97,400 24,352 21,128 25,942 22,359
97,400 97,450 24,367 21,142 25,960 22,374
97,450 97,500 24,382 21,156 25,977 22,389
97,500 97,550 24,397 21,169 25,995 22,404
97,550 97,600 24,413 21,183 26,013 22,420
97,600 97,650 24,428 21,197 26,031 22,435
97,650 97,700 24,443 21,211 26,048 22,450
97,700 97,750 24,458 21,224 26,066 22,465
97,750 97,800 24,474 21,238 26,084 22,481
97,800 97,850 24,489 21,252 26,102 22,496
97,850 97,900 24,504 21,266 26,119 22,511
97,900 97,950 24,519 21,279 26,137 22,526
97,950 98,000 24,535 21,293 26,155 22,542
98,050 24,550 21,307 26,173 22,557
98,050 98,100 24,565 21,321 26,190 22,572
98,100 98,150 24,580 21,334 26,208 22,587
98,150 98,200 24,596 21,348 26,226 22,603
98,200 98,250 24,611 21,362 26,244 22,618
98,250 98,300 24,626 21,376 26,261 22,633
98,300 98,350 24,641 21,389 26,279 22,648
98,350 98,400 24,657 21,403 26,297 22,664
98,400 98,450 24,672 21,417 26,315 22,679
98,450 98,500 24,687 21,431 26,332 22,694
98,500 98,550 24,702 21,444 26,350 22,709
98,550 98,600 24,718 21,458 26,368 22,725
98,600 98,650 24,733 21,472 26,386 22,740
98,650 98,700 24,748 21,486 26,403 22,755
98,700 98,750 24,763 21,499 26,421 22,770
98,750 98,800 24,779 21,513 26,439 22,786
98,800 98,850 24,794 21,527 26,457 22,801
98,850 98,900 24,809 21,541 26,474 22,816
98,900 98,950 24,824 21,554 26,492 22,831
98,950 99,000 24,840 21,568 26,510 22,847
99,000 99,050 24,855 21,582 26,528 22,862
99,050 99,100 24,870 21,596 26,545 22,877
99,100 99,150 24,885 21,609 26,563 22,892
99,150 99,200 24,901 21,623 26,581 22,908
99,200 99,250 24,916 21,637 26,599 22,923
99,250 99,300 24,931 21,651 26,616 22,938
99,300 99,350 24,946 21,664 26,634 22,953
99,350 99,400 24,962 21,678 26,652 22,969
99,400 99,450 24,977 21,692 26,670 22,984
99,450 99,500 24,992 21,706 26,687 22,999
99,500 99,550 25,007 21,719 26,705 23,014
99,550 99,600 25,023 21,733 26,723 23,030
99,600 99,650 25,038 21,747 26,741 23,045
99,650 99,700 25,053 21,761 26,758 23,060
99,700 99,750 25,068 21,774 26,776 23,075
99,750 99,800 25,084 21,788 26,794 23,091
99,800 99,850 25,099 21,802 26,812 23,106
99,850 99,900 25,114 21,816 26,829 23,121
99,900 99,950 25,129 21,829 26,847 23,136
99,950 100,000 25,145 21,843 26,865 23,152
Caution.
● Dependents, see Tax
Computation Worksheet for
Certain Dependents in your
tax form package
Page 274

Page 277 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001
Tax Rate
Schedules
Use only if your taxable income (Form 1040, line 39) is $100,000 or more.
If less, use the Tax Table. Even though you cannot use the T ax Rate Schedules
below if your taxable income is less than $100,000, all levels of taxable
income are shown so taxpayers can see the tax rate that applies to each level.
Schedule Z— Use if your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X— Use if your filing status is Single
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
$015%$36,250$0
$015%$27,050$0
27,050
36,250$5,437.50 +93,65036,250
27,050$4,057.50 +65,550
65,550 14,645.00 +
93,65021,222.50 +93,650
65,550
Schedule Y-2— Use if your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1— Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
$015%$45,200$0
$0$22,600$0 15%
22,600 $3,390.00 + 22,600
$6,780.00 + 45,200109,25045,200
54,625
54,62512,196.88 +54,625
24,393.75 +109,250 109,250
136,750
166,500
151,650
83,250
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Enter on
Form 1040,
line 40
If the amount on
Form 1040, line
39, is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
136,750
297,350
297,350 36,361.00 +
93,374.00 +
136,750
297,350
166,500
297,350
297,350 41,855.00 +
88,306.75 +
166,500
297,350
83,250
148,675
148,675 20,927.50 +
44,153.38 +
83,250
148,675
151,650
297,350
297,350 38,912.50 +
90,636.00 +
151,650
297,350
27.5%
30.5%
35.5%
39.1%
27.5%
30.5%
35.5%
39.1%
27.5%
30.5%
35.5%
39.1%
27.5%
30.5%
35.5%
39.1%
Dependents,
see Tax
Computation
W orksheet
for Certain
Dependents
in your tax
form
package.
Page 275

Page 278 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
The first part of this section ex- the right to ask the Appeals Office Please do not hesitate to write to usCollections
plains some of your most important to review your case. You may alsoabout anything you do not under-
Publication 594, The IRS Collec-rights as a taxpayer. The second ask a court to review your case.stand.
tion Process, explains your rightspart explains the examination, ap-Relief from certain penalties andpeal, collection, and refund and responsibilities regarding pay-interest.The IRS will waive pen-By interview. If we notify youprocesses. ment of federal taxes. It describes:alties when allowed by law if youthat we will conduct your examina-
can show you acted reasonably tion through a personal interview,• What to do when you oweDeclaration of and in good faith or relied on theor you request such an interview, taxes. It describes what to doincorrect advice of an IRS em- you have the right to ask that theTaxpayer Rights if you get a tax bill and whatployee. We will waive interest thatexamination take place at a rea- to do if you think your bill isis the result of certain errors or de-sonable time and place that is con-wrong. It also covers makingProtection of your rights.IRS lays caused by an IRS employee.venient for both you and the IRS. Ifinstallment payments, delay-employees will explain and protect our examiner proposes any ing collection action, and sub-your rights as a taxpayer through-Examinations, changes to your return, he or she mitting an offer inout your contact with us. will explain the reasons for the compromise.Appeals,Privacy and confidentiality. changes. If you do not agree with
• IRS collection actions. It cov-Collections, andThe IRS will not disclose to anyone these changes, you can meet with
ers liens, releasing a lien, le-the information you give us, except the examiner’s supervisor.Refunds vies, releasing a levy,as authorized by law. You have the
seizures and sales, and re-right to know why we are asking Repeat examinations. If we ex-Examinations (Audits) lease of property.you for information, how we will use amined your return for the sameit, and what happens if you do notWe accept most taxpayers’ returns items in either of the 2 previousYour collection appeal rights areprovide requested information. as filed. If we inquire about youryears and proposed no change toexplained in detail in PublicationProfessional and courteous ser-return or select it for examination, ityour tax liability, please contact us1660, Collection Appeal Rights.vice. If you believe that an IRS does not suggest that you are dis-as soon as possible so we can see
employee has not treated you in a honest. The inquiry or examinationif we should discontinue the exami-
Innocent spouse relief.Gener-professional, fair, and courteous may or may not result in more tax.nation.
manner, you should tell that We may close your case without ally, both you and your spouse are
employee ’s supervisor. If the change; or, you may receive a re- responsible, jointly and individu-
supervisor’s response is not satis- fund. ally, for paying the full amount ofAppeals
factory, you should write to the IRS The process of selecting a re- any tax, interest, or penalties due
director for your area or the center turn for examination usually beginsIf you do not agree with the on your joint return. However, if you
where you filed your return. in one of two ways. First, we useexaminer’s proposed changes, youqualify for innocent spouse relief,
computer programs to identify re-can appeal them to the Appeals you may not have to pay the tax,Representation. You may either turns that may have incorrect Office of IRS. Most differences caninterest, and penalties related torepresent yourself or, with properamounts. These programs may be be settled without expensive andyour spouse (or former spouse).written authorization, have some-based on information returns, suchtime-consuming court trials. YourFor information on innocent spouseone else represent you in your as Forms 1099 and W–2, on stud-appeal rights are explained in detailrelief and two other ways to getplace. Your representative must beies of past examinations, or on cer-in both Publication 5, Your Appeal relief, see Publication 971, Inno-a person allowed to practice beforetain issues identified by complianceRights and How To Prepare a Pro-the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- cent Spouse Relief, and Formprojects. Second, we use informa-test If You Don’t Agree, and Publi-fied public accountant, or enrolled 8857, Request for Innocenttion from outside sources that indi-cation 556, Examination ofagent. If you are in an interview and Spouse Relief (And Separation ofcates that a return may have Returns, Appeal Rights, andask to consult such a person, then Liability and Equitable Relief).incorrect amounts. These sourcesClaims for Refund.we must stop and reschedule themay include newspapers, publicinterview in most cases. If you do not wish to use therecords, and individuals. If we de-You can have someone accom- Appeals Office or disagree with itsRefundstermine that the information is ac-pany you at an interview. You may findings, you may be able to takecurate and reliable, we may use it You may file a claim for refund ifmake sound recordings of any your case to the U.S. Tax Court,to select a return for examination.meetings with our examination, ap- you think you paid too much tax.U.S. Court of Federal Claims, orPublication 556, Examination ofpeal, or collection personnel, pro- You must generally file the claimthe U.S. District Court where youReturns, Appeal Rights, andvided you tell us in writing 10 days within 3 years from the date youlive. If you take your case to court,Claims for Refund, explains thebefore the meeting. filed your original return or 2 yearsrules and procedures that we follow the IRS will have the burden of
from the date you paid the tax,in examinations. The following sec-proving certain facts if you kept ad-Payment of only the correct whichever is later. The law gener-tions give an overview of how weequate records to show your taxamount of tax. You are respon-
ally provides for interest on yourconduct examinations. liability, cooperated with the IRS,sible for paying only the correct
refund if it is not paid within 45 daysand meet certain other conditions.amount of tax due under the law— By mail. We handle many exami- of the date you filed your return orIf the court agrees with you on mostno more, no less. If you cannot paynations and inquiries by mail. We claim for refund. Publication 556,issues in your case and finds thatall of your tax when it is due, youwill send you a letter with either a Examination of Returns, Appealsour position was largely unjustified,may be able to make monthly in-request for more information or a Rights, and Claims for Refund, hasyou may be able to recover some ofstallment payments. reason why we believe a change to
more information on refunds.your administrative and litigationyour return may be needed. YouHelp with unresolved tax costs. You will not be eligible tocan respond by mail or you can If you were due a refund but youproblems. See How To Get Tax recover these costs unless yourequest a personal interview with did not file a return, you must fileHelp. tried to resolve your case adminis-an examiner. If you mail us the re- within 3 years from the date the
tratively, including going throughAppeals and judicial review.If quested information or provide an return was originally due to get that
the appeals system, and you gaveyou disagree with us about the explanation, we may or may not refund.
us the information necessary to re-amount of your tax liability or cer- agree with you, and we will explain
solve the case.tain collection actions, you havethe reasons for any changes. I
Page 276

Page 279 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved save the form for recordkeep- any taxpayer’s name or tax • Popular tax forms that may
tax issues, order free publications be filled in electronically,ing. identification number.
and forms, ask tax questions, and printed out for submission,• View Internal Revenue Bulle- • We sometimes record tele-get more information from the IRS and saved for recordkeeping.tins published in the last few phone calls to evaluate IRSin several ways. By selecting the • Internal Revenue Bulletins.years. assistors objectively. We holdmethod that is best for you, you will
these recordings no longerhave quick and easy access to tax• Search regulations and the The CD-ROM can be purchasedthan one week and use themhelp. Internal Revenue Code. from National Technical Informa-only to measure the quality oftion Service (NTIS) by calling• Receive our electronic news- assistance.Contacting your Taxpayer 1–877–233–6767 or on the In-letters on hot tax issues andAdvocate. If you have attempted • We value our customers’ ternet at www.irs.gov. The first re-news.to deal with an IRS problem unsuc- opinions. Throughout this lease is available in mid-Decembercessfully, you should contact your• Get information on starting year, we will be surveying ourand the final release is available inTaxpayer Advocate. and operating a small busi- late January.customers for their opinions
The Taxpayer Advocate repre- ness. IRS Publication 3207, Smallon our service.sents your interests and concerns Business Resource Guide, is an in-
within the IRS by protecting yourYou can also reach us with your teractive CD-ROM that contains in-Walk-in. You can walk inrights and resolving problems thatcomputer using File Transfer Pro- formation important to smallto many post offices, li-have not been fixed through normaltocol at ftp.irs.gov. businesses. It is available inbraries, and IRS offices tochannels. While Taxpayer Advo- mid-February. You can get onepick up certain forms, instructions,cates cannot change the tax law or TaxFax Service. Using free copy by callingand publications. Some IRS of-make a technical tax decision, they the phone attached to 1–800–829–3676 or visiting the
fices, libraries, grocery stores, copycan clear up problems that resulted your fax machine, you can IRS web site at www.irs.gov.
from previous contacts and ensure centers, city and county govern-receive forms and instructions by
that your case is given a complete ments, credit unions, and officecalling 703–368–9694. Follow the Written tax questions.You canand impartial review. supply stores have an extensivedirections from the prompts. When send your written tax questions toyou order forms, enter the catalogTo contact your Taxpayer Ad- collection of products available to your IRS office. You should get anvocate: number for the form you need. Theprint from a CD-ROM or photocopyanswer in about 30 days. If you do
items you request will be faxed tofrom reproducible proofs. Also,not have the address, you can get it• Call the Taxpayer Advocate you. some IRS offices and libraries haveby calling 1–800–829–1040. Doat the Internal Revenue Code, regula-For help with transmission not send tax questions with your1–877–777–4778. tions, Internal Revenue Bulletins,problems, call the FedWorld Help return.
• Call the IRS at Desk at 703–487–4608. and Cumulative Bulletins available
Braille tax materials.Braille tax1–800–829–1040. for research purposes.
materials are available for reviewPhone. Many services• Call, write, or fax the Tax- from Regional Libraries for theare available by phone. Mail. You can send yourpayer Advocate office in your Visually Impaired in conjunctionorder for forms, instruc-area. with the National Library Servicetions, and publications to• Ordering forms, instructions, for the Blind and Physically Handi-• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you the Distribution Center nearest toand publications. Call capped. To locate your nearest li-are a you and receive a response within1–800–829–3676 to order brary, write to:TTY/TDD user. 10 workdays after your request iscurrent and prior year forms, National Library Service forreceived. Find the address that ap-instructions, and publications. the Blind and PhysicallyFor more information, see Publi- plies to your part of the country. Handicappedcation 1546, The Taxpayer Advo- • Asking tax questions. Call the • Western part of U.S.: Library of Congresscate Service of the IRS. IRS with your tax questions at Western Area Distribution 1291 Taylor St., NW1–800–829–1040. Center Washington, DC 20542Free tax services.To find out
• TTY/TDD equipment. If youwhat services are available, get Rancho Cordova, CA
have access to TTY/TDDPublication 910, Guide to Free Tax 95743–0001 Braille materials currently avail-equipment, call 1–800–829–Services. It contains a list of free able for review include this publica-• Central part of U.S.:4059 to ask tax questions ortax publications and an index of tax tion, Publication 334, Tax Guide forCentral Area Distributionto order forms and publica-topics. It also describes other free Small Business, and Forms 1040,Centertions.tax information services, including 1040A, and 1040EZ and their in-P.O. Box 8903tax education and assistance pro- structions.• TeleTax topics. Call Bloomington, IL 61702–8903grams and a list of TeleTax topics.1–800–829–4477 to listen Assistance with your return.• Eastern part of U.S. and for-Personal computer. to pre-recorded messages IRS offices can help you prepareeign addresses:With your personal com- covering various tax topics. your return. An assistor will explainEastern Area Distributionputer and modem, you a Form 1040EZ, 1040A, or 1040Centercan access the IRS on the Internet with Schedules A and B to you andEvaluating the quality of our P.O. Box 85074at www.irs.gov. While visiting our other taxpayers in a group setting.telephone services. To ensure Richmond, VA 23261–5074web site, you can: You may also be able to file yourthat IRS representatives give accu-
return electronically by computer• Find answers to questions rate, courteous, and professional
CD-ROM. You can order free of charge at some IRS offices.you may have. answers, we evaluate the quality of
IRS Publication 1796, To find the IRS office nearest you,our telephone services in several• Download forms and publica- Federal Tax Products onlook in the phone book underways.tions or search for forms and CD-ROM, and obtain: “United States Government, Inter-publications by topic or • A second IRS representative nal Revenue Service ” or call• Current tax forms, instruc-keyword. sometimes monitors live tele- 1–800–829–1040.tions, and publications.phone calls. That person only• View forms that may be filled At all IRS offices you can also
• Prior-year tax forms and in-evaluates the IRS assistorin electronically, print the get help with questions about IRS
and does not keep a record ofcompleted form, and then structions. notices or bills.
Page 277

Page 280 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Volunteer Income Tax Assis- low-income people, persons with Call the IRS for the location of1–877–227–7844 or visit their In-
tance (VITA) and Tax Counselingdisabilities, the elderly, and the volunteer assistance site near ternet Web Site at www.aarp.org/
for the Elderly (TCE).Free help non-English-speaking people. At you. Or, for the location of an Amer-taxaide.
from volunteers is available in most some of these offices, you can file ican Association of Retired Per-
communities. After completing IRS your tax return electronically. See sons (AARP) Tax-Aide site in your
training, these volunteers help pre-IRS e-file in chapter 1 for informa-community, call
pare basic tax returns for taxpayers tion on electronic filing.
with special needs, including
I
Page 278

Page 281 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Assessments, Car allowance .......... 1 9 3 Coverdell education savingsA
improvements . . . 72, 98, 155 account .............. 4 1Car expenses:Abortion, legal.......... 1 5 1
Assistance (See Tax help) Coverdell ESA .......... 4 0Business use......... 1 8 7Accelerated death
Car pools........... 1 8 8Assistance from employer . . 201 CPA exam review course . . 200benefits............ 39, 90
Charitable contribution . . . 169ATIN .............. 15, 219 Credit card insurance ...... 9 6Accident and health
Medical expense...... 1 5 2Attendance, temporary.... 2 0 0 Credit, rate reduction...... 9 5insurance......... 57, 149
Moving expense....... 1 3 9Attorney fees.......... 2 0 6 Credits:Accidents............. 1 7 4
Carryover, capital loss.... 1 1 6 Additional child tax..... 2 3 8Automatic extension....... 1 3Accountable plans....... 1 9 2
Cash rebates............ 9 6 Adoption............ 2 6 1Automatic investmentAccounting methods....... 1 5
Child and dependentCasualties............ 1 7 4service............. 1 0 9Accounting periods....... 1 5 care ............. 2 1 9Casualty insurance andAwards, prizes........ 51, 96Accounting to employer . . . 192 Child tax............ 2 3 7other reimbursements.... 9 6Away from home ........ 1 8 0Accuracy-related penalties . . 21 Earned income........ 2 4 6Certificates of deposit...... 6 5Active participation........ 7 9 Education expenses.... 2 4 2Change of address..... 18, 47Activity not for profit..... 72, 93 Electric vehicle........ 2 6 3B Change of name ....... 15, 48Additional child tax credit . . 238 For the disabled....... 2 2 9Baby sitting............ 5 1 Charitable contributions . . . 166Address label........... 1 8 For the elderly........ 2 2 9Back pay .............. 5 1 Check-writing fees....... 2 0 7 Foreign tax.......... 2 6 2Adjusted basis...... 100, 177 Backup withholding . . 46, 58, 66Checks, year received..... 1 5 Higher educationAdministrator........... 3 7 Bad debts............. 1 0 8 Child: expenses .......... 2 4 2Adoption .......... 29, 148, Bar exam review course . . . 200Care provider.......... 5 1 Minimum tax ......... 2 6 2168, 219 Gifts to.............. 6 0Bargain purchases....... 1 0 1 Mortgage interest . . . 159, 260Adoption credit......... 2 6 1 Investment income..... 2 1 4 Railroad retirement taxBarter income........... 9 1Adoption taxpayer Support........... 34, 140 overpaid .......... 2 6 3Basis................. 9 9identification number..... 1 5 Rate reduction........ 2 6 1Tax on investmentBeneficiary, estate or trust:Advance commissions..... 5 1 Regulated investmentincome of.......... 2 1 2Bonds:Advance earned income company .......... 2 6 3Child care:Amortization ofcredit.............. 2 5 8 Social security taxCredit.............. 2 1 9premium ....... 103, 204Advance payment ....... 2 6 1 overpaid .......... 2 6 3Provider............ 2 2 3Basis of............ 1 0 3Advance rent........... 7 1 Custodial fees.......... 2 0 5Child support payments.... 9 6Issued at discount.... 65, 105AGI limitation.......... 1 4 9 Custody:Child tax credit......... 2 3 7Original issue discount . . . 65Alaska Permanent Fund Exception............ 3 4Church employee ....... 2 5 3Retirement of...... 104, 105dividend income........ 9 5 General rule.......... 3 4Sale of........... 65, 105 Citizens outside the U.S...... 8Alaska Permanent Fund dividends Savings ............. 6 2 Claims for refund . . . 20, 36, 106(See also Interest expenses: Series EE and E........ 6 2 Clergy...............9 ,  5 2 DLimit on investment interest)Series HH and H....... 6 2 Clerical help, deductibility Damages .......... 96, 151,Aliens (See also Nonresident Series I.............. 6 2 o f................. 2 0 5 201aliens) Tax-exempt ........ 66, 105 Closing costs (settlement Day-care center......... 2 2 3Alimony ............... 9 5 Bonuses .............. 5 1 fees) .............. 1 1 1 Death benefits:Alimony and separate Bribes and illegal Clothing, work.......... 2 0 4 Life insurance......... 9 2maintenance: payments ........... 2 0 7 Public safety officers..... 9 2Collection of tax......... 2 7 8General rules......... 1 4 1 Brokerage account........ 1 5 Debts:Combat zone:Burial or funeralInstruments executed Bad debts........... 1 0 8Extension to file return.... 1 4expenses ........ 33, 149,after 1984......... 1 4 1 Cancellation orExtension to pay tax..... 1 4205Alimony and separate forgiveness.......... 9 1Commissions, advance..... 5 1Business use ofmaintenance: Paid by another...... 15, 89Common law marriage..... 2 3home ........... 111, 113,Allocated tips........... 5 9 Deceased taxpayer . . . 8, 26, 35,Community202Alternative minimum tax . . . 210 61, 148property....... 24, 61, 147
Amended returns......... 2 0 Decedent’s medicalCommuting expenses . . 188, 205
expenses ........... 1 4 9American citizens abroad.... 8 Considered unmarried..... 2 6C Deductible expenses..... 2 0 0Annuities: Constructive receipt ofCampaign contributions Deductions in respect ofAmount received....... 8 0 income ............ 15, 64received............. 9 6 decedent............. 4 2Contributions to retirementPurchased............ 8 5 Campaign expenses ..... 2 0 7 Deductions related toplan ................ 5 2Appeal rights.......... 2 7 8 Canceling a lease........ 7 1 benefits.............. 8 9Contributions, charitable . . . 166Appraisal fees....... 170, 203 Cancellation of debt....... 9 1 Deferred compensationConvention expenses..... 1 8 5Archer MSA ............ 4 0 Capital asset defined..... 1 0 7 plans .............. 2 5 4CooperativeArmed forces : Capital gain: Dependent care:apartments ....... 75, 108,Distributions.......... 6 9Armed forces: Benefits............ 2 2 4154Gains and losses . . . 107, 113Dependency allotments . . . 30 Credit for............ 2 1 9Copyrights.......... 94, 105Tax computation....... 1 1 6 Dependents:Disability pensions.... 54, 55 Cosmetic surgery....... 1 5 1Capital gain distributions (See Child tax credit........ 2 3 7Moving expenses...... 1 3 8 Cost basis............. 9 9also Interest expenses: Limit Exemption............ 2 8Travel and on investment interest) Cost of annuity.......... 8 3 Filing requirements....... 9transportation.... 180, 186 Capital gain, lump-sum Cost-of-living allowances, For education credits.... 2 4 2
distributions........... 8 3Uniforms............ 2 0 5 government ........... 5 2 Medical expenses...... 1 4 9
Capital loss carryover..... 1 1 6Artistic works.......... 1 0 7 Coupon bonds .......... 6 6 Social security
Car accidents.......... 1 7 4Artists, performing.... 196, 201 Court awards ........... 9 6 number .......... 15, 34
Page 279

Page 282 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard deduction..... 1 4 5 Electric vehicle credit..... 2 6 3 Federal per diem........ 1 9 3 8453 ............... 1 2
Support by divorced or 8582 ............ 79, 113Electronic filing.......... 1 2 Fee-basis officials.... 196, 201,
separated parents..... 3 3 8606 .............. 1 2 9205Eligible educational
Tests to claim......... 2 8 8615 ......... 60, 66, 212institution........... 2 4 2 Fellowships and
8801 .............. 2 6 2Dependents: scholarships........ 33, 96Emotional distress........ 9 6
8812 .............. 2 3 8Deposits, loss on..... 106, 108, Filing requirements........ 7Employee expenses:
8814 ......... 60, 66, 211173 Cellular telephone...... 2 0 3 Filing status, general rules . . . 23
8815 ............... 6 4Depreciation........... 1 1 3 Education........... 1 9 8 Final return........... 36, 37 8818 ............... 6 5C a r ............... 1 8 9 Home computer ....... 2 0 3 Financially disabled....... 2 0 8822 ............. 20, 47Rental property........ 7 4 Miscellaneous........ 2 0 3 Fines............. 189, 205 8824 .............. 1 0 5Vacant rental property.... 7 1 Travel and transportation.... Fiscal year........ 15, 46, 48 8834 .............. 2 6 3Desert Storm (See Combat zone) ................ 1 8 0 Flexible spending 8839 .............. 2 6 2Diaper service.......... 1 5 1 Employer plans: arrangement ......... 1 5 1 8863 ........... 242, 244Defined benefit plan.... 1 2 5Directors’ fees........... 9 6 Foreclosure........... 1 1 1 9465 ............... 1 8Defined contribution plan....Disability: Foreign: SS –5............. 15, 34................ 1 2 5Benefits repaid......... 8 9 Conventions ......... 1 8 5 W –1 0 ............. 2 2 3For which year(s) areIncome ......... 54, 54, 55, Employer ............ 5 5 W –2 ............. 14, 47you covered?....... 1 2 5229 Students............. 2 9 W –2 G .............. 4 9Nonvested employees . . . 125Pensions............. 8 5 Tax credit or W –4 ............... 4 4Employer-providedPermanent and total.... 2 2 9 deduction....... 156, 260 W –4 P ............ 46, 78assistance........... 2 0 1Disabled persons: Forms : W –4 S .............. 4 6Employer-sponsoredCredit for............ 2 2 9 W –4 V ............ 44, 46Forms:health insurance plan . . . 151Expenses for...... 152, 194, W –5 .............. 2 5 81040 .......... 11, 64, 68204 Employment: W –7 ........... 7 ,  14, 341040–E S ............ 4 9Financially............ 2 0 Abroad .............. 5 5 W –7 A .............. 1 51040–ES(NR) ......... 4 7Agency fees ......... 2 0 4Disaster area losses...... 1 7 8 W –9 S ............. 2 4 41040–V ........... 12, 15R ´esum ´e expenses ..... 2 0 4Disaster relief........... 9 5 Foster care expenses...... 3 01040A ......... 10, 64, 68Taxes .............. 2 2 5Disclosure statement...... 2 1 1040EZ .............. 1 0 Foster care payments...... 3 0Energy conservationDiscount, bonds and notes 1040X .............. 2 0 Foster child, dependencysubsidies............ 9 6issued at............. 6 5 1065 ............... 9 2 exemption for:Entertainers and musicians....Distributions: 1098 ............ 79, 161 Member of household test . . ................... 2 0 4Designated beneficiary . . 129 1098–T ............ 2 4 4 ................. 2 9Entertainment expenses . . . 185Early, tax on.......... 8 4 1099 ............... 1 4 Support test........... 3 0Estate tax........ 42, 80, 204Required............. 8 5 1099–A ............ 1 1 1 Foster parents andEstates and trusts, incomeDistributions from: 1099–B ......... 91, 102, providers............. 9 6from ................ 9 6Corporations.......... 6 8 113, 115 Free tax services........ 2 7 9Estates and trusts..... 94, 96 Estimated tax: 1099–C ............ 1 1 1 Free tour received........ 9 7Retirement bonds....... 8 4 Credit for........... 48, 49 1099–D I V....... 49, 66, 68 Fringe benefits........ 45, 50S corporations......... 9 3 How to figure.......... 4 8 1099–G ............. 9 3 De minimis (minimal)..... 5 3Payment-voucher....... 4 9Distributions, exceptions to 1099–I N T....... 50, 58, 64 Funeral or burialPayments ............ 4 7age 59 1/2 rule........ 1 2 8 1099–MISC .......... 6 8 expenses ........ 33, 149,Penalty.............. 5 0Dividends.............. 6 8 1099–O I D............ 6 5 205When to pay .......... 4 8 1099–R ....... 50, 62, 128Divorced taxpayers:
Estimated tax: 1099–S ......... 110, 113,Alimony ............ 1 4 1
Examination of return..... 2 7 8 155Dependent, support test . . . 33 G1116 .............. 2 6 2Exemptions ........... 2 8 Excess reimbursements . . . 194 Gains and losses:1120S .............. 9 3Filing status........... 2 3 Executors and Basis ............... 9 9Transfers of property.... 1 0 6 2106 .............. 1 9 5administrators..... 8 ,  35, 94 Capital or ordinary..... 1 0 72106–E Z ........... 1 9 5Drugs and medicines..... 1 5 1 Exempt-interest dividends . . . 61 Casualty and theft2120 ............... 3 3Due dates ........... 11, 12 Exemptions: losses............ 1 7 42439 ............ 69, 261Dues: Deduction for .......... 2 8 Deposits......... 106, 1082441 .............. 2 2 5Chamber of Commerce . . 203 Final return for decedent . . 40 Estates and trusts....... 9 62688 ............... 1 3Club ............ 167, 205 Phaseout of ........... 3 6 Figuring......... 104, 1053115 ............... 6 3Union ........... 98, 167, Exemptions: Gambling ......... 97, 2043903 .............. 1 4 0202 Expenses for higher Hobby .............. 9 74070 ............... 5 8education........... 2 4 2 Passive activity losses.... 2 54070A .............. 5 8Expenses, education..... 1 9 8 Personal items......... 9 8E 4137 ............... 5 9 Related parties........ 1 0 6Extensions............. 1 3 4506 ............... 1 9e-file................. 1 2 Reporting........... 1 1 5Eyeglasses............ 1 5 1 4562 ............. 74, 77Early distributions: Rollover of gain....... 1 0 94684 ........... 106, 108Exceptions .......... 1 3 1 Gambling winnings4810 ............... 3 8Early distributions, tax on . . . 84F and losses...... 46, 95, 2044868 ............... 1 3Earned income ......... 1 4 5 Fair market value..... 99, 103, Garnishments and4952 .............. 1 6 4Earned income credit . . . 26, 244 168, 173 attachments........... 1 55329 ............ 84, 129Easements ............ 1 0 0 Fair rental value......... 3 3 General rule............ 8 15 6 ................. 3 7Education credits........ 2 4 2 Federal crime Gifts :6251 .............. 2 1 0
Education savings investigations or 8271 ............... 2 2 Gifts:
account, Coverdell.... 39, 40 prosecutions......... 1 8 2 8275 ............... 2 1 Basis .............. 1 0 2
Education savings bond Federal Employees 8283 .............. 1 7 3 Holding period........ 1 0 9
program ............. 6 4 Compensation Act 8332 ............... 3 4 Not taxed............ 9 7
Educational assistance.... 2 0 1 payments ............ 5 7 8379 ............... 1 7 Taxes on............ 1 5 8
Educational expenses.... 1 9 8 Federal income taxes..... 1 5 8 8396 ........... 159, 260 To reduce the public debt . . 18
Page 280

Page 283 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gifts from employer....... 5 3 Income-producing Interlocutory decree of Losses on sales or trades . . 164
expenses ........... 2 0 5 divorce............. 1 4 1Gifts: Losses, deduction on final
Indefinite assignment..... 1 8 2 Interview expenses....... 9 7 return............... 4 0Grants................ 9 8
Individual retirement Investment expenses, Lost property ....... 174, 206Gross income............ 8
arrangements (IRAs): interest ............. 1 6 3 Lotteries............... 9 7Ground rent........... 1 5 9
Administrative fees..... 2 0 6 Investment income, tax on Lump-sum distributions..... 8 2Group life insurance....... 5 3
Contributions......... 1 2 4 child’s.............. 2 1 2 10-year option......... 8 3Group medical insurance Deductions .......... 1 2 4 Investment property . . . 107, 161Capital gain part........ 8 3premiums ........... 1 5 1 General rules......... 1 2 2 Involuntary conversions . . . 101Guaranteed payments...... 8 1 Married filing separately . . . 25Itemized deductions:Guide dogs............ 1 5 1 Penalties............ 1 3 0 MChanging your mind.... 1 4 5Rollovers and other M&IE ............. 181, 183Decedent’s return....... 4 0transfers.......... 1 2 7 Limit............... 1 4 7 Main home .......... 73, 108H Roth IRA............ 1 3 1 Recoveries of.......... 9 3 Mandatory retirement age . . 231H.R. 10 (Keogh) plans..... 8 0 Individual retirement State benefit funds..... 1 5 5 Married taxpayers:Hazardous duty area (See arrangements (IRAs): Who should itemize..... 1 4 5 Child and dependentCombat zone) Individual taxpayer ITIN............... 16, 217 care credit......... 2 2 3Head of household........ 2 5 identification number..... 1 6 Estimated tax.......... 4 7Health insurance (See Insurance Inheritances: Filing status........... 2 3premiums) JBasis .............. 1 0 2 Signing joint return...... 2 4Hearing aids........... 1 5 1 Holding period........ 1 0 9 Job search expenses..... 2 0 4 Surviving spouse....... 3 8Help (See Tax help) Not taxed............ 9 7 Joint accounts......... 60, 66 Maternity clothes........ 1 5 1Hobbies ............ 97, 203 Inherited IRAs........... 4 1 Joint return, revoked by Meals and lodging:Holding period.......... 1 0 9 Injured spouse.......... 1 7 personal representative . . . 38Business travel....... 1 8 2Holocaust victims restitution . . .Injury and illness Jury duty.............. 9 7 Medical............. 1 5 1................... 9 7 payments .......... 52, 54 Support for dependent.... 3 0Home: Innocent spouse......... 2 4 Medical expenses:Abandoned .......... 1 1 1 KInstallment agreement..... 1 8 Checklist............ 1 5 1Business use of....... 2 0 4 Keeping up a home....... 2 6Installment sale......... 1 1 4 Costs you can deduct . . . 149Changed to rental Keogh (H.R. 10) plans..... 8 0Insurance policies Decedent’s return....... 4 0property......... 72, 100 Kickbacks.............. 9 7exchanged .......... 1 0 5 Insurance........ 149, 151Closing costs......... 1 1 1 Kidnapped child......... 2 5 1Insurance premiums: Work-related......... 2 2 4Cost of keeping up...... 2 6 Alimony payments, part Medicare .......... 149, 151Damage to .......... 1 7 4 o f ............... 1 4 1 Medicines and drugs..... 1 5 1Exclusion of gain...... 1 1 2 LGroup life............ 5 3 Mineral royalties......... 9 4Foreclosure.......... 1 1 1 Laboratory fees......... 1 5 1Home .............. 2 0 7Main home defined . . . 73, 108 Minimum tax credit....... 2 6 2Late payment charges.... 1 5 9Liability............. 2 0 3Mortgage interest...... 1 5 9 Ministers.............9 ,  5 2Leases canceled orLife ............... 2 0 7Renting........... 71, 111 Miscellaneous deductions . . 203transferred........... 7 1Long-term care....... 1 5 1Repossession ........ 1 1 1 Mobile home............ 7 3Medical............. 1 5 1 Leasing a car.......... 1 8 9Sale of.......... 108, 110 Modified accelerated costMortgage ........... 2 0 7 Legal expenses...... 89, 204,Security system....... 2 0 7 recovery systemPaid in advance........ 6 1 206Settlement fees..... 99, 109 (MACRS) ............ 7 5Rental .............. 7 2 License and similar fees . . . 207Tax home defined...... 1 8 1 Modified adjusted grossSelf-employed........ 1 5 1 Life insurance:Vacation............. 7 3 income for educationInsurance proceeds: Paid before death....... 9 2Hope credit............ 2 4 3 credits............. 2 4 3Accident and health..... 5 7 Premiums ......... 53, 205Hours of service limits.... 1 8 6 Money market certificates . . . 61Dividends............ 7 0 Proceeds .......... 65, 90Household employees.... 2 2 5 Dividends, interest on.... 6 1 More information (See Tax help)Life insurance proceeds:Household services...... 2 2 3 Endowment ........... 9 2 Mortgage assistanceLifetime learning credit.... 2 4 4From long-term care payments ............ 9 5Like-kind exchange...... 1 0 1contract............ 5 7 Mortgage interest:Limit on credit.......... 2 3 2I Installment payments . . 65, 90 Credit........... 159, 260Limits:Identification number, Life .............. 65, 90 Deduction........... 1 5 9Capital loss.......... 1 1 6qualifying person...... 2 1 9 Medical............. 1 5 2 Recapture of credit..... 1 1 4Casualty and theft loss . . 177Impairment-related Property......... 175, 176 Mortgages:Charitable contributions . . 171work expenses..... 152, 194, Veterans............. 5 5 Insurance premiums.... 2 0 7Depreciation of car..... 1 8 9204 Interest: Interest on........... 1 5 9Entertainment........ 1 8 6Improvements..... 71, 98, 109 Expense ............ 1 5 9 Prepayment penalty.... 1 5 9Gifts............... 1 8 6Income: Fees to collect........ 2 0 5 Seller-financed........ 1 1 4Itemized deductions.... 1 4 7Interest and dividend..... 3 8 Frozen deposits...... 62, 95 Moving expenses ....... 1 3 6Meals .............. 1 8 6Partnership, final return . . . 39Income .............. 6 0 Miscellaneous Multiple support:Income in respect of decedent: Mortgage ........... 1 5 9 deductions......... 2 0 3 Agreement ........... 3 3How to report.......... 4 1 On refunds ........... 1 9 Postponement of gain Medical expenses...... 1 5 0Inherited IRAs......... 4 1 On unpaid taxes..... 18, 162 from securities sale . . . 109Municipal bonds......... 6 6Installment obligations.... 4 1 Personal............ 1 6 4 Liquidating distributions Musical compositions..... 1 0 7Interest, savings Usurious............. 6 2 (dividends)........... 6 9 Musicians and entertainers....certificates.......... 4 1 Interest expenses: Literary compositions..... 1 0 7 .................. 2 0 4Income taxes: Allocation........... 1 6 3
Loan origination fees..... 1 6 1 Mutual funds........ 69, 101,Deductible amounts....... Carry forward......... 1 6 3
Lobbying expenses...... 2 0 7 107............. 155, 156 Investment .......... 1 6 3
Allocated expenses..... 2 0 5Lockout benefits......... 9 8Interest on......... 18, 162 Limit on investment
Nonpublicly offered..... 2 0 5Nondeductible amounts . . 158 interest........... 1 6 3 Long-term gains and
Refund of........... 1 5 6 Mutual funds:Passive activity losses . . . 164 losses........... 109, 113
Page 281

Page 284 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form W –4 ........... 4 5 Retirement plans:NR
457 plans............ 8 1Fraud ............... 2 2Name change ......... 15, 48 Raffles ................ 9 7
For employees......... 8 0Frivolous return........ 2 2Net operating loss....... 1 7 9 Railroad retirement benefits: Individual retirementNegligence ........... 2 1 Repayments .......... 8 9New job: arrangements (IRAs) . . 122Substantial Taxation of........... 8 6Employment agency Keogh .............. 8 0understatement offees ............. 2 0 4 Withholding........... 4 6 Roth IRA............ 1 3 1income tax.......... 2 1Job search expenses . . . 204 Railroad retirement tax, Self-employed......... 8 0Penalty taxes, pension..... 8 4Moving expenses...... 1 3 6 credit for overpayment of.... Voluntary payments to.... 8 3Pensions: .................. 2 6 3Travel expenses....... 2 0 4 Return of capital......... 6 9Amount received....... 8 0 Rate reduction credit . . . 95, 259Nominees ......... 61, 63, 66 Returns:Unrecovered Real estate investmentNonaccountable plans.... 1 9 4 Aliens................ 9investment in..... 40, 205 trust (REIT).......... 1 0 9Nonresident aliens . . . 10, 22, 24 Amended ............ 2 0Per diem allowance...... 1 9 3 Real estate taxes:Nontaxable: Child .............9 ,  2 1 0Performing artists.... 196, 201 Basis adjustment...... 1 0 0Distributions.......... 6 9 Copies of............ 1 9
Permanent and total Deductible amounts.... 1 5 6Exchanges ....... 101, 103, Deceased taxpayer....... 8
disability............ 2 2 9 Local benefits...... 72, 155107 Estimated tax.......... 4 9
Personal exemption....... 2 8 Refund of........... 1 5 7Not-for-profit activities.... 72, 93 Extension of filing date . . . 13
Service charges....... 1 5 7Personal interest........ 1 6 4Notes: Filing status........... 2 3
Real estate taxes:Personal property Final.............. 36, 37Discounted ........ 65, 105
taxes ........... 156, 158 How to file............ 1 4Recapture, alimony...... 1 4 3Received for services.... 5 2
Joint........... 24, 26, 35,Personal representative.... 3 7 Recordkeeping:Nursing home.......... 1 5 1
36Points............... 1 6 1 Contributions, charitable....Nutrition Program for the
Puerto Rican residents.... 8................ 1 7 2Elderly.............. 9 5 Political campaign
Separate........... 24, 26Employee businessexpenses ........ 206, 207
Signatures....... 16, 22, 35expenses .......... 1 8 9Power of attorney........ 1 6 When to file........... 1 2O Gambling ........... 2 0 6Premature distributions (early Which form to use....... 1 0Office rent, deductibility of . . 205 Generalwithdrawals): Who must file........... 7requirements..... 19, 201Office, use of home as.... 2 0 4 Exceptions to age 59 1/2 Rollovers:Home .............. 1 1 1Older taxpayers: rule.............. 1 2 8 Gain from sale ofSavings bonds used forCredit for the elderly.... 2 2 9 Prepaid: securities.......... 1 0 9education........... 6 5Filing requirements....... 8 Income .............. 1 5 Individual retirementRecoveries of:Original issue discount . . 65, 105Insurance......... 61, 149 arrangements (IRAs) . . 127Amounts previouslyOther basis............ 1 0 1 Interest............. 1 5 9 Pensions............. 8 3deducted ........... 9 3Overpayment of tax: Rent ................ 7 1 Roth IRAs........... 1 3 3Itemized deductions..... 9 3Credited to estimated Preparer’s fee: Waiting period betweenStolen property....... 1 7 5t a x .............48, 49 Deductible amount..... 2 0 5 rollovers........... 1 2 8Refunds :Refunded ............ 1 7 Rental expense........ 7 2 Roth IRA ........... 40, 129Refunds: Conversions ......... 1 3 3Presidential Election Of interest........... 1 6 1 Rollovers........... 1 3 3Campaign Fund ........ 1 6P Of state income tax Roth IRAs ............. 4 1Private delivery services.... 1 3 (recoveries)......... 9 3Parent’s responsibility for Rounding off dollars....... 1 6Private schools, tuition to . . 170child’s  t a x ............. 9 Offset against Royalties.............. 9 4Prizes and awards...... 51, 96 debts......... 12, 15, 19Parking fees and tolls: Profit-sharing plans: Past due............. 1 9Contributions......... 1 6 9
Lump-sum distributions . . . 82Taxability of........... 9 3Employee business SPrompt assessment,expenses .......... 1 8 9 Regulated investment S corporations........ 93, 203request.............. 3 8Medical............. 1 5 2 company ............ 2 6 3 Safe deposit box........ 2 0 6Property:Partners and Reimbursements ........ 1 9 2 Salaries and wages....... 5 1Basis of............. 9 9partnerships....... 92, 203 Casualty and theft Salaries and wages,Casualty and theft loss . . 174 loss........... 175, 176Passive activity......... 1 6 4 unpaid ............. 1 0 8Change to rental..... 72, 100 Medical expenses...... 1 5 2Passive activity losses . . . 25, 76 Sales and exchanges:Gifts to charity........ 1 7 0 Moving expenses...... 1 4 0Patents ............... 9 4 Bonds ............ 65, 105Inherited.......... 97, 100 Related parties,Patronage dividends...... 7 0 General rules......... 1 0 4Received as a gift...... 1 0 2 transactions between . . . 106Payment by credit card . . . 17, 47 Home .............. 1 1 0Received for services . . 52, 99Release from personalPayment by direct debit.... 4 9 Savings:liability, request........ 3 8Rental .............. 7 1Payment of tax....... 17, 276 Bonds ............. 62, 65Rental income andTransferred from spouse....Peace Corps allowances.... 5 6 Bonds used for education . . .expenses .......... 70, 71................ 1 0 2 ................. 6 4Penalties: Repayment of socialProrating standard meal Certificate.......... 61, 63Accuracy-related....... 2 1 security benefits........ 8 9allowance........... 1 9 3Criminal............. 2 2 Schedule K–1 ..... 60, 66, 90,Repayment, amountProtective clothing....... 2 0 4 91Deductibility....... 164, 205 previously includedPsychiatric care......... 1 5 1Estimated tax.......... 5 0 Schedules (Form 1040):in income......... 94, 205Public assistance benefits . . . 95Failure to file.......... 2 1 C.................. 7 9Repossession of home.... 1 1 1Publications (See Tax help)Failure to furnish tax D................. 1 1 5
Resident aliens.......... 1 0Puerto Rico, residents of..... 8shelter registration E................ 77, 79
Retirement of bonds . . . 104, 105number ............ 2 2 R................. 2 3 1
Retirement pay: S E.................. 9Failure to pay.......... 2 1
Q Armed forces.......... 5 5Failure to report tips to Schedules (Form 1040A):
Qualified 5-year gain..... 1 1 6 Pensions and annuities . . . 80employer ........... 5 8 1 – Part I............ 6 6
Failure to supply social 2 ................. 2 2 5Qualified Domestic Retirement plan
security number...... 2 2 2 – Part II............ 7 0Relations Order (QDRO) . . 83 contributions.......... 5 2
Page 282

Page 285 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3 ................. 2 3 1 Income tax refunds Estimated .......... 47, 48 Tuition, parochial school . . . 170
(recoveries)......... 9 3 For not making minimumScholarships.......... 33, 96
Obligations, interest on . . . 66 distributions......... 8 4Security deposit.......... 7 1 UOfficials......... 196, 201, Foreign .......... 154, 155,Self-employed persons: U.S. citizens abroad........ 8205 260Filing requirements....... 9 U.S. obligations, interest . . 60, 61How to figure......... 2 0 9Sterilization........... 1 5 1Health insurance Underpayment of estimatedIncome ............. 1 5 5Stock:premiums .......... 1 5 1 tax, penalty for......... 5 0IRA penalties......... 1 3 0Appreciation rights...... 5 2Self-employment tax: UnemploymentMinor children........ 2 1 2Basis .............. 1 0 3Deduction for......... 1 5 8 compensation ....... 46, 92Not deductible........ 1 5 8Dividends............ 6 9Seller-financed mortgage . . 114 On capital gains....... 1 1 6 Uniforms .......... 168, 202For services........... 5 2Separated taxpayers: On child’s investment Union:Holding period........ 1 0 9Dependent, support test . . . 33 income ........... 2 1 2 Assessments ....... 98, 202Indirect ownership..... 1 0 6Filing status........... 2 3 Personal property...... 1 5 8 Benefits............. 9 8Mutual fund....... 103, 107Separate maintenance Railroad retirement..... 2 6 3 Dues ........... 98, 167,Options.............. 5 2decree............ 1 4 1 Real estate.......... 1 5 6 202Rights............ 69, 107Separation agreement . . . 141 Social security...... 52, 261Rollover of gain from Unpaid salaries and wages....Series EE and E......... 6 2 Withholding......... 43, 47sale.............. 1 0 9 .................. 1 0 8Series HH and H......... 6 2 Taxes:Sale or exchange...... 1 0 5 Unstated interest......... 9 9Series I............... 6 2 Small business........ 1 0 9 Taxpayer Advocate . . . 277, 278Use of home in business . . . 204Service charges........ 2 0 6 Worthless........... 1 0 4 Taxpayer Usurious interest......... 6 2Settlement fees......... 1 1 1 Stock bonus plans, identification Utility rebate............ 9 8Severance pay .......... 5 2 lump-sum distributions.... 8 2 number ..........7 ,  14, 34,
217Shareholder, S corporation . . 93Stockholders’ meeting
Vexpenses ........... 2 0 8 Taxpayer rights......... 2 7 8Short-term gains and
Vacation homes:losses........... 109, 113 Strike benefits........... 9 8 Teachers’ educational
Vandalism ............ 1 7 4expenses ........... 1 9 9Sick pay.......... 46, 50, 54,Student loan interest..... 2 0 1
Veterans’ benefits...... 33, 53149 TeleFile............... 1 2Students:
VISTA volunteers........ 5 6Signing your return . . 16, 22, 36Dependent ........... 3 0 Telephones ........... 2 0 8
Fellowships, grants, Volunteer work ......... 2 2 3Simplified Method: Temporary
and scholarships.... 33, 96Who must use ......... 8 1 assignment ....... 182, 185
Living in your home..... 1 6 8Social security benefits: Temporary attendance.... 2 0 0 WLoan canceled......... 9 1Medicare............ 1 5 1 Ten-year tax option....... 8 3 Wages (See Salaries and wages)Theological........... 5 4Repayments ....... 89, 204 Tenants by the entirety . . . 60, 66Welfare benefits......... 9 5Withholding, exemptionTaxation of........... 8 6 Tenants in common..... 60, 66 Wheelchair............ 1 5 1from .............. 4 5Social security benefits: The federal rate......... 1 9 3 When to file............ 1 2Support for dependent..... 3 0Social security Theft losses........... 1 7 4 Where to file:Support, decree of....... 1 4 1number ......... 15, 34, 66, Tip income............. 5 8 Address to use......... 1 9Survivor annuities........ 8 1217 Tip Rate Determination and Deceased taxpayer...... 3 8Survivors............. 1 3 9Social security tax: Education Program...... 5 9 Who should itemize...... 1 4 5Credit for overpayment . . 263 Tools............. 188, 202 Widow(er) with dependentDeductibility.......... 1 5 8 T Trade-in.............. 1 0 5 child................ 2 6Specialized small business Tax (See Taxes) Trades (See Nontaxable Winter energy payments.... 9 5investment company.... 1 0 9 Tax counsel fees........ 2 0 5 exchanges) Withdrawals........... 1 3 0Spouse : Tax figured by IRS....... 2 1 0 Traditional IRAs......... 1 2 3 Withholding:Spouse: Tax help.............. 2 7 9 Transfer taxes.......... 1 5 8 Backup .............. 4 6Deceased ...........8 ,  2 6
Tax home ............. 1 8 1 Transportation expenses . . . 200 Credit for............. 4 9Disabled, qualifying for
Tax on early distributions . . . 84 Federal payments ....... 4 6Transporting schoolchildren . . 98dependent care credit . . 221
Fringe benefits......... 4 5Tax preference items..... 2 1 0Exemption for......... 2 8 Travel and transportation:
Gambling winnings...... 4 6Medical expenses for . . . 149 Tax refunds: Contributions ......... 1 6 9
General rules.......... 4 3Standard deduction..... 1 4 4 Claim for.......... 20, 276 Educational .......... 2 0 1
Pensions andStudent............. 2 2 1 Deceased taxpayer.... 36, 37 Employees .......... 1 8 0
annuities......... 46, 78General rules for....... 1 7 Expenses paid for others....Standard deduction:
Railroad retirementInterest on.......... 19, 59 ................ 2 0 8Age 65 or older....... 1 4 4
benefits............ 4 6Less than $1.......... 1 7 I n  the United States.... 1 8 4Blindness........... 1 4 4
Salaries and wages...... 4 3Offset against debts . . . 12, 15 Investment-related . . 183, 185Decedent’s return....... 4 0
Sick pay............. 4 6Past due............. 1 9 Medical............. 1 5 1Dependents .......... 1 4 5
Tips ................ 4 5State income tax Moving ............. 1 3 9Persons not eligible..... 1 4 4
Unemploymentrecoveries.......... 9 3 New employment ...... 2 0 4Spouse ............. 1 4 4
compensation........ 4 6Outside the UnitedTax-exempt:Standard deduction:
Work clothes........... 2 0 4States............ 1 8 4Bonds and otherStandard meal allowance . . 183
Rental .............. 7 2 Workers’ compensation.... 5 7obligations....... 66, 105Standard mileage rate.... 1 8 9 Standard mileage rate.... 7 2Income ............. 2 0 8 Worthless securities...... 1 0 4State: Transportation........ 1 8 7Interest.............. 6 6 Wristwatch............ 2 0 8Benefit funds......... 1 5 5 Travel advance....... 1 9 4Taxes :Benefit payments....... 3 0 ITreasury notes....... 61, 104Taxes:Benefit payments (See
Trusts and estates, incomeAlternative minimum.... 2 1 0also Welfare benefits) . . . 30
from ................ 9 6Credit for............. 4 9
Deductible........... 1 5 5 TTY/TDD information..... 2 7 9
Page 283

Page 286 of 286 of Publication 17 10:33 - 26-APR-2002
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Order Blank
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order blank below .
We will mail you two copies of each form and one copy of each publication you order. T o
help reduce waste, please order only the items you need to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, such as by computer or
fax, see the front cover.
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Schedule R
(1040)
8582
24411040
Pub. 508
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Pub. 521
Schedules A&B
(1040)
1040-ES
(2000)
3903
Pub. 11040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 525
Schedule D
(1040)
Schedule 1
(1040A)
2106
Pub. 929
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
Schedule 2
(1040A)
5329
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule 3
(1040A)
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505
Schedule EIC
(1040A or 1040) Pub. 596
8822
Central United States Central Area Distribution Center
Eastern United States or a foreign country Eastern Area Distribution Center
THEN mail to . . .IF you live in the . . .
Western United States Western Area Distribution Center
Where To Mail Your Order Blank for Free Forms and Publications
AT this address . . .
Detach at this line
Name
Number and street
City
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
2210
Order Blank
Fill in your name and
address.
How To Use the Order
Blank
Circle the items you need on the order blank
below . Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address accu-
rately in the space provided below . An accu-
rate address is necessary to ensure delivery
of your order. Cut the order blank on the
dotted line. Enclose the order blank in your
own envelope and send it to the IRS address
shown on this page that applies to you. Y ou
should receive your order within 10 days
after we receive your request.
Some items may be picked up at many IRS offices, post offices, and libraries. You may also download all
these items from the Internet at www.irs.gov or place an electronic order for them.
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502
Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
Pub. 936
2106-EZ
Schedule H
(1040) Pub. 926
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001
P.O. Box 8903 Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
P.O. Box 85074 Richmond, VA 23261-5074
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 535
Pub. 972
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime telephone number (optional)
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
Page 284