Contents
Important Changes ............................1
Important Reminders.........................2
Introduction ........................................2
Chapter 1. Investment Income..........3
General Information ........................3
Interest Income ...............................4
Discount on Debt Instruments ........12
When To Report Interest Income ...15
How To Report Interest Income .....16
Dividends and Other Corporate
Distributions .............................18
Stripped Preferred Stock ................22
REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs 22
S Corporations ................................23
Investment Clubs ............................24
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters.....................26
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses..... 29
Limits on Deductions ......................29
Interest Expenses ...........................29
Bond Premium Amortization ...........31
Expenses of Producing Income ......32
Nondeductible Expenses ................33
How To Report Investment
Expenses .................................34
When To Report Investment
Expenses .................................34
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property...................36
What is a Sale or Trade? ...............36
Basis of Investment Property .........39
How To Figure Gain or Loss ..........42
Nontaxable Trades .........................43
Transfers Between Spouses ..........44
Related Party Transactions ............44
Capital Gains and Losses ..............45
Holding Period .............................49
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ..............50
Short Sales ..................................51
Wash Sales ..................................52
Options .........................................53
Straddles ......................................54
Rollover of Gain From Publicly
Traded Securities .....................57
Gains on Qualified Small Business
Stock ........................................58
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ......................................59
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities .................................64
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help......65
Glossary ..............................................66
Index ....................................................68
Important Changes
Reporting capital gain distributions on
Form 1040A.  For 2000, you may be able to
report your capital gain distributions from
mutual funds on Form 1040A, instead of on
Form 1040. A worksheet in the Form 1040A
instructions is used to figure the tax. For de-
tails, see Reporting Capital Gains and Losses
in chapter 4.
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 550
Cat. No. 15093R
Investment
Income and
Expenses
(Including Capital
Gains and Losses)
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


Definition of noncapital assets expanded.
The definition of noncapital assets (assets
that generally produce ordinary rather than
capital gain or loss when sold) has been ex-
panded to include three additional categories
of assets. These are listed in chapter 4 under
Capital Assets and Noncapital Assets.
Constructive ownership transactions.  If
you have a gain from a constructive owner-
ship transaction entered into after July 11,
1999, involving certain financial assets and
the gain normally would be treated as a
long-term capital gain, all or part of the gain
may be treated as ordinary income. For more
information, see Gains From Certain Con-
structive Ownership Transactions in chapter
4.
Photographs of missing children.  The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE-LOST (1–800–
843–5678) if you recognize a child.
Important Reminders
Investing in DC Zone assets.Beginning in
2003, investments in District of Columbia
Enterprise Zone (DC Zone) assets held more
than 5 years will qualify for a special tax
benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone asset
at a gain, you will not have to include any
qualified capital gain in your gross income.
This exclusion applies to an interest in, or
property of, certain businesses operating in
the District of Columbia. For more informa-
tion, see Publication 954, Tax Incentives for
Empowerment Zones and Other Distressed
Communities.
U.S. property acquired from a foreign per-
son. If you acquire a U.S. real property in-
terest from a foreign person or firm, you may
have to withhold income tax on the amount
you pay for the property (including cash, the
fair market value of other property, and any
assumed liability). Domestic or foreign cor-
porations, partnerships, trusts, and estates
may also have to withhold on certain distri-
butions and other transactions involving U.S.
real property interests. If you fail to withhold,
you may be held liable for the tax, penalties
that apply, and interest. For more information,
see Publication 515, Withholding of Tax on
Nonresident Aliens and Foreign Corporations.
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S.
citizen with investment income from sources
outside the United States (foreign income),
you must report that income on your tax re-
turn unless it is exempt by U.S. law. This is
true whether you reside inside or outside the
United States and whether or not you receive
a Form 1099 from the foreign payer.
Alien's individual taxpayer identification
number (ITIN).The IRS will issue an ITIN to
a nonresident or resident alien who does not
have and is not eligible to get a social security
number (SSN). To apply for an ITIN, file Form
W–7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number with the IRS. Enter
your ITIN wherever an SSN is requested on
a tax return. If you must include another
person's SSN on your return and that person
does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter
that person's ITIN.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not
entitle you to social security benefits or
change your employment or immigration sta-
tus under U.S. law.
Introduction
This publication provides information on the
tax treatment of investment income and ex-
penses. It explains what investment income
is taxable and what investment expenses are
deductible. It explains when and how to show
these items on your tax return. It also explains
how to determine and report gains and losses
on the disposition of investment property and
provides information on property trades and
tax shelters.
There is a glossary at the end of this
publication that defines many of the terms
used.
Investment income.This generally includes
interest, dividends, capital gains, and other
types of distributions.
Investment expenses. These include inter-
est paid or incurred to acquire investment
property and expenses to manage or collect
income from investment property.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Page 2

1.
Investment
Income
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Interest income, 
 Dividends and other corporate distribu-
tions, 
 Real estate mortgage investment
conduits (REMICs), financial asset
securitization investment trusts (FASITs),
and other collateralized debt obligations
(CDOs),
 S corporations, and 
 Investment clubs. 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
/H18554 537 Installment Sales
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions
/H18554590 Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs)
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
/H185541212 List of Original Issue Discount In-
struments
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
/H18554Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and
Ordinary Dividends for Form
1040A Filers 
/H185541099 General Instructions for Forms
1099, 1098, 5498, and W–2G 
/H185543115 Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method 
/H185546251 Alternative Minimum Tax — Indi-
viduals 
/H185548582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations 
/H185548615 Tax for Children Under Age 14
Who Have Investment Income of
More Than $1,400 
/H185548814 Parents' Election To Report
Child's Interest and Dividends 
/H185548815 Exclusion of Interest From Series
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Is-
sued After 1989 
/H185548818 Optional Form To Record Re-
demption of Series EE and I U.S.
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989
See chapter 5 for information about get-
ting these publications and forms.
General Information
A few items of general interest are covered
here.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. You should keep a
list showing sources and amounts of
investment income that you receive
during the year. Also, keep the forms you re-
ceive that show your investment income
(Forms 1099–INT, Interest Income, and
1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions, for
example) as an important part of your rec-
ords.
Tax on investment income of a child under
age 14.  Part of a child's 2000 investment
income may be taxed at the parent's tax rate.
This may happen if all of the following are
true.
1) The child was under age 14 on January
1, 2001.
2) The child had more than $1,400 of in-
vestment income (such as taxable inter-
est and dividends) and has to file a tax
return.
3) Either parent was alive at the end of
2000.
If all of these statements are true, Form 8615
must be completed and attached to the child's
tax return. If any of these statements is not
true, Form 8615 is not required and the child's
income is taxed at his or her own tax rate.
However, the parent can choose to in-
clude the  child's interest and dividends on the
parent's return if certain requirements are
met. Use Form 8814 for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on in-
vestment income of children and the parents'
election, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for
Children and Dependents.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust.  Interest,
dividends, and other investment income you
receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust
is generally taxable income. You should re-
ceive a Schedule K–1 (Form 1041), Benefi-
ciary's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,
etc., from the fiduciary. Your copy of Sched-
ule K–1 and its instructions will tell you where
to report the income on your Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN).  You must
give your name and SSN to any person re-
quired by federal tax law to make a return,
statement, or other document that relates to
you. This includes payers of interest and div-
idends.
SSN for joint account.If the funds in a
joint account belong to one person, list that
person's name first on the account and give
that person's SSN to the payer. (For infor-
mation on who owns the funds in a joint ac-
count, see Joint accounts, later.) If the joint
account contains combined funds, give the
SSN of the person whose name is listed first
on the account.
These rules apply both to joint ownership
by a married couple and to joint ownership
by other individuals. For example, if you open
a joint savings account with your child using
funds belonging to the child, list the child's
name first on the account and give the child's
SSN.
Custodian account for your child.If
your child is the actual owner of an account
that is recorded in your name as custodian for
the child, give the child's SSN to the payer.
For example, you must give your child's SSN
to the payer of dividends on stock owned by
your child, even though the dividends are paid
to you as custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply SSN.  You
will be subject to a penalty if, when required,
you fail to:
1) Include your SSN on any return, state-
ment, or other document, 
2) Give your SSN to another person who
has to include it on any return, state-
ment, or other document, or 
3) Include the SSN of another person on
any return, statement, or other docu-
ment. 
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a
maximum penalty of $100,000 for any calen-
dar year.
You will not be subject to this penalty if
you can show that your failure to provide the
SSN was due to a reasonable cause and not
to willful neglect.
If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also
be subject to backup withholding.
Backup withholding.  Your investment in-
come is generally not subject to regular with-
holding. However, it may be subject to backup
withholding to ensure that income tax is col-
lected on the income. Under backup with-
holding, the bank, broker, or other payer of
interest, original issue discount (OID), divi-
dends, cash patronage dividends, or royalties
must withhold, as income tax, 31% of the
amount you are paid.
Backup withholding applies if:
1) You do not give the payer your identifi-
cation number (either a social security
number or an employer identification
number) in the required manner,
2) The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) no-
tifies the payer that you gave an incor-
rect identification number,
3) The IRS notifies the payer that you are
subject to backup withholding on interest
or dividends because you have
underreported interest or dividends on
your income tax return, or
4) You are required, but fail, to certify that
you are not subject to backup withhold-
ing for the reason described in (3).
Certification.For new accounts paying
interest or dividends, you must certify under
penalties of perjury that your social security
number (SSN) is correct and that you are not
subject to backup withholding. Your payer will
give you a Form W–9 ,  Request for Taxpayer
Identification Number and Certification, or
similar form, to make this certification. If you
fail to make this certification, backup with-
holding may begin immediately on your new
account or investment.
Underreported interest and dividends.
You will be considered to have underreported
your interest and dividends if the IRS has
determined for a tax year that—
1) You failed to include any part of a re-
portable interest or dividend payment
required to be shown on your return, or 
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

2) You were required to file a return and to
include a reportable interest or dividend
payment on that return, but you failed to
file the return.
How to stop backup withholding due to
underreporting.If you have been notified
that you underreported interest or dividends,
you can request a determination from the IRS
to prevent backup withholding from starting
or to stop backup withholding once it has be-
gun. You must show that at least one of the
following situations applies.
1) No underreporting occurred. 
2) You have a bona fide dispute with the
IRS about whether underreporting oc-
curred. 
3) Backup withholding will cause or is
causing an undue hardship, and it is
unlikely that you will underreport interest
and dividends in the future. 
4) You have corrected the underreporting
by filing a return if you did not previously
file one and by paying all taxes, penal-
ties, and interest due for any
underreported interest or dividend pay-
ments. 
If the IRS determines that backup with-
holding should stop, it will provide you with a
certification and will notify the payers who
were sent notices earlier.
How to stop backup withholding due to
an incorrect identification number. If you
have been notified by a payer that you are
subject to backup withholding because you
have provided an incorrect SSN or employer
identification number, you can stop it by fol-
lowing the instructions the payer gives you.
Reporting backup withholding. If
backup withholding is deducted from your in-
terest or dividend income or other reportable
payment, the bank or other business must
give you an information return for the year (for
example, a Form 1099–INT) that indicates the
amount withheld. The information return will
show any backup withholding as “Federal in-
come tax withheld.”
Nonresident aliens. Generally, pay-
ments made to nonresident aliens are not
subject to backup withholding. You can use
Form W–8BEN , Certificate of Foreign Status
of Beneficial Owner for United States Tax
Withholding, to certify exempt status. How-
ever, this does not exempt you from the 30%
(or lower treaty) withholding rate that may
apply to your investment income. For infor-
mation on the 30% rate, see Publication 519,
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Penalties.  There are civil and criminal
penalties for giving false information to avoid
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a
fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to
1 year, or both.
Where to report investment income.Table
1–1 gives an overview of the forms and
schedules to use to report some common
types of investment income. But, see the rest
of this publication for detailed information
about reporting investment income. 
Joint accounts.  In a joint account, two or
more persons hold property as joint tenants,
tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common.
That property can include a savings account,
bonds, or stock. Each person may receive a
share of any interest or dividends from the
property as determined by local law.
Example. You and your husband have a
joint money market account. Under state law,
half the income from the account belongs to
you, and half belongs to your husband. If you
file separate returns, you each report half of
the income.
Income from property given to a child.
Property you give as a parent to your child
under the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors
Act, the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any
similar law, becomes the child's property.
Income from the property is taxable to the
child, except that any part used to satisfy a
legal obligation to support the child is taxable
to the parent or guardian having that legal
obligation.
Savings account with parent as trustee.
Interest income from a savings account
opened for a child who is a minor, but placed
in the name and subject to the order of the
parents as trustees, is taxable to the child if,
under the law of the state in which the child
resides, both of the following are true.
1) The savings account legally belongs to
the child.
2) The parents are not legally permitted to
use any of the funds to support the child.
Accuracy-related penalty.  An accuracy-
related penalty of 20% can be charged for
underpayments of tax due to negligence or
disregard of rules or regulations or substantial
understatement of tax. For information on the
penalty and any interest that applies, see
Penalties in chapter 2.
Interest Income 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Accrual method 
Below-market loan
Cash method 
Demand loan
Forgone interest 
Gift loan
Interest
Nominee 
Original issue discount 
Private activity bond
Term loan
This section discusses the tax treatment of
different types of interest income.
In general, any interest that you receive
or that is credited to your account and can
be withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not
have to be entered in your passbook.) Ex-
ceptions to this rule are discussed later.
Form  1099–INT. Interest income is gener-
ally reported to you on Form 1099–INT, or a
similar statement, by banks, savings and
loans, and other payers of interest. This form
shows you the interest you received during
the year. Keep this form for your records.
You do not have to attach it to your tax return.
Report on your tax return the total amount
of interest income that you receive for the tax
year. This includes amounts reported to you
on Form 1099–INT and amounts for which
you did not receive a Form 1099–INT.
Nominees.  Generally, if someone re-
ceives interest as a nominee for you, that
person will give you a Form 1099–INT show-
ing the interest received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099–INT that in-
cludes amounts belonging to another person,
see the discussion on nominee distributions,
later, under How To Report Interest Income.
Incorrect amount.If you receive a Form
1099–INT that shows an incorrect amount (or
other incorrect information), you should ask
the issuer for a corrected form. The new Form
1099–INT you receive will be marked “COR-
RECTED.”
Form 1099–OID. Reportable interest income
may also be shown on Form 1099–OID, Ori-
ginal Issue Discount. For more information
about amounts shown on this form, see Ori-
ginal Issue Discount (OID), later in this chap-
ter.
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-
interest dividends you receive from a regu-
lated investment company (mutual fund) are
not included in your taxable income. (How-
ever, see Information-reporting requirement,
next.) You will receive a notice from the mu-
tual fund telling you the amount of the
exempt-interest dividends that you received.
Exempt-interest dividends are not shown on
Form 1099–DIV or Form 1099–INT.
Information-reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends are not
taxable, you must show them on your tax re-
turn if you have to file. This is an
information-reporting requirement and does
not change the exempt-interest dividends to
taxable income. See How To Report Interest
Income, later.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid
from specified private activity bonds may be
subject to the alternative minimum tax. See
Form 6251 and its instructions for more in-
formation about this tax. (Private activity
bonds are discussed later under State or Lo-
cal Government Obligations.) 
Interest on VA dividends.Interest on in-
surance dividends that you leave on deposit
with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
is not taxable. This includes interest paid on
dividends on converted United States Gov-
ernment Life Insurance policies and on Na-
tional Service Life Insurance policies.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
Interest on a Roth IRA or education IRA
generally is not taxable. Interest on a tradi-
tional IRA is tax deferred. You generally do
not include it in your income until you make
withdrawals from the IRA. See Publication
590 for more information.
Taxable Interest — General 
Taxable interest includes interest you receive
from bank accounts, loans you make to oth-
ers, and other sources. The following are
some sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.Cer-
tain distributions commonly called dividends
are actually interest. You must report as in-
terest so-called “dividends” on deposits or on
share accounts in:
 Cooperative banks,
 Credit unions,
Page 4 Chapter 1  Investment Income

Table 1–1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income
Income
If you file
Form 1040
If you can file
Form 1040A
If you can file
Form 1040EZ
Taxable interest that totals
$400 or less
Ordinary dividends that total
$400 or less
Taxable interest that totals
more than $400
Ordinary dividends that total
more than $400
Savings bond interest you will
exclude because of higher
education expenses
Gain or loss from sale of
stocks and bonds
Gain or loss from exchanges
of like investment property
Line 2
Line 8a (You may need to file
Schedule B as well.)
Line 9 (You may need to file
Schedule B as well.)
Line 8a; also use Schedule B
Line 9; also use Schedule B
Schedule B; also use Form
8815
Line 13; also use Schedule D
Line 13; also use Schedule D
and Form 8824
Line 8a (You may need to file
Schedule 1 as well.)
Line 9 (You may need to file
Schedule 1 as well.)
Line 8a; also use Schedule 1
Line 9; also use Schedule 1
Schedule 1; also use Form
8815
You cannot use Form 1040A.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ.
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this publication, especially
How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.)
Capital gain distributions
(if you have to file Schedule D)
Schedule D, line 13
Capital gain distributions (if you
do not have to file Schedule D)
Line 13 Line 10
 Domestic building and loan associations,
 Domestic savings and loan associations,
 Federal savings and loan associations,
and
 Mutual savings banks.
Money market funds. Generally, amounts
you receive from money market funds should
be reported as dividends, not as interest.
Money market certificates, savings certif-
icates, and other deferred interest ac-
counts. If you open any of these accounts,
interest may be paid at fixed intervals of 1
year or less during the term of the account.
You generally must include this interest in
your income when you actually receive it or
are entitled to receive it without paying a
substantial penalty. The same is true for ac-
counts that mature in 1 year or less and pay
interest in a single payment at maturity. If in-
terest is deferred for more than 1 year, see
Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early
withdrawal. If you withdraw funds from a
deferred interest account before maturity, you
may have to pay a penalty. You must report
the total amount of interest paid or credited
to your account during the year, without sub-
tracting the penalty. See Penalty on early
withdrawal of savings under How To Report
Interest Income, later, for more information
on how to report the interest and deduct the
penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in money
market certificate.The interest you pay on
money borrowed from a bank or savings in-
stitution to meet the minimum deposit re-
quired for a money market certificate from the
institution and the interest you earn on the
certificate are two separate items. You must
report the total interest you earn on the cer-
tificate in your income. If you itemize de-
ductions, you can deduct the interest you pay
as investment interest, up to the amount of
your net investment income. See Interest
Expenses in chapter 3.
Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to
make up the $10,000 minimum deposit re-
quired to buy a 6–month money market cer-
tificate. The certificate earned $575 at matu-
rity in 2000, but you received only $265,
which represented the $575 you earned mi-
nus $310 interest charged on your $5,000
loan. The bank gives you a Form 1099–INT
for 2000 showing the $575 interest you
earned. The bank also gives you a statement
showing that you paid $310 interest for 2000.
You must include the $575 in your income. If
you itemize your deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
to the net investment income limit.
Gift for opening account.If you receive
noncash gifts or services for making deposits
or for opening an account in a savings insti-
tution, you may have to report the value as
interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or
services valued at more than $10 must be
reported as interest. For deposits of $5,000
or more, gifts or services valued at more than
$20 must be reported as interest. The value
is determined by the cost to the financial in-
stitution.
Example. You open a savings account
at your local bank and deposit $800. The ac-
count earns $20 interest. You also receive a
$15 calculator. If no other interest is credited
to your account during the year, the Form
1099–INT you receive will show $35 interest
for the year. You must report $35 interest in-
come on your tax return.
Interest on insurance dividends.  Interest
on insurance dividends left on deposit with
an insurance company that can be withdrawn
annually is taxable to you in the year it is
credited to your account. However, if you can
withdraw it only on the anniversary date of the
policy (or other specified date), the interest is
taxable in the year that date occurs.
Prepaid insurance premiums.  Any increase
in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,
advance premiums, or premium deposit funds
is interest if it is applied to the payment of
premiums due on insurance policies or made
available for you to withdraw.
U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obli-
gations, such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes
and bonds, issued by any agency or instru-
mentality of the United States is taxable for
federal income tax purposes.
Interest on tax refunds.  Interest you receive
on tax refunds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.  If the
condemning authority pays you interest to
compensate you for a delay in payment of an
award, the interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.  If a contract for
the sale or exchange of property provides for
deferred payments, it also usually provides for
interest payable with the deferred payments.
That interest is taxable when you receive it.
If little or no interest is provided for in a de-
ferred payment contract, part of each pay-
ment may be treated as interest. See Un-
stated Interest in Publication 537.
Interest on annuity contract.  Accumulated
interest on an annuity contract you sell before
its maturity date is taxable.
Usurious interest.  Usurious interest is in-
terest charged at an illegal rate. This interest
is taxable unless state law automatically
changes it to a payment on the principal.
Interest income on frozen deposits.  Ex-
clude from your gross income interest on fro-
zen deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

of the year, you cannot withdraw any part of
the deposit because:
1) The financial institution is bankrupt or
insolvent, or 
2) The state in which the institution is lo-
cated has placed limits on withdrawals
because other financial institutions in the
state are bankrupt or insolvent. 
The amount of interest you must exclude
is the interest that was credited on the frozen
deposits minus the sum of:
1) The net amount you withdrew from these
deposits during the year, and 
2) The amount you could have withdrawn
as of the end of the year (not reduced
by any penalty for premature with-
drawals of a time deposit). 
If you receive a Form 1099–INT for interest
income on deposits that were frozen at the
end of 2000, see Frozen deposits under How
To Report Interest Income for information
about reporting this interest income exclusion
on your 2000 tax return.
The interest you exclude must be reported
in the later tax year when you can withdraw
it from your account.
Example. $100 of interest was credited
on your frozen deposit during the year. You
withdrew $80 but could not withdraw any
more as of the end of the year. You must
include $80 in your income for the year. You
must exclude $20.
Bonds traded flat.  If you buy a bond when
interest has been defaulted or when the in-
terest has accrued but has not been paid, that
interest is not income and is not taxable as
interest if paid later. When you receive a
payment of that interest, it is a return of cap-
ital that reduces the remaining cost basis. In-
terest that accrues after the date of purchase,
however, is taxable interest income for the
year received or accrued. See Bonds Sold
Between Interest Dates, later in this chapter.
Below-Market Loans 
If you make a below-market gift or demand
loan, you must report as interest income any
forgone interest (defined later) from that loan.
The below-market loan rules and exceptions
are described in this section. For more infor-
mation, see section 7872 of the Internal
Revenue Code and its regulations.
If you receive a below-market loan, you
may be able to deduct the forgone interest,
as well as any interest that you actually paid,
but not if it is personal interest.
Loans subject to the rules.The rules for
below-market loans apply to:
 Gift loans, 
 Pay-related loans, 
 Corporation-shareholder loans, 
 Tax avoidance loans, and
 Loans to qualified continuing care facili-
ties (made after October 11, 1985) under
a continuing care contract.
A pay-related loan is any below-market
loan between an employer and an employee
or between an independent contractor and a
person for whom the contractor provides ser-
vices.
A tax avoidance loan is any below-market
loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one
of the main purposes of the interest arrange-
ment.
Forgone interest.For any period, forgone
interest is:
1) The amount of interest that would be
payable for that period if interest accrued
on the loan at the applicable federal rate
and was payable annually on December
31, minus 
2) Any interest actually payable on the loan
for the period.
Applicable federal rate. Applicable fed-
eral rates are published by the IRS each
month in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. You
can also contact the IRS to get these rates.
See chapter 5 for the telephone number to
call.
Rules for below-market loans. The rules
that apply to a below-market loan depend on
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan,
or term loan.
Gift and demand loans.A gift loan is any
below-market loan where the forgone interest
is in the nature of a gift.
A demand loan is a loan payable in full at
any time upon demand by the lender. A de-
mand loan is a below-market loan if no inter-
est is charged or if interest is charged at a
rate below the applicable federal rate. 
A demand loan or gift loan that is a
below-market loan is generally treated as an
arm's-length transaction in which the lender
is treated as having made:
1) A loan to the borrower in exchange for
a note that requires the payment of in-
terest at the applicable federal rate, and
2) An additional payment to the borrower in
an amount equal to the forgone interest.
The borrower is generally treated as trans-
ferring the additional payment back to the
lender as interest. The lender must report that
amount as interest income.
The lender's additional payment to the
borrower is treated as a gift, dividend, contri-
bution to capital, pay for services, or other
payment, depending on the substance of the
transaction. The borrower may have to report
this payment as taxable income, depending
on its classification.
These transfers are considered to occur
annually, generally on December 31.
Term loans.  A term loan is any loan that
is not a demand loan. A term loan is a
below-market loan if the amount of the loan
is more than the present value of all payments
due under the loan. 
A lender who makes a below-market term
loan other than a gift loan is treated as
transferring an additional lump-sum cash
payment to the borrower (as a dividend, con-
tribution to capital, etc.) on the date the loan
is made. The amount of this payment is the
amount of the loan minus the present value,
at the applicable federal rate, of all payments
due under the loan. An equal amount is
treated as original issue discount (OID). The
lender must report the annual part of the OID
as interest income. The borrower may be able
to deduct the OID as interest expense. See
Original Issue Discount (OID), later. 
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules.
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are
discussed here.
Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.
The rules for below-market loans do not apply
to any day on which the total outstanding
amount of loans between the borrower and
lender is $10,000 or less. This exception ap-
plies only to:
1) Gift loans between individuals if the gift
loan is not directly used to buy or carry
income-producing assets, and
2) Pay-related loans or corporation-
shareholder loans if the avoidance of
federal tax is not a principal purpose of
the interest arrangement.
This exception does not apply to a term
loan described in (2) above that previously
has been subject to the below-market loan
rules. Those rules will continue to apply even
if the outstanding balance is reduced to
$10,000 or less.
Age exception for loans to continuing
care facilities.Loans to qualified continuing
care facilities under continuing care contracts
are not subject to the rules for below-market
loans for the calendar year if the lender or the
lender's spouse is 65 or older at the end of
the year. For 2000, this exception applies only
to the part of the total outstanding loan bal-
ance that is $139,700 or less.
Exception for loans without significant
tax effect.Loans are excluded from the
below-market loan rules if their interest ar-
rangements do not have a significant effect
on the federal tax liability of the borrower or
the lender. These loans include:
1) Loans made available by the lender to
the general public on the same terms
and conditions that are consistent with
the lender's customary business prac-
tice, 
2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
municipal government that are made
available under a program of general
application to the public, 
3) Certain employee-relocation loans, 
4) Certain loans from a foreign person, un-
less the interest income would be effec-
tively connected with the conduct of a
U.S. trade or business and would not be
exempt from U.S. tax under an income
tax treaty, 
5) Gift loans to a charitable organization,
contributions to which are deductible, if
the total outstanding amount of loans
between the organization and lender is
$250,000 or less at all times during the
tax year, and
6) Other loans on which the interest ar-
rangement can be shown to have no
significant effect on the federal tax li-
ability of the lender or the borrower.
For a loan described in (6) above, all the
facts and circumstances are used to deter-
mine if the interest arrangement has a signif-
icant effect on the federal tax liability of the
lender or borrower. Some factors to be con-
sidered are:
 Whether items of income and deduction
generated by the loan offset each other, 
 The amount of these items, 
Page 6 Chapter 1  Investment Income

 The cost to you of complying with the
below-market loan rules, if they were to
apply, and 
 Any reasons other than taxes for struc-
turing the transaction as a below-market
loan. 
If you structure a transaction to meet this
exception, and one of the principal purposes
of structuring the transaction in that way is the
avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be
considered a tax-avoidance loan and this ex-
ception will not apply.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans
of $100,000 or less. For gift loans between
individuals, if the outstanding loans between
the lender and borrower total $100,000 or
less, the forgone interest to be included in
income by the lender and deducted by the
borrower is limited to the amount of the bor-
rower's net investment income for the year.
If the borrower's net investment income is
$1,000 or less, it is treated as zero. This limit
does not apply to a loan if the avoidance of
federal tax is one of the main purposes of the
interest arrangement.
Effective dates.These rules apply to term
loans made after June 6, 1984, and to de-
mand loans outstanding after that date.
U.S. Savings Bonds 
This section provides tax information on U.S.
savings bonds. It explains how to report the
interest income on these bonds and how to
treat transfers of these bonds.
For other information on U.S. savings
bonds, write to:
Bureau of the Public Debt
Attn: Customer Information
P.O. Box 1328
Parkersburg, WV 26106–1328.
Or, on the Internet, visit:
www. publicdebt.treas.gov
Accrual method taxpayers.  If you use an
accrual method of accounting, you must re-
port interest on U.S. savings bonds each year
as it accrues. You cannot postpone reporting
interest until you receive it or until the bonds
mature.
Cash method taxpayers.  If you use the
cash method of accounting, as most individ-
ual taxpayers do, you generally report the in-
terest on U.S. savings bonds when you re-
ceive it. But see the discussion of Series EE
and series I bonds, below.
Series HH bonds. These bonds are issued
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by
direct deposit to your bank account. If you are
a cash method taxpayer, you must report in-
terest on these bonds as income in the year
you receive it.
Series HH bonds were first offered in
1980. Before 1980, series H bonds were is-
sued. Series H bonds are treated the same
as series HH bonds. If you are a cash method
taxpayer, you must report the interest when
you receive it.
Series H bonds have a maturity period of
30 years. Series HH bonds mature in 20
years.
Series EE and series I bonds.Interest on
these bonds is payable when you redeem the
bonds. The difference between the purchase
price and the redemption value is taxable in-
terest. 
Series EE bonds were first offered in July
1980. They have a maturity period of 30
years. Before July 1980, series E bonds
were issued. The original 10-year maturity
period of series E bonds has been extended
to 40 years for bonds issued before Decem-
ber 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after
November 1965. Series EE and series E
bonds are issued at a discount. The face
value is payable to you at maturity.
Series I bonds were first offered in 1998.
These are inflation-indexed bonds issued at
their face amount with a maturity period of 30
years. The face value plus accrued interest
is payable to you at maturity.
If you use the cash method of reporting
income, you can report the interest on series
EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of
the following ways.
1) Method 1. Postpone reporting the inter-
est until the earlier of the year you cash
or dispose of the bonds or the year in
which they mature. (However, see
Savings bonds traded, later.) Note. Se-
ries E bonds issued in 1960 and 1970
matured in 2000. If you have used
method 1, you generally must report the
interest on these bonds on your 2000
return.
2) Method 2. Choose to report the increase
in redemption value as interest each
year. 
You must use the same method for all series
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own. If
you do not choose method 2 by reporting the
increase in redemption value as interest each
year, you must use method 1.
TIP
If you plan to cash your bonds in the
same year that you will pay for higher
educational expenses, you may want
to use method 1 because you may be able to
exclude the interest from your income. To
learn how, see Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram, later.
Change from method 1. If you want to
change your method of reporting the interest
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so
without permission from the IRS. In the year
of change you must report all interest accrued
to date and not previously reported for all your
bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest
each year, you must continue to do so for all
series EE, series E, and series I bonds you
own and for any you get later, unless you re-
quest permission to change, as explained
next.
Change from method 2.To change from
method 2 to method 1, you must request
permission from the IRS. Permission for the
change is automatically granted if you send
the IRS a statement that meets all the fol-
lowing requirements.
1) You have typed or printed at the top,
“Change in Method of Accounting Under
Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev.
Proc. 99–49” (or later update).
2) It includes your name and social security
number under the label in (1).
3) It identifies the savings bonds for which
you are requesting this change.
4) It includes your agreement to:
a) Report all interest on any bonds
acquired during or after the year of
change when the interest is realized
upon disposition, redemption, or
final maturity, whichever is earliest,
and 
b) Report all interest on the bonds
acquired before the year of change
when the interest is realized upon
disposition, redemption, or final
maturity, whichever is earliest, with
the exception of the interest re-
ported in prior tax years.
5) It includes your signature.
You must attach this statement to your tax
return for the year of change, which you must
file by the due date (including extensions).
You can have an automatic extension of
6 months from the due date of your return
(including extensions) to file the statement
with an amended return. To get this exten-
sion, you must have filed your original return
by the due date (including extensions). At the
top of the statement, write “Filed Pursuant to
Reg. 301.9100–2.”
By the date you file the original
statement, you must also send a copy
to the address below.
Commissioner of Internal Revenue
Attention: CC:DOM:IT&A (Automatic
Rulings Branch)
P.O. Box 7604
Benjamin Franklin Station
Washington, DC 20044.
If you use a private delivery service, send
the copy to the Commissioner of Internal
Revenue, Attention: CC:DOM:IT&A (Auto-
matic Rulings Branch), 1111 Constitution Av-
enue, NW, Washington, DC 20224.
Instead of filing this statement, you can
request permission to change from method 2
to method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,
follow the form instructions for an automatic
change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued
in the names of co-owners, such as you and
your child or you and your spouse, interest
on the bond is generally taxable to the co-
owner who bought the bond.
One co-owner's funds used.If you used
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the
tax on the interest. This is true even if you let
the other co-owner redeem the bond and
keep all the proceeds. Under these circum-
stances, since the other co-owner will receive
a Form 1099–INT at the time of redemption,
the other co-owner must provide you with
another Form 1099–INT showing the amount
of interest from the bond that is taxable to
you. The co-owner who redeemed the bond
is a “nominee.” See Nominee distributions
under How To Report Interest Income, later,
for more information about how a person who
is a nominee reports interest income belong-
ing to another person.
Both co-owners' funds used.If you and
the other co-owner each contribute part of the
bond's purchase price, the interest is gener-
ally taxable to each of you, in proportion to the
amount each of you paid.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Table 1–2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF . . . THEN the tax on the bond interest must
be paid by . . .
You buy a bond in your name and the name
of another person as co-owners, using only
your own funds
You buy a bond in the name of another
person, who is the sole owner of the bond
You and another person buy a bond as
co-owners, each contributing part of the
purchase price
You and your spouse, who live in a
community property state, buy a bond that
is community property
You.
The person for whom you bought the bond.
Both you and the other co-owner, in
proportion to the amount each paid for the
bond.
You and your spouse. If you file separate
returns, both you and your spouse generally
pay tax on one-half of the interest.
Transfer to a trust.If you own series E,
series EE, or series I bonds and transfer them
to a trust, giving up all rights of ownership,
you must include in your income for that year
the interest earned to the date of transfer if
you have not already reported it. However, if
you are considered the owner of the trust and
if the increase in value both before and after
the transfer continues to be taxable to you,
you can continue to defer reporting the inter-
est earned each year. You must include the
total interest in your income in the year you
cash or dispose of the bonds or the year the
bonds finally mature, whichever is earlier.
The same rules apply to previously
unreported interest on series EE or series E
bonds if the transfer to a trust consisted of
series HH or series H bonds you acquired in
a trade for the series EE or series E bonds.
See Savings bonds traded, later.
Decedents.  The manner of reporting interest
income on series E, series EE, or series I
bonds, after the death of the owner, depends
on the accounting and income-reporting
method previously used by the decedent.
Decedent who reported interest each
year. If the bonds transferred because of
death were owned by a person who used an
accrual method, or who used the cash
method and had chosen to report the interest
each year, the interest earned in the year of
death up to the date of death must be re-
ported on that person's final return. The
person who acquires the bonds includes in
income only interest earned after the date of
death.
Decedent who postponed reporting in-
terest.If the transferred bonds were owned
by a decedent who had used the cash method
and had not chosen to report the interest each
year, and who had bought the bonds entirely
with his or her own funds, all interest earned
before death must be reported in one of the
following ways.
1) The surviving spouse or personal repre-
sentative (executor, administrator, etc.)
who files the final income tax return of
the decedent can choose to include on
that return all of the interest earned on
the bonds before the decedent's death.
The person who acquires the bonds then
includes in income only interest earned
after the date of death.
2) If the choice in (1) is not made, the in-
terest earned up to the date of death is
income in respect of the decedent. It
should not be included in the decedent's
final return. All of the interest earned
both before and after the decedent's
death is income to the person who ac-
quires the bonds. If that person uses the
cash method and does not choose to
report the interest each year, he or she
can postpone reporting it until the year
the bonds are cashed or disposed of or
the year they mature, whichever is ear-
lier. In the year that person reports the
interest, he or she can claim a deduction
for any federal estate tax that was paid
on the part of the interest included in the
decedent's estate. 
For more information on income in respect
of a decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors,
Executors, and Administrators.
Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method
taxpayer, died and left you a $1,000 series
EE bond. He had bought the bond for $500
Community property. If you and your
spouse live in a community property state and
hold bonds as community property, one-half
of the interest is considered received by each
of you. If you file separate returns, each of
you generally must report one-half of the
bond interest. For more information about
community property, see Publication 555,
Community Property.
Table 1–2. These rules are also shown
in Table 1–2.
Child as only owner.  Interest on U.S.
savings bonds bought for and registered only
in the name of your child is income to your
child, even if you paid for the bonds and are
named as beneficiary. If the bonds are series
EE, series E, or series I bonds, the interest
on the bonds is income to your child in the
earlier of the year the bonds are cashed or
disposed of or the year the bonds mature,
unless your child chooses to report the inter-
est income each year.
Choice to report interest each year.
The choice to report the accrued interest each
year can be made either by your child or by
you for your child. This choice is made by
filing an income tax return that shows all the
interest earned to date, and by stating on the
return that your child chooses to report the
interest each year. Either you or your child
should keep a copy of this return.
Unless your child is otherwise required to
file a tax return for any year after making this
choice, your child does not have to file a re-
turn only to report the annual accrual of U.S.
savings bond interest under this choice.
However, see Tax on investment income of
a child under age 14, earlier, under General
Information. Neither you nor your child can
change the way you report the interest unless
you request permission from the IRS, as dis-
cussed earlier under Change from method 2.
Ownership transferred.If you bought series
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with
your own funds and had them reissued in
your co-owner's name or beneficiary's name
alone, you must include in your gross income
for the year of reissue all interest that you
earned on these bonds and have not previ-
ously reported. But, if the bonds were reis-
sued in your name alone, you do not have to
report the interest accrued at that time.
This same rule applies when bonds (other
than bonds held as community property) are
transferred between spouses or incident to
divorce.
Example. You bought series EE bonds
entirely with your own funds. You did not
choose to report the accrued interest each
year. Later, you transfer the bonds to your
former spouse under a divorce agreement.
You must include the deferred accrued inter-
est, from the date of the original issue of the
bonds to the date of transfer, in your income
in the year of transfer. Your former spouse
includes in income the interest on the bonds
from the date of transfer to the date of re-
demption.
Purchased jointly.If you and a co-owner
each contributed funds to buy series E, series
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have
the bonds reissued in the co-owner's name
alone, you must include in your gross income
for the year of reissue your share of all the
interest earned on the bonds that you have
not previously reported. At the time of reissue,
the former co-owner does not have to include
in gross income his or her share of the inter-
est earned that was not reported before the
transfer. This interest, however, as well as all
interest earned after the reissue, is income to
the former co-owner.
This income-reporting rule also applies
when the bonds are reissued in the name of
your former co-owner and a new co-owner.
But the new co-owner will report only his or
her share of the interest earned after the
transfer.
If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
jointly are reissued to each of you separately
in the same proportion as your contribution to
the purchase price, neither you nor your co-
owner has to report at that time the interest
earned before the bonds were reissued.
Example 1. You and your spouse each
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to
you and your spouse as co-owners. You both
postpone reporting interest on the bond. You
later have the bond reissued as two $500
bonds, one in your name and one in your
spouse's name. At that time neither you nor
your spouse has to report the interest earned
to the date of reissue.
Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series
EE savings bond entirely with your own funds.
The bond was issued to you and your spouse
as co-owners. You both postponed reporting
interest on the bond. You later have the bond
reissued as two $500 bonds, one in your
name and one in your spouse's name. You
must report half the interest earned to the
date of reissue.
Page 8 Chapter 1  Investment Income

and had not chosen to report the interest each
year. At the date of death, interest of $200
had accrued on the bond and its value of
$700 was included in your uncle's estate.
Your uncle's executor chose not to include the
$200 accrued interest in your uncle's final in-
come tax return. The $200 is income in re-
spect of the decedent.
You are a cash method taxpayer and do
not choose to report the interest each year
as it is earned. If you cash the bond when it
reaches maturity value of $1,000, you report
$500 interest income—the difference be-
tween maturity value of $1,000 and the ori-
ginal cost of $500. For that year, you can
deduct (as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-
gross-income limit) any federal estate tax paid
because the $200 interest was included in
your uncle's estate.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executor
had chosen to include the $200 accrued in-
terest in your uncle's final return, you would
report only $300 as interest when you cashed
the bond at maturity. $300 is the interest
earned after your uncle's death.
Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make
or have made the choice to report the in-
crease in redemption value as interest each
year, you include in gross income for the year
you acquire the bond all of the unreported
increase in value of all series E, series EE,
and series I bonds you hold, including the
$200 on the bond you inherited from your
uncle.
Example 4. When your aunt died, she
owned series H bonds that she had acquired
in a trade for series E bonds. You were the
beneficiary of these bonds. Your aunt used
the cash method and did not choose to report
the interest on the series E bonds each year
as it accrued. Your aunt's executor chose not
to include any interest earned before your
aunt's death on her final return.
The income in respect of the decedent is
the sum of the unreported interest on the se-
ries E bonds and the interest, if any, payable
on the series H bonds but not received as of
the date of your aunt's death. You must report
any interest received during the year as in-
come on your return. The part of the interest
that was payable but not received before your
aunt's death is income in respect of the de-
cedent and may qualify for the estate tax de-
duction. For information on when to report the
interest on the series E bonds traded, see
Savings bonds traded, later.
Savings bonds distributed from a retire-
ment or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire
a U.S. savings bond in a taxable distribution
from a retirement or profit-sharing plan, your
income for the year of distribution includes the
bond's redemption value (its cost plus the in-
terest accrued before the distribution). When
you redeem the bond (whether in the year of
distribution or later), your interest income in-
cludes only the interest accrued after the
bond was distributed. To figure the interest
reported as a taxable distribution and your
interest income when you redeem the bond,
see Worksheet for savings bonds distributed
from a retirement or profit-sharing plan under
How To Report Interest Income, later.
Savings bonds traded. If you postponed
reporting the interest on your series EE or
series E bonds, you did not recognize taxable
income when you traded the bonds for series
HH or series H bonds, unless you received
cash in the trade. (You cannot trade series I
bonds for series HH bonds.) Any cash you
received is income up to the amount of the
interest earned on the bonds traded. When
your series HH or series H bonds mature, or
if you dispose of them before maturity, you
report as interest the difference between their
redemption value and your cost. Your cost is
the sum of the amount you paid for the traded
series EE or series E bonds plus any amount
you had to pay at the time of the trade.
Example 1. You own series E bonds with
accrued interest of $523 and a redemption
value of $2,723 and have postponed reporting
the interest. You trade the bonds for $2,500
in series HH bonds and $223 in cash. You
must report the $223 as taxable income in the
year of the trade.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1. You hold the series HH bonds
until maturity, when you receive $2,500. You
must report $300 as interest income in the
year of maturity. This is the difference be-
tween their redemption value, $2,500, and
your cost, $2,200 (the amount you paid for the
series E bonds). (It is also the difference be-
tween the accrued interest of $523 on the
series E bonds and the $223 cash received
on the trade.)
Choice to report interest in year of
trade. You can choose to treat all of the
previously unreported accrued interest on
series EE or series E bonds traded for series
HH bonds as income in the year of the trade.
If you make this choice, it is treated as a
change from method 1. See Change from
method 1 under Series EE and series I bonds,
earlier.
Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bond in-
terest.  When you cash a bond, the bank or
other payer that redeems it must give you a
Form 1099–INT if the interest part of the
payment you receive is $10 or more. Box 3
of your Form 1099–INT should show the in-
terest as the difference between the amount
you received and the amount paid for the
bond. However, your Form 1099–INT may
show more interest than you have to include
on your income tax return. For example, this
may happen if any of the following are true.
1) You chose to report the increase in the
redemption value of the bond each year.
The interest shown on your Form
1099–INT will not be reduced by
amounts previously included in income. 
2) You received the bond from a decedent.
The interest shown on your Form
1099–INT will not be reduced by any in-
terest reported by the decedent before
death, or on the decedent's final return,
or by the estate on the estate's income
tax return. 
3) Ownership of the bond was transferred.
The interest shown on your Form
1099–INT will not be reduced by interest
that accrued before the transfer. 
4) You were named as a co-owner and the
other co-owner contributed funds to buy
the bond. The interest shown on your
Form 1099–INT will not be reduced by
the amount you received as nominee for
the other co-owner. (See Co-owners,
earlier in this section, for more informa-
tion about the reporting requirements.) 
5) You received the bond in a taxable dis-
tribution from a retirement or profit-
sharing plan. The interest shown on your
Form 1099–INT will not be reduced by
the interest portion of the amount taxable
as a distribution from the plan and not
taxable as interest. (This amount is
generally shown on Form 1099–R, Dis-
tributions From Pensions, Annuities,
Retirement or Profit-Sharing Plans,
IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc., for the
year of distribution.)
For more information on including the
correct amount of interest on your return, see
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported or Nominee distributions under How
To Report Interest Income, later.
TIP
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
empt from state and local taxes. The
Form 1099–INT you receive will indi-
cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds
interest in box 3. Do not include this income
on your state or local income tax return.
Education Savings Bond Program
You may be able to exclude from income all
or part of the interest you receive on the re-
demption of qualified U.S. savings bonds
during the year if you pay qualified higher
educational expenses during the same year.
This exclusion is known as the Education
Savings Bond Program.
If you are married, you can qualify for this
exclusion only if you file a joint return with
your spouse.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of
Interest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings
Bonds Issued After 1989, to figure your ex-
clusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040
or Form 1040A.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.A qualified
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued
after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must
be issued either in your name (sole owner)
or in your and your spouse's names (co-
owners). You must be at least 24 years old
before the bond's issue date.
CAUTION
!
The date a bond is issued may be
earlier than the date the bond is pur-
chased because bonds are issued as
of the first day of the month in which they are
purchased.
Beneficiary.You can designate any in-
dividual (including a child) as a beneficiary of
the bond.
Verification by IRS.If you claim the ex-
clusion, the IRS will check it by using bond
redemption information from the Department
of Treasury.
Qualified expenses.Qualified higher edu-
cational expenses are tuition and fees re-
quired for you, your spouse, or your depend-
ent (for whom you claim an exemption) to
attend an eligible educational institution.
Qualified expenses include any contribu-
tion you make to a qualified state tuition pro-
gram or to an education IRA. For information
about state tuition programs and education
IRAs, see Publication 970, Tax Benefits for
Higher Education.
Qualified expenses do not include ex-
penses for room and board or for courses in-
volving sports, games, or hobbies that are not
part of a degree program.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Eligible educational institutions.These
institutions include most public, private, and
nonprofit universities, colleges, and voca-
tional schools that are accredited and are el-
igible to participate in student aid programs
run by the Department of Education.
Reduction for certain benefits.You
must reduce your qualified higher educational
expenses by certain benefits the student may
have received. These benefits include:
1) Qualified scholarships that are exempt
from tax (see Publication 520, Scholar-
ships and Fellowships, for information
on qualified scholarships), and
2) Any other nontaxable payments (other
than gifts, bequests, or inheritances) re-
ceived for educational expenses, such
as:
a) Veterans' educational assistance
benefits,
b) Benefits under a qualified state tui-
tion program, or
c) Certain employer-provided educa-
tional assistance benefits.
Effect of other tax benefits.Do not in-
clude in your qualified expenses any expense
used to:
1) Figure an education credit on Form
8863, or
2) Figure how much of a distribution from
an education IRA you can exclude from
your income.
For information about education credits or
education IRAs, see Publication 970.
Amount excludable. If the total proceeds
(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.
savings bonds you redeem during the year
are not more than your qualified higher edu-
cational expenses for the year, you can ex-
clude all of the interest. If the proceeds are
more than the expenses, you can exclude
only part of the interest.
To determine the excludable amount,
multiply the interest part of the proceeds by
a fraction. The numerator (top part) of the
fraction is the qualified higher educational
expenses you paid during the year. The de-
nominator (bottom part) of the fraction is the
total proceeds you received during the year.
Example. In February 2000, Mark and
Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified
series EE U.S. savings bond they bought in
November 1992. They received proceeds of
$7,564, representing principal of $5,000 and
interest of $2,564. In 2000, they paid $4,000
of their daughter's college tuition. They are
not claiming an education credit for that
amount, and they do not have an education
IRA. They can exclude $1,356 ($2,564 ×
($4,000 ÷ $7,564)) of interest in 2000. They
must pay tax on the remaining $1,208 ($2,564
− $1,356) interest.
Figuring the interest part of the pro-
ceeds (Form 8815, line 6).To figure the
amount of interest to report on Form 8815,
line 6, use the Line 6 Worksheet in the Form
8815 instructions. 
If you previously reported any interest
from savings bonds cashed during
2000, use the Alternate Line 6 Work-
sheet below instead.
Modified adjusted gross income limit.
The interest exclusion is limited if your modi-
fied adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
 $54,100 to $69,100 for taxpayers filing
single or head of household, and 
 $81,100 to $111,100 for married taxpay-
ers filing jointly, or for a qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child. 
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion
if your modified AGI is equal to or more than
the upper limit for your filing status.
Modified AGI.Modified AGI, for purposes
of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income
(line 20 of Form 1040A or line 34 of Form
1040) figured before the interest exclusion,
and modified by adding back any:
1) Foreign earned income exclusion,
2) Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,
3) Exclusion of income for bona fide resi-
dents of American Samoa,
4) Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
5) Exclusion for adoption benefits received
under an employer's adoption assistance
program, and
6) Deduction for student loan interest.
Use the worksheet in the instructions for
line 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified
AGI. If you claim any of the items (1) – (6)
listed above, add the amount of the exclusion
or deduction to the amount on line 5 of the
worksheet, and enter the total on Form 8815,
line 9, as your modified AGI.
Royalties included in modified AGI.
Because the deduction for interest expenses
attributable to royalties and other investments
is limited to your net investment income (see
Investment Interest in chapter 3), you cannot
figure the deduction until you have figured this
interest exclusion. Therefore, if you had in-
terest expenses attributable to royalties and
deductible on Schedule E (Form 1040), you
must make a special computation of your
deductible interest without regard to this ex-
clusion to figure the net royalty income in-
cluded in your modified AGI.
You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, In-
vestment Interest Expense Deduction, to
make the special computation. On this form,
include in your net investment income your
total interest income for the year from series
EE and I U.S. savings bonds. Use the
deductible interest amount from this form only
to figure your modified AGI. Do not attach this
form to your tax return.
After you figure this interest exclusion, use
a separate Form 4952 to figure your actual
deduction for investment interest expenses,
and attach that form to your return.
Alternate Line 6 Worksheet
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. If you claim the in-
terest exclusion, you must keep a
written record of the qualified U.S.
savings bonds you redeem. Your record must
include the serial number, issue date, face
value, and total redemption proceeds (princi-
pal and interest) of each bond. You can use
Form  8818, Optional Form To Record Re-
demption of Series EE and I U.S. Savings
Bonds Issued After 1989, to record this infor-
mation. You should also keep bills, receipts,
canceled checks, or other documentation that
shows you paid qualified higher educational
expenses during the year.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Notes, and Bonds 
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct
debts (obligations) of the U.S. Government.
Interest income from Treasury bills, notes,
and bonds is subject to federal income tax,
but is exempt from all state and local income
taxes. You should receive Form 1099–INT
showing the amount of interest (in box 3) that
was paid to you for the year.
Payments of principal and interest gener-
ally will be credited to your designated
checking or savings account by direct deposit
through the TREASURY DIRECT system.
Treasury bills.These bills generally have a
13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturity pe-
riod. They are issued at a discount in the
amount of $1,000 and multiples of $1,000.
The difference between the discounted price
you pay for the bills and the face value you
receive at maturity is interest income. Gener-
ally, you report this interest income when the
bill is paid at maturity. See Discount on
Short-Term Obligations under Discount on
Debt Instruments, later.
If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its
maturity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond,
you will receive payment for the difference
between the proceeds of the maturing bill (par
amount less any tax withheld) and the pur-
chase price of the new Treasury security.
However, you must report the full amount of
the interest income on each of your Treasury
bills at the time it reaches maturity.
Treasury notes and bonds.  Treasury notes
have maturity periods of more than 1 year,
ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods for
Treasury bonds are longer than 10 years.
Both of these Treasury issues generally are
issued in denominations of $1,000 to $1
million. Both notes and bonds generally pay
interest every 6 months. Generally, you re-
port this interest for the year paid. When the
notes or bonds mature, you can redeem
these securities for face value.
Treasury notes and bonds are usually sold
by auction with competitive bidding. If, after
compiling the competitive bids, a determi-
nation is made that the purchase price is less
than the face value, you will receive a refund
for the difference between the purchase price
and the face value. This amount is consid-
ered original issue discount. However, the
original issue discount rules (discussed later)
do not apply if the discount is less than one-
fourth of 1% (.0025) of the face amount
multiplied by the number of full years from the
date of original issue to maturity. See De
minimis OID under Original Issue Discount
(OID), later. If the purchase price is deter-
1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, line
5 ...........................................................
2. Enter the face value of all post-1989
series EE bonds cashed in 2000 ........
3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) ......
4. Enter the face value of all series I
bonds cashed in 2000. ........................
5. Add lines 3 and 4 ................................
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...................
7. Enter the amount of interest reported
as income in previous years ...............
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the
result here and on Form 8815, line 6 .
Page 10 Chapter 1  Investment Income

mined to be more than the face amount, the
difference is a premium. (See Bond Premium
Amortization in chapter 3.)
For other information on these notes
or bonds, write to:
Bureau of the Public Debt
Attn: Customer Information
P.O. Box 1328
Parkersburg, WV 26106-1328.
Or, on the Internet, visit:
www. publicdebt.treas.gov 
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities.
These securities pay interest twice a year at
a fixed rate, based on a principal amount that
is adjusted to take into account inflation and
deflation. For the tax treatment of these se-
curities, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instru-
ments under Original Issue Discount (OID),
later.
Retirement, sale, or redemption.For infor-
mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption
of U.S. government obligations, see Capital
or Ordinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also
see Nontaxable Trades in chapter 4 for infor-
mation about trading U.S. Treasury obli-
gations for certain other designated issues.
Bonds Sold Between
Interest Dates 
If you sell a bond between interest payment
dates, part of the sales price represents in-
terest accrued to the date of sale. You must
report that part of the sales price as interest
income for the year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest pay-
ment dates, part of the purchase price repre-
sents interest accrued before the date of
purchase. When that interest is paid to you,
treat it as a return of your capital investment,
rather than interest income, by reducing your
basis in the bond. See Accrued interest on
bonds under How To Report Interest Income,
later in this chapter, for information on re-
porting the payment.
Insurance 
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as ben-
eficiary of the insured person are usually not
taxable. But if you receive the proceeds in
installments, you must usually report part of
each installment payment as interest income.
For more information about insurance
proceeds received in installments, see Publi-
cation 525.
Interest option on insurance.  If you leave
life insurance proceeds on deposit with an
insurance company under an agreement to
pay interest only, the interest paid to you is
taxable.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life in-
surance proceeds, the annuity payments you
receive are taxed as pension and annuity in-
come, not as interest income. See Publication
939, General Rule for Pensions and Annui-
ties, for information on taxation of pension
and annuity income.
State or Local
Government Obligations
Interest you receive on an obligation issued
by a state or local government is generally
not taxable. The issuer should be able to tell
you whether the interest is taxable. The
issuer should also give you a periodic (or
year-end) statement showing the tax treat-
ment of the obligation. If you invested in the
obligation through a trust, a fund, or other
organization, that organization should give
you this information.
CAUTION
!
Even if interest on the obligation is not
subject to income tax, you may have
to report capital gain or loss when you
sell it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax
may also apply to other dispositions of the
obligation.
Tax-Exempt Interest
Interest on a bond used to finance govern-
ment operations generally is not taxable if the
bond is issued by a state, the District of
Columbia, a U.S. possession, or any of their
political subdivisions. Political subdivisions
include:
 Port authorities,
 Toll road commissions,
 Utility services authorities,
 Community redevelopment agencies, and
 Qualified volunteer fire departments (for
certain obligations issued after 1980).
There are other requirements for tax-exempt
bonds. Contact the issuing state or local
government agency or see sections 103 and
141 through 150 of the Internal Revenue
Code and the related regulations.
TIP
Obligations that are not bonds. In-
terest on a state or local government
obligation may be tax exempt even if
the obligation is not a bond. For example, in-
terest on a debt evidenced only by an ordi-
nary written agreement of purchase and sale
may be tax exempt. Also, interest paid by an
insurer on default by the state or political
subdivision may be tax exempt.
Registration requirement. A bond issued
after June 30, 1983, generally must be in
registered form for the interest to be tax ex-
empt.
Indian tribal government. Bonds issued af-
ter 1982 by an Indian tribal government are
treated as issued by a state. Interest on these
bonds is generally tax exempt if the bonds
are part of an issue of which substantially all
of the proceeds are to be used in the exercise
of any essential government function. How-
ever, interest on private activity bonds (other
than certain bonds for tribal manufacturing
facilities) is taxable.
Original issue discount. Original issue dis-
count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local
government bonds is treated as tax-exempt
interest.
For information on the treatment of OID
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, see
Tax-exempt state and local government
bonds under Discounted Debt Instruments in
chapter 4.
Stripped bonds or coupons. For special
rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obli-
gations, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons
under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Information reporting requirement.If you
must file a tax return, you are required to
show any tax-exempt interest you received
on your return. This is an information-
reporting requirement only. It does not
change tax-exempt interest to taxable inter-
est. See Reporting tax-exempt interest under
How To Report Interest Income, later in this
chapter. That discussion also explains what
to do if you receive a Form 1099–INT for
tax-exempt interest.
Taxable Interest
Interest on some state or local obligations is
taxable.
Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on
federally guaranteed state or local obligations
issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This
rule does not apply to interest on obligations
guaranteed by the following U.S. Govern-
ment agencies.
 Bonneville Power Authority (if the guar-
antee was under the Northwest Power
Act as in effect on July 18, 1984).
 Department of Veterans Affairs.
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpo-
ration.
 Federal Housing Administration.
 Federal National Mortgage Association.
 Government National Mortgage Corpo-
ration.
 Resolution Funding Corporation.
 Student Loan Marketing Association.
Mortgage revenue bonds.  The proceeds
of these bonds are used to finance mortgage
loans for homebuyers. Generally, interest on
state or local government home mortgage
bonds issued after April 24, 1979, is taxable
unless the bonds are qualified mortgage
bonds or qualified veterans' mortgage bonds.
Arbitrage bonds.  Interest on arbitrage
bonds issued by state or local governments
after October 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage
bond is a bond, any portion of the proceeds
of which is expected to be used to buy (or to
replace funds used to buy) higher yielding
investments. A bond is treated as an arbitrage
bond if the issuer intentionally uses any part
of the proceeds of the issue in this manner.
Private activity bonds. Interest on a private
activity bond that is not a qualified bond (de-
fined below) is taxable. Generally, a private
activity bond is part of a state or local gov-
ernment bond issue that meets both of the
following requirements.
1) More than 10% of the proceeds of the
issue is to be used for a private business
use.
2) More than 10% of the payment of the
principal or interest is: 
a) Secured by an interest in property
to be used for a private business
use (or payments for this property),
or 
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

b) Derived from payments for property
(or borrowed money) used for a
private business use.
Also, a bond is generally considered a private
activity bond if the amount of the proceeds to
be used to make or finance loans to persons
other than government units is more than 5%
of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever is
less).
Qualified bond. Interest on a private ac-
tivity bond that is a qualified bond is tax ex-
empt. A qualified bond is an exempt-facility
bond (including an enterprise zone facility
bond), qualified student loan bond, qualified
small issue bond (including a tribal manufac-
turing facility bond), qualified redevelopment
bond, qualified mortgage bond, qualified vet-
erans' mortgage bond, or qualified 501(c)(3)
bond (a bond issued for the benefit of certain
tax-exempt organizations).
Interest that you receive on these tax-
exempt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3)
bonds), if issued after August 7, 1986, gen-
erally is a “tax preference item” and may be
subject to the alternative minimum tax. See
Form 6251 and its instructions for more in-
formation.
Enterprise zone facility bonds. Interest
on certain private activity bonds issued by a
state or local government to finance a facility
used in an empowerment zone or enterprise
community is tax exempt. For information on
these bonds, see Publication 954.
Market discount. Market discount on a tax-
exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If you bought
the bond after April 30, 1993, you can choose
to accrue the market discount over the period
you own the bond and include it in your in-
come currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-
ket Discount Bonds under Discount on Debt
Instruments, later. If you do not make that
choice, or if you bought the bond before May
1, 1993, any gain from market discount is
taxable when you dispose of the bond.
For more information on the treatment of
market discount when you dispose of a tax-
exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru-
ments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss
in chapter 4.
Discount on
Debt Instruments 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Market discount
Market discount bond 
Original issue discount (OID) 
Premium 
In general, a debt instrument, such as a bond,
note, debenture, or other evidence of indebt-
edness, that bears no interest or bears inter-
est at a lower than current market rate will
usually be issued at less than its face amount.
This discount is, in effect, additional interest
income. The following are some of the types
of discounted debt instruments.
 Corporate bonds.
 Municipal bonds.
 Certificates of deposit.
 Notes between individuals.
 Stripped bonds and coupons.
 Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
The discount on these instruments (except
municipal bonds) is taxable in most instances.
The discount on municipal bonds generally is
not taxable (but see State or Local Govern-
ment Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See
also REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs,
later, for information about applying the rules
discussed in this section to the regular inter-
est holder of a real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduit, a financial asset securitization
investment trust, or other CDO.
Original Issue
Discount (OID)
OID is a form of interest. You generally in-
clude OID in your income as it accrues over
the term of the debt instrument, whether or
not you receive any payments from the
issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when
the instrument is issued for a price that is less
than its stated redemption price at maturity.
OID is the difference between the stated re-
demption price at maturity and the issue
price.
All instruments that pay no interest before
maturity are presumed to be issued at a dis-
count. Zero coupon bonds are one example
of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally do not
apply to short-term obligations (those with a
fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from date
of issue). See Discount on Short-Term Obli-
gations, later.
For information about the sale of a debt
instrument with OID, see chapter 4.
De minimis OID.You can treat the discount
as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1%
(.0025) of the stated redemption price at ma-
turity multiplied by the number of full years
from the date of original issue to maturity.
This small discount is known as “de minimis”
OID.
Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond
with a stated redemption price at maturity of
$1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20.
One-fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated redemp-
tion price) times 10 (the number of full years
from the date of original issue to maturity)
equals $25. Because the $20 discount is less
than $25, the OID is treated as zero. (If you
hold the bond at maturity, you will recognize
$20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that the bond was issued
at $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50
discount is more than the $25 figured in Ex-
ample 1, you must include the OID in income
as it accrues over the term of the bond.
Debt instrument bought after original
issue. If you buy a debt instrument with de
minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not
includible in income. If you buy a debt instru-
ment with de minimis OID at a discount, the
discount is reported under the market dis-
count rules. See Market Discount Bonds, later
in this chapter.
Exceptions to reporting OID.The OID rules
discussed here do not apply to the following
debt instruments.
1) Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see
Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)
2) U.S. savings bonds.
3) Short-term debt instruments (those with
a fixed maturity date of not more than 1
year from the date of issue).
4) Obligations issued by an individual be-
fore March 2, 1984.
5) Loans between individuals, if all the fol-
lowing are true.
a) The lender is not in the business
of lending money.
b) The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior
loans between the same individ-
uals, is $10,000 or less.
c) Avoiding any federal tax is not one
of the principal purposes of the
loan.
Form 1099–OID
The issuer of the debt instrument (or your
broker, if you held the instrument through a
broker) should give you Form 1099–OID, Or-
iginal Issue Discount, or a similar statement,
if the total OID for the calendar year is $10
or more. Form 1099–OID will show, in box 1,
the amount of OID for the part of the year that
you held the bond. It also will show, in box
2, the stated interest that you must include in
your income. A copy of Form 1099–OID will
be sent to the IRS. Do not file your copy with
your return. Keep it for your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099–OID
as interest income. But see Refiguring OID
shown on Form 1099–OID, later in this dis-
cussion, and also Original issue discount
(OID) adjustment under How To Report In-
terest Income, later in this chapter, for more
information.
Form 1099–OID not received. If you had
OID for the year but did not receive a Form
1099–OID, see Publication 1212, which lists
total OID on certain debt instruments and has
information that will help you figure OID. If
your debt instrument is not listed in Publica-
tion 1212, consult the issuer for further infor-
mation about the accrued OID for the year.
Nominee.  If someone else is the holder of
record (the registered owner) of an OID in-
strument that belongs to you and receives a
Form 1099–OID on your behalf, that person
must give you a Form 1099–OID.
If you receive a Form 1099–OID that in-
cludes amounts belonging to another person,
see Nominee distributions under How To
Report Interest Income, later.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID.
You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 of
Form 1099–OID if either of the following ap-
ply.
1) You bought the debt instrument after its
original issue and paid a premium or an
acquisition premium.
2) The debt instrument is a stripped bond
or a stripped coupon (including certain
zero coupon instruments). See Figuring
OID under Stripped Bonds and Cou-
pons, later in this chapter.
See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment
under How To Report Interest Income, later
Page 12 Chapter 1  Investment Income

in this chapter, for information about reporting
the correct amount of OID.
Premium. You bought a debt instrument
at a premium if its adjusted basis immediately
after purchase was greater than the total of
all amounts payable on the instrument after
the purchase date, other than qualified stated
interest.
If you bought an OID debt instrument at
a premium, you generally do not have to re-
port any OID as ordinary income.
Qualified stated interest.In general, this
is stated interest that is unconditionally pay-
able in cash or property (other than debt in-
struments of the issuer) at least annually at
a fixed rate.
Acquisition premium.  You bought a
debt instrument at an acquisition premium if
both of the following are true.
1) You did not pay a premium.
2) The instrument's adjusted basis imme-
diately after purchase (including pur-
chase at original issue) was greater than
its adjusted issue price. This is the issue
price plus the OID previously accrued,
minus any payment previously made on
the instrument other than qualified stated
interest. 
Acquisition premium reduces the amount of
OID includible in your income. For informa-
tion about figuring the correct amount of OID
to include in your income, see Figuring OID
on Long-Term Debt Instruments in Publica-
tion 1212.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on
Form 1099–OID. If you disposed of a debt
instrument or acquired it from another holder
during the year, see Bonds Sold Between In-
terest Dates, earlier, for information about the
treatment of periodic interest that may be
shown in box 2 of Form 1099–OID for that
instrument.
Applying the OID Rules
The rules for reporting OID depend on the
date the long-term debt instrument was is-
sued.
Debt instruments issued after 1954 and
before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982,
if a government instrument). For these in-
struments, you do not report the OID until the
year you sell, exchange, or redeem the in-
strument. If a gain results and the instrument
is a capital asset, the amount of the gain
equal to the OID is ordinary interest income.
The rest of the gain is capital gain. If there is
a loss on the sale of the instrument, the entire
loss is a capital loss and no reporting of OID
is required.
In general, the amount of gain that is or-
dinary interest income equals the following
amount:
Debt instruments issued after May 27,
1969 (after July 1, 1982, if a government
instrument), and before 1985. If you hold
these debt instruments as capital assets, you
must include a part of the discount in your
gross income each year that you own the in-
struments.
Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID that
you include in your gross income.
Debt instruments issued after 1984.For
these debt instruments, you report the total
OID that applies each year regardless of
whether you hold that debt instrument as a
capital asset.
Effect on basis. Your basis in the instru-
ment is increased by the amount of OID that
you include in your gross income.
Certificates of Deposit (CDs) 
If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than
1 year, you must include in income each year
a part of the total interest due and report it in
the same manner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit ar-
rangements with banks, building and loan
associations, etc., including:
 Time deposits,
 Bonus plans,
 Savings certificates,
 Deferred income certificates,
 Bonus savings certificates, and
 Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs.  These are not issued in the
depositor's name and are transferable from
one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the per-
son redeeming the bearer certificate with a
Form 1099–INT.
CDs issued after 1982 generally must be
in registered form. For more information, see
Bearer Obligations under Capital Gains and
Losses in chapter 4.
Time deposit open account arrangement.
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity
date in which you make deposits on a
schedule arranged between you and your
bank. But there is no actual or constructive
receipt of interest until the fixed maturity date
is reached. For instance, you and your bank
enter into an arrangement under which you
agree to deposit $100 each month for a pe-
riod of 5 years. Interest will be compounded
twice a year at 7
1/2%, but payable only at the
end of the 5-year period. You must include a
part of the interest in your income as OID
each year. Each year the bank must give you
a Form 1099–OID to show you the amount
you must include in your income for the year.
Redemption before maturity.If, before the
maturity date, you redeem a deferred interest
account for less than its stated redemption
price at maturity, you can deduct the amount
of OID that you previously included in income
but did not receive.
Renewable certificates.If you renew a CD
at maturity, it is treated as a redemption and
a purchase of a new certificate. This is true
regardless of the terms of renewal.
Face-Amount Certificates 
These certificates are subject to the OID
rules. They are a form of endowment con-
tracts issued by insurance or investment
companies for either a lump-sum payment or
periodic payments, with the face amount be-
coming payable on the maturity date of the
certificate.
In general, the difference between the
face amount and the amount you paid for the
contract is OID. You must include a part of the
OID in your income over the term of the cer-
tificate.
The issuer must give you a statement on
Form 1099–OID indicating the amount you
must include in your income each year.
Inflation-Indexed
Debt Instruments
If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instru-
ment (other than a series I U.S. savings
bond), you must report as OID any increase
in the inflation-adjusted principal amount of
the instrument that occurs while you held the
instrument during the year. In general, an
inflation-indexed debt instrument is a debt in-
strument on which the payments are adjusted
for inflation and deflation (such as Treasury
Inflation-Indexed Securities). You should re-
ceive Form 1099–OID from the payer show-
ing the amount you must report as OID and
any qualified stated interest paid to you during
the year. For more information, see Publica-
tion 1212.
Stripped Bonds and Coupons 
If you strip one or more coupons from a bond
and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond
and coupons are treated as separate debt
instruments issued with OID.
The holder of a stripped bond has the right
to receive the principal (redemption price)
payment. The holder of a stripped coupon has
the right to receive interest on the bond.
Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-
clude:
1) Zero coupon instruments available
through the Department of the Treas-
ury's Separate Trading of Registered In-
terest and Principal of Securities
(STRIPS) program and government-
sponsored enterprises such as the Res-
olution Funding Corporation and the Fi-
nancing Corporation, and 
2) Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury
securities that represent ownership in-
terests in those securities, such as obli-
gations backed by U.S. Treasury bonds
that are offered primarily by brokerage
firms.
Seller.If you strip coupons from a bond and
sell the bond or coupons, include in income
the interest that accrued while you held the
bond before the date of sale to the extent you
did not previously include this interest in your
income. For an obligation acquired after Oc-
tober 22, 1986, you must also include the
market discount that accrued before the date
of sale of the stripped bond (or coupon) to the
extent you did not previously include this dis-
count in your income.
Add the interest and market discount that
you include in income to the basis of the bond
and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis
between the items you keep and the items
you sell, based on the fair market value of the
items. The difference between the sale price
of the bond (or coupon) and the allocated
basis of the bond (or coupon) is your gain or
loss from the sale.
Treat any item you keep as an OID bond
originally issued and bought by you on the
sale date of the other items. If you keep the
Number of full
months you held
the instrument
× Original
Number of full Issue
months from date Discount
of original issue
to date of maturity
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

bond, treat the amount of the redemption
price of the bond that is more than the basis
of the bond as the OID. If you keep the cou-
pons, treat the amount payable on the cou-
pons that is more than the basis of the cou-
pons as the OID.
Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or stripped
coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued
on the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped
bond, treat as OID any excess of the stated
redemption price at maturity over your pur-
chase price. If you buy a stripped coupon,
treat as OID any excess of the amount pay-
able on the due date of the coupon over your
purchase price.
Figuring OID.The rules for figuring OID on
stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend
on the date the debt instruments were pur-
chased, not the date issued.
You must refigure the OID shown on the
Form 1099–OID you receive for a stripped
bond or coupon. For information about figur-
ing the correct amount of OID on these in-
struments to include in your income, see
Figuring OID on Stripped Bonds and Coupons
in Publication 1212. However, owners of
stripped bonds and coupons should not rely
on the OID shown in Section II of Publication
1212, because the amounts listed in Section
II for stripped bonds or coupons are figured
without reference to the date or price at which
you acquired them.
Stripped tax-exempt obligations. You do
not have to pay tax on OID on any stripped
tax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought
before June 11, 1987. However, if you ac-
quired it after October 22, 1986, you must
accrue OID on it to determine its basis when
you dispose of it. See Original issue discount
(OID) on debt instruments under Stocks and
Bonds in chapter 4.
You may have to pay tax on part of the
OID on stripped tax-exempt bonds or cou-
pons that you bought after June 10, 1987. For
information on figuring the taxable part, see
Tax-Exempt Bonds and Coupons under Fig-
uring OID on Stripped Bonds and Coupons in
Publication 1212.
Market Discount Bonds 
A market discount bond is any bond having
market discount except:
1) Short-term obligations (those with fixed
maturity dates of up to 1 year from the
date of issue), 
2) Tax-exempt obligations that you bought
before May 1, 1993, 
3) U.S. savings bonds, and 
4) Certain installment obligations.
Market discount arises when the value of
a debt obligation decreases after its issue
date, generally because of an increase in in-
terest rates. If you buy a bond on the sec-
ondary market, it may have market discount.
When you buy a market discount bond,
you can choose to accrue the market discount
over the period you own the bond and include
it in your income currently as interest income.
If you do not make this choice, the following
rules generally apply.
1) You must treat any gain when you dis-
pose of the bond as ordinary interest in-
come, up to the amount of the accrued
market discount. See Discounted Debt
Instruments under Capital Gains and
Losses in chapter 4.
2) You must treat any partial payment of
principal on the bond as ordinary interest
income, up to the amount of the accrued
market discount. See Partial principal
payments, later in this discussion.
3) If you borrow money to buy or carry the
bond, your deduction for interest paid on
the debt is limited. See Deferral of inter-
est deduction for market discount bonds
under When To Deduct Investment In-
terest in chapter 3.
Market discount. Market discount is the
amount of the stated redemption price of a
bond at maturity that is more than your basis
in the bond immediately after you acquire it.
You treat market discount as zero if it is less
than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated
redemption price of the bond multiplied by the
number of full years to maturity (after you
acquire the bond).
If a market discount bond also has OID,
the market discount is the sum of the bond's
issue price and the total OID includible in the
gross income of all holders (for a tax-exempt
bond, the total OID that accrued) before you
acquired the bond, reduced by your basis in
the bond immediately after you acquired it.
Bonds acquired at original issue.Gener-
ally, a bond that you acquired at original issue
is not a market discount bond. If your adjusted
basis in a bond is determined by reference to
the adjusted basis of another person who
acquired the bond at original issue, you are
also considered to have acquired it at original
issue.
Exceptions. A bond you acquired at ori-
ginal issue can be a market discount bond if
either of the following is true.
1) Your cost basis in the bond is less than
the bond's issue price.
2) The bond is issued in exchange for a
market discount bond under a plan of
reorganization. (This does not apply if
the bond is issued in exchange for a
market discount bond issued before July
19, 1984, and the terms and interest
rates of both bonds are the same.)
Accrued market discount. The accrued
market discount is figured in one of two ways.
Ratable accrual method. Treat the
market discount as accruing in equal daily
installments during the period you hold the
bond. Figure the daily installments by dividing
the market discount by the number of days
after the date you acquired the bond, up to
and including its maturity date. Multiply the
daily installments by the number of days you
held the bond to figure your accrued market
discount.
Constant yield method.Instead of using
the ratable accrual method, you can choose
to figure the accrued discount using a con-
stant interest rate (the constant yield method).
Make this choice by attaching to your timely
filed return a statement identifying the bond
and stating that you are making a constant
interest rate election. The choice takes effect
on the date you acquired the bond. If you
choose to use this method for any bond, you
cannot change your choice for that bond.
For information about using the constant
yield method, see Figuring OID using the
constant yield method under Debt Instru-
ments Issued After 1984 in Publication 1212.
To use this method to figure market discount
(instead of OID), treat the bond as having
been issued on the date you acquired it. Treat
the amount of your basis (immediately after
you acquired the bond) as the issue price.
Then apply the formula shown in Publication
1212.
Choosing to include market discount in
income currently.You can make this choice
if you have not revoked a prior choice to in-
clude market discount in income currently
within the last 5 calendar years. Make the
choice by attaching to your timely filed return
a statement in which you:
1) State that you have included market
discount in your gross income for the
year under section 1278(b) of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, and 
2) Describe the method you used to figure
the accrued market discount for the year.
Once you make this choice, it will apply to
all market discount bonds that you acquire
during the tax year and in later tax years. You
cannot revoke your choice without the con-
sent of the IRS.
Also see Election To Report All Interest
as OID, later. If you make that election, you
must use the constant yield method.
Effect on basis.You increase the basis
of your bonds by the amount of market dis-
count you include in your income.
Partial principal payments.If you receive
a partial payment of principal on a market
discount bond that you acquired after October
22, 1986, and you did not choose to include
the discount in income currently, you must
treat the payment as ordinary interest income
up to the amount of the bond's accrued mar-
ket discount. Reduce the amount of accrued
market discount reportable as interest at dis-
position by that amount.
You can choose to figure accrued market
discount for this purpose:
1) On the basis of the constant yield
method, described earlier, 
2) In proportion to the accrual of OID for
any accrual period, if the debt instrument
has OID, or 
3) In proportion to the amount of stated in-
terest paid in the accrual period, if the
debt instrument has no OID.
Under method (2) above, figure accrued
market discount for a period by multiplying the
total remaining market discount by a fraction.
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the
OID for the period, and the denominator
(bottom part) is the total remaining OID at the
beginning of the period.
Under method (3) above, figure accrued
market discount for a period by multiplying the
total remaining market discount by a fraction.
The numerator is the stated interest paid in
the accrual period, and the denominator is the
total stated interest remaining to be paid at
the beginning of the accrual period.
Page 14 Chapter 1  Investment Income

Discount on
Short-Term Obligations 
When you buy a short-term obligation (one
with a fixed maturity date of 1 year or less
from the date of issue), other than a tax-
exempt obligation, you can generally choose
to accrue any discount and interest payable
on the obligation and include it in income
currently. If you do not make this choice, the
following rules generally apply.
1) You must treat any gain when you sell,
exchange, or redeem the obligation as
ordinary income, up to the amount of the
ratable share of the discount. See Dis-
counted Debt Instruments under Capital
Gains and Losses in chapter 4.
2) If you borrow money to buy or carry the
obligation, your deduction for interest
paid on the debt is limited. See Deferral
of interest deduction for short-term obli-
gations under When To Deduct Invest-
ment Interest in chapter 3.
Short-term obligations for which no
choice is available. You must include any
discount or interest in current income as it
accrues for any short-term obligation (other
than a tax-exempt obligation) that is:
1) Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer, 
2) Held primarily for sale to customers in
the ordinary course of your trade or
business, 
3) Held by a bank, regulated investment
company, or common trust fund, 
4) Held by certain pass-through entities, 
5) Identified as part of a hedging trans-
action, or 
6) A stripped bond or stripped coupon held
by the person who stripped the bond or
coupon (or by any other person whose
basis in the obligation is determined by
reference to the basis in the hands of
that person).
Effect on basis.Increase the basis of your
obligation by the amount of discount you in-
clude in income currently.
Accrual methods. Figure the accrued dis-
count by using either the ratable accrual
method or the constant yield method dis-
cussed previously in Accrued market discount
under Market Discount Bonds, earlier.
Government obligations.For an obligation
described above that is a short-term govern-
ment obligation, the amount you include in
your income for the current year is the ac-
crued acquisition discount, if any, plus any
other accrued interest payable on the obli-
gation. The acquisition discount is the
stated redemption price at maturity minus
your basis.
If you choose to use the constant yield
method to figure accrued acquisition discount,
treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the
issue price. If you choose to use this method,
you cannot change your choice.
Nongovernment obligations. For an obli-
gation listed above that is not a government
obligation, the amount you include in your in-
come for the current year is the accrued OID,
if any, plus any other accrued interest pay-
able. If you choose the constant yield method
to figure accrued OID, apply it by using the
obligation's issue price.
Choosing to include accrued acquisi-
tion discount instead of OID. You can
choose to report accrued acquisition discount
(defined earlier under Government
obligations) rather than accrued OID on these
short-term obligations. Your choice will apply
to the year for which it is made and to all later
years and cannot be changed without the
consent of the IRS.
You must make your choice by the due
date of your return, including extensions, for
the first year for which you are making the
choice. Attach a statement to your return or
amended return indicating:
1) Your name, address, and social security
number, 
2) The choice you are making and that it is
being made under section 1283(c)(2) of
the Internal Revenue Code, 
3) The period for which the choice is being
made and the obligation to which it ap-
plies, and 
4) Any other information necessary to show
you are entitled to make this choice.
Choosing to include accrued discount and
other interest in current income. If you ac-
quire short-term discount obligations that are
not subject to the rules for current inclusion
in income of the accrued discount or other
interest, you can choose to have those rules
apply. This choice applies to all short-term
obligations you acquire during the year and
in all later years. You cannot change this
choice without the consent of the IRS.
The procedures to use in making this
choice are the same as those described for
choosing to include acquisition discount in-
stead of OID on nongovernment obligations
in current income. However, you should in-
dicate that you are making the choice under
section 1282(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
Also see the following discussion. If you
make the election to report all interest cur-
rently as OID, you must use the constant yield
method.
Election To Report
All Interest as OID
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest
on a debt instrument acquired during the tax
year as OID and include it in income currently.
For purposes of this election, interest includes
stated interest, acquisition discount, OID, de
minimis OID, market discount, de minimis
market discount, and unstated interest as
adjusted by any amortizable bond premium
or acquisition premium. See Treasury Regu-
lation 1.1272–3.
When To Report
Interest Income 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Accrual method 
Cash method 
When to report your interest income depends
on whether you use the cash method or an
accrual method to report income.
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use
the cash method. If you use this method, you
generally report your interest income in the
year in which you actually or constructively
receive it. However, there are special rules for
reporting the discount on certain debt instru-
ments. See U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount
on Debt Instruments, earlier.
Example. On September 1, 1998, you
loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%,
compounded annually. You are not in the
business of lending money. The note stated
that principal and interest would be due on
August 31, 2000. In 2000, you received
$2,508.80 ($2,000 principal and $508.80 in-
terest). If you use the cash method, you must
include in income on your 2000 return the
$508.80 interest you received in that year.
Constructive receipt. You constructively
receive income when it is credited to your
account or made available to you. You do not
need to have physical possession of it. For
example, you are considered to receive in-
terest, dividends, or other earnings on any
deposit or account in a bank, savings and
loan, or similar financial institution, or interest
on life insurance policy dividends left to ac-
cumulate, when they are credited to your ac-
count and subject to your withdrawal. This is
true even if they are not yet entered in your
passbook.
You constructively receive income on the
deposit or account even if you must:
1) Make withdrawals in multiples of even
amounts, 
2) Give a notice to withdraw before making
the withdrawal, 
3) Withdraw all or part of the account to
withdraw the earnings, or 
4) Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, un-
less the interest you are to receive on
an early withdrawal or redemption is
substantially less than the interest pay-
able at maturity. 
Accrual method. If you use an accrual
method, you report your interest income when
you earn it, whether or not you have received
it. Interest is earned over the term of the debt
instrument.
Example. If, in the previous example, you
use an accrual method, you must include the
interest in your income as you earn it. You
would report the interest as follows: 1998,
$80; 1999, $249.60; and 2000, $179.20.
Coupon bonds.  Interest on coupon bonds
is taxable in the year the coupon becomes
due and payable. It does not matter when you
mail the coupon for payment.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

How To Report
Interest Income 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Nominee 
Original issue discount (OID) 
Generally, you report all of your taxable in-
terest income on line 8a, Form 1040; line 8a,
Form 1040A; or line 2, Form 1040EZ.
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your in-
terest income is more than $400. Instead, you
must use Form 1040A or Form 1040.
In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ
if you must use Form 1040, as described
later, or if any of the statements listed under
Schedule B, later, are true.
Form 1040A. You must complete Part I of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) if you file Form
1040A and any of the following are true.
1) Your taxable interest income is more
than $400.
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram (discussed earlier).
3) You received interest from a seller-
financed mortgage, and the buyer used
the property as a home.
4) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-
exempt interest.
5) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.
savings bond interest that includes
amounts you reported before 2000. 
6) You received, as a nominee, interest that
actually belongs to someone else. 
7) You received a Form 1099–INT for in-
terest on frozen deposits.
List each payer's name and the amount of
interest income received from each payer on
line 1. If you received a Form 1099–INT or
Form 1099–OID from a brokerage firm, list
the brokerage firm as the payer.
You cannot use Form 1040A if you must
use Form 1040, as described next.
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 in-
stead of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:
1) You forfeited interest income because
of the early withdrawal of a time deposit,
2) You received or paid accrued interest on
securities transferred between interest
payment dates, 
3) You had a financial account in a foreign
country, unless the combined value of
all foreign accounts was $10,000 or less
during all of 2000 or the accounts were
with certain U.S. military banking facili-
ties,
4) You acquired taxable bonds after 1987
and choose to reduce interest income
from the bonds by any amortizable bond
premium (discussed in chapter 3 under
Bond Premium Amortization), or 
5) You are reporting OID in an amount
more or less than the amount shown on
Form 1099–OID. 
Schedule B. You must complete Part I
of Schedule B (Form 1040) if you file Form
1040 and any of the following apply.
1) Your taxable interest income is more
than $400. 
2) You are claiming the interest exclusion
under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram (discussed earlier). 
3) You had a foreign account. 
4) You received interest from a seller-
financed mortgage, and the buyer used
the property as a home. 
5) You received a Form 1099–INT for tax-
exempt interest. 
6) You received a Form 1099–INT for U.S.
savings bond interest that includes
amounts you reported before 2000. 
7) You received, as a nominee, interest that
actually belongs to someone else. 
8) You received a Form 1099–INT for in-
terest on frozen deposits.
9) You received a Form 1099–INT for in-
terest on a bond that you bought be-
tween interest payment dates. 
10) Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list
is true.
On line 1, Part I, list each payer's name and
the amount received from each. If you re-
ceived a Form 1099–INT or Form 1099–OID
from a brokerage firm, list the brokerage firm
as the payer.
Reporting tax-exempt interest. Report the
total of your tax-exempt interest (such as in-
terest or accrued OID on certain state and
municipal bonds) and exempt-interest divi-
dends from a mutual fund on line 8b of Form
1040A or Form 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ,
print “TEI” in the space to the right of the
words “Form 1040EZ” on line 2. After “TEI,”
show the amount of your tax-exempt interest,
but do not add tax-exempt interest in the total
on Form 1040EZ, line 2.
You should not have received a Form
1099–INT for tax-exempt interest. But if you
did, you must fill in Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)
or Schedule B (Form 1040). See the Sched-
ule 1 or Schedule B instructions for how to
report this. Be sure to also show this tax-
exempt interest on line 8b.
CAUTION
!
Do not report interest from an indi-
vidual retirement arrangement (IRA)
as tax-exempt interest.
Form 1099–INT.  Your taxable interest in-
come, except for interest from U.S. savings
bonds and Treasury obligations, is shown in
box 1 of Form 1099–INT. Add this amount to
any other taxable interest income you re-
ceived. You must report all of your taxable
interest income even if you do not receive a
Form 1099–INT.
If you forfeited interest income because
of the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the
deductible amount will be shown on Form
1099–INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early
withdrawal of savings, later.
Box 3 of Form 1099–INT shows the
amount of interest income you received from
U.S. savings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury
notes, and Treasury bonds. Add the amount
shown in box 3 to any other taxable interest
income you received, unless part of the
amount in box 3 was previously included in
your interest income. If part of the amount
shown in box 3 was previously included in
your interest income, see U.S. savings bond
interest previously reported, later. If you re-
deemed U.S. savings bonds you bought after
1989 and you paid qualified educational ex-
penses, see Interest excluded under the Ed-
ucation Savings Bond Program, later.
Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of
Form 1099–INT will contain an amount if you
were subject to backup withholding. Report
the amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line
7, on Form 1040A, line 36, or on Form 1040,
line 58.
Box 5 of Form 1099–INT shows invest-
ment expenses you may be able to deduct
as an itemized deduction. Chapter 3 dis-
cusses investment expenses.
If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of
Form 1099–INT, you must file Form 1040.
You may be able to take a credit for the
amount shown in box 6 (foreign tax paid) un-
less you deduct this amount on Schedule A
of Form 1040 as “Other taxes.” To take the
credit, you may have to file Form 1116, For-
eign Tax Credit. For more information, see
Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-
viduals.
Form 1099–OID.  The taxable OID on a dis-
counted obligation for the part of the year you
owned it is shown in box 1 of Form
1099–OID. Include this amount in your total
taxable interest income. But see Refiguring
OID shown on Form 1099–OID under Original
Issue Discount (OID), earlier.
You must report all taxable OID even if
you do not receive a Form 1099–OID.
Box 2 of Form 1099–OID shows any tax-
able interest on the obligation other than OID.
Add this amount to the OID shown in box 1
and include the result in your total taxable
income.
If you forfeited interest or principal on the
obligation because of an early withdrawal, the
deductible amount will be shown in box 3.
See Penalty on early withdrawal of savings,
later.
Box 4 of Form 1099–OID will contain an
amount if you were subject to backup with-
holding. Report the amount from box 4 on
Form 1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 36,
or on Form 1040, line 58.
Box 7 of Form 1099–OID shows invest-
ment expenses you may be able to deduct
as an itemized deduction. Chapter 3 dis-
cusses investment expenses.
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported.  If you received a Form 1099–INT for
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may
show interest you do not have to report. See
Form 1099–INT for U.S. savings bond interest
under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.
On line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form
1040), or on line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form
1040A), report all the interest shown on your
Form 1099–INT. Then follow these steps.
1) Several lines above line 2, enter a sub-
total of all interest listed on line 1.
2) Below the subtotal write “U.S. Savings
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and
enter amounts previously reported or in-
terest accrued before you received the
bond.
3) Subtract these amounts from the sub-
total and enter the result on line 2.
Page 16 Chapter 1  Investment Income

CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
Interest income not included in box 31PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
$
Early withdrawal penalty Interest on U.S. Savings
Bonds and Treas. obligations
32RECIPIENT’S name
$$
Federal income tax withheld4Street address (including apt. no.)
$
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7Foreign tax paid6City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(Keep for your records.)
Form 1099-INT
Investment expenses5
$
2000
Example 1. Your parents bought U.S.
savings bonds for you when you were a child.
The bonds were issued in your name, and the
interest on the bonds was reported each year
as it accrued. (See Choice to report interest
each year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)
In April 2000, you redeemed one of the
bonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond
was originally issued in March 1982. When
you redeemed the bond, you received
$1,826.40 for it.
The Form 1099–INT you received shows
interest income of $1,326.40. However, since
the interest on your savings bonds was re-
ported yearly, you need only include the
$53.20 interest that accrued from January
2000 to April 2000.
You received no other taxable interest for
2000. You file Form 1040A.
On line 1, Part I of Schedule 1 (Form
1040A), enter your interest income as shown
on Form 1099–INT — $1,326.40. (If you had
other taxable interest income, you would en-
ter it next and then enter a subtotal, as de-
scribed earlier, before going to the next step.)
Several lines above line 2, write “U.S.
Savings Bond Interest Previously Reported”
and enter $1,273.20 ($1,326.40 − $53.20).
Subtract $1,273.20 from $1,326.40 and write
$53.20 on line 2. Enter $53.20 on line 4 of
Schedule 1 and on line 8a of Form 1040A.
Example 2. Your uncle died and left you
a $1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the
bond when it reaches maturity.
Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so
$500 of the amount you receive upon re-
demption is interest income. Your uncle's ex-
ecutor included in your uncle's final return
$200 of the interest that had accrued at the
time of your uncle's death. You have to in-
clude only $300 in your income.
The bank where you redeem the bond
gives you a Form 1099–INT showing interest
income of $500. You also receive a Form
1099–INT showing taxable interest income
of $300 from your savings account.
You file Form 1040 and you complete
Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list
the $500 and $300 interest amounts shown
on your Forms 1099. Several lines above line
2, you put a subtotal of $800. Below this
subtotal, write “U.S. Savings Bond Interest
Previously Reported” and enter the $200 in-
terest included in your uncle's final return.
Subtract the $200 from the subtotal and write
$600 on line 2. You then complete the rest
of the form.
Worksheet for savings bonds distrib-
uted from a retirement or profit-sharing
plan. If you cashed a savings bond acquired
in a taxable distribution from a retirement or
profit-sharing plan (as discussed under U.S.
Savings Bonds, earlier), your interest income
does not include the interest accrued before
the distribution and taxed as a distribution
from the plan.
Use the worksheet below to figure the
amount you subtract from the interest
shown on Form 1099–INT.
Your employer should tell you the value
of each bond on the date it was distributed.
Example. You received a distribution of
series EE U.S. savings bonds in January
1999 from your company's profit-sharing plan.
In April 2000, you redeemed a $100 series
EE bond that was part of the distribution you
received in 1999. You received $93.04 for the
bond. The company told you that the bond
was bought in May 1989 for $50 and that the
value of the bond at the time of distribution in
1999 was $87.68. (This is the amount you
included on your 1999 return.) The bank gave
you a Form 1099–INT that shows $43.04 in-
terest (the total interest from the date the
bond was purchased to the date of redemp-
tion). Since a part of the interest was included
in your income in 1999, you need to include
in your 2000 income only the interest that
accrued after the bond was distributed to you.
On line 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040), in-
clude all the interest shown on your Form
1099–INT as well as any other taxable inter-
est income you received. Several lines above
line 2, put a subtotal of all interest listed on
line 1. Below this subtotal write “U.S. Savings
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and enter
the amount figured on the worksheet below.
Subtract $37.68 from the subtotal and enter
the result on line 2 of Schedule B. You then
complete the rest of the form.
Interest excluded under the Education
Savings Bond Program. Use Form 8815,
to figure your interest exclusion when you
redeem qualified savings bonds and pay
qualified higher educational expenses during
the same year.
For more information on the exclusion and
qualified higher educational expenses, see
the earlier discussion under Education
Savings Bond Program.
You must show your total interest from
qualified savings bonds that you cashed dur-
ing 2000 on line 6 of Form 8815 and on line
1 of either Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or
Schedule B (Form 1040). After completing
Form 8815, enter the result from line 14
(Form 8815) on line 3 of Schedule 1 (Form
1040A) or line 3 of Schedule B (Form 1040).
A. Write the amount of cash received upon
redemption of the bond ........................ $93.04
B. Write the value of the bond at the time
of distribution by the plan ..................... 87.68
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the
amount on line A. This is the amount
of interest accrued on the bond since it
was distributed by the plan .................. $5.36
A. Write the amount of cash received upon
redemption of the bond ........................D. Write the amount of interest shown on
your Form 1099–INT ............................ $43.04B. Write the value of the bond at the time
of distribution by the plan .....................E. Subtract the amount on line C from the
amount on line D. This is the amount
you include in “U.S. Savings Bond In-
terest Previously Reported” .................. $37.68
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the
amount on line A. This is the amount
of interest accrued on the bond since it
was distributed by the plan ..................
D. Write the amount of interest shown on
your Form 1099–INT ............................
E. Subtract the amount on line C from the
amount on line D. This is the amount
you include in “U.S. Savings Bond In-
terest Previously Reported” ..................
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Interest on seller-financed mortgage.  If an
individual buys his or her home from you in
a sale that you finance, you must report the
buyer's name, address, and social security
number on line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form 1040A)
or line 1 of Schedule B (Form 1040). If you
do not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
The buyer may have to pay a $50 penalty if
he or she does not give you this information.
You must also give your name, address,
and social security number (or employer
identification number) to the buyer. If you do
not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty.
Frozen deposits.  Even if you receive a Form
1099–INT for interest on deposits that you
could not withdraw at the end of 2000, you
must exclude these amounts from your gross
income. (See Interest income on frozen de-
posits under Interest Income, earlier.) Do not
include this income on line 8a of Form 1040A
or Form 1040. In Part I of Schedule 1 (Form
1040A) or Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040),
include the full amount of interest shown on
your Form 1099–INT on line 1. Several lines
above line 2, put a subtotal of all interest in-
come. Below this subtotal, write “Frozen
Deposits” and show the amount of interest
that you are excluding. Subtract this amount
from the subtotal and write the result on line
2.
Accrued interest on bonds.  If you received
a Form 1099–INT that reflects accrued inter-
est paid on a bond you bought between in-
terest payment dates, include the full amount
shown as interest on the Form 1099–INT on
line 1, Part I of Schedule B (Form 1040).
Then, below a subtotal of all interest income
listed, write “Accrued Interest” and the
amount of accrued interest. Subtract that
amount from the interest income subtotal.
Enter the result on line 2 and also on Form
1040, line 8a.
For more information, see Bonds Sold
Between Interest Dates, earlier.
Nominee distributions.  If you received a
Form 1099–INT that includes an amount you
received as a nominee for the real owner,
report the full amount shown as interest on
the Form 1099–INT on line 1, Part I of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B
(Form 1040). Then, below a subtotal of all
interest income listed, write “Nominee Distri-
bution” and the amount that actually belongs
to someone else. Subtract that amount from
the interest income subtotal. Enter the result
on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form 1040A
or 1040.
File Form 1099–INT with the IRS.If you
received interest as a nominee in 2000, you
must file a Form 1099–INT for that interest
with the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099–INT
with a Form 1096, Annual Summary and
Transmittal of U.S. Information Returns, to
your Internal Revenue Service Center by
February 28, 2001 (April 2, 2001 if filing
electronically). Give the actual owner of the
interest Copy B of the Form 1099–INT by
January 31, 2001. On Form 1099–INT, you
should be listed as the “Payer.” Prepare one
Form 1099–INT for each other owner and
show that person as the “Recipient.” How-
ever, you do not have to file Form 1099–INT
to show payments for your spouse. For more
information about the reporting requirements
and the penalties for failure to file (or furnish)
certain information returns, see the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
W2 –G.
Similar rules apply to OID reported to you
as a nominee on Form 1099–OID. You must
file a Form 1099–OID with Form 1096 to show
the proper distributions of the OID.
Example. You and your sister have a joint
savings account that paid $1,500 interest for
2000. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds
in this account, and you and she have agreed
to share the yearly interest income in propor-
tion to the amount that each of you has in-
vested. Because your social security number
was given to the bank, you received a Form
1099–INT for 2000 that includes the interest
income earned belonging to your sister. This
amount is $450, or 30% of the total interest
of $1,500.
You must give your sister a Form
1099–INT by January 31, 2001, showing
$450 of interest income that she earned for
2000. You must also send a copy of the
nominee Form 1099–INT, along with Form
1096, to the Internal Revenue Service Center
by February 28, 2001. Show your own name,
address, and social security number as that
of the “Payer” on the Form 1099–INT. Show
your sister's name, address, and social se-
curity number in the blocks provided for
identification of the “Recipient.”
When you prepare your own federal in-
come tax return, report the total amount of
interest income, $1,500, on line 1, Part I of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or line 1, Part I of
Schedule B (Form 1040), and identify the
name of the bank that paid this interest. Show
the amount belonging to your sister, $450, as
a subtraction from a subtotal of all interest on
Schedule 1 (or Schedule B) and identify this
subtraction as a “Nominee Distribution.” (Your
sister will report the $450 of interest income
on her own tax return, if she has to file a re-
turn, and identify you as the payer of that
amount.)
Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. 
If you are reporting OID in an amount greater
or less than the amount shown on Form
1099–OID or other written statement (such
as for a REMIC regular interest), include the
full amount of OID shown on your Form
1099–OID or other statement on line 1, Part
I of Schedule B (Form 1040). If the OID to be
reported is less than the amount shown on
Form 1099–OID, show the OID you do not
have to report below a subtotal of the interest
and OID listed. Identify the amount as “OID
Adjustment” and subtract it from the subtotal.
If the OID to be reported is greater than the
amount shown on Form 1099–OID, show the
additional OID below the subtotal. Identify the
amount as “OID Adjustment” and add it to the
subtotal.
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. If
you withdraw funds from a time-savings or
other deferred interest account before matu-
rity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form
1099–INT or similar statement given to you
by the financial institution will show the total
amount of interest in box 1 and will show the
penalty separately in box 2. You must include
in income all the interest shown in box 1. You
can deduct the penalty on line 30, Form 1040.
Deduct the entire penalty even if it is more
than your interest income.
Dividends and
Other Corporate
Distributions 
Dividends are distributions of money, stock,
or other property paid to you by a corporation.
You also may receive dividends through a
partnership, an estate, a trust, or an associ-
ation that is taxed as a corporation. However,
some amounts you receive that are called
dividends are actually interest income. (See
Dividends that are actually interest under
Taxable Interest —  General, earlier.)
You may receive any of the following kinds
of distributions.
 Ordinary dividends. 
 Capital gain distributions.
 Nontaxable distributions.
Most distributions that you receive are paid in
cash (check). However, you may receive
more stock, stock rights, other property, or
services.
Form 1099–DIV.  Most corporations use
Form  1099–DIV, Dividends and Distributions,
to show you the distributions you received
from them during the year. Keep this form
with your records. You do not have to attach
it to your tax return. Even if you do not re-
ceive Form 1099–DIV, you must still report
all of your taxable dividend income.
Nominees.  If someone receives distribu-
tions as a nominee for you, that person will
give you a Form 1099–DIV, which will show
distributions received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099–DIV that in-
cludes amounts belonging to another person,
see Nominees under How To Report Dividend
Income, later, for more information.
Form 1099–MISC. Certain substitute pay-
ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt in-
terest that are received by a broker on your
behalf must be reported to you on Form
1099–MISC, Miscellaneous Income, or a
similar statement. See also Reporting Sub-
stitute Payments under Short Sales in chapter
4.
Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. 
If you receive a Form 1099 that shows an
incorrect amount (or other incorrect informa-
tion), you should ask the issuer for a cor-
rected form. The new Form 1099 you receive
will be marked “CORRECTED.”
Dividends on stock sold.  If stock is sold,
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a
dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the
owner of record (usually the payee shown on
the dividend check) must include the dividend
in income.
Dividends received in January.  If a regu-
lated investment company (mutual fund) or
real estate investment trust (REIT) declares
a dividend (including any exempt-interest
dividend) in October, November, or Decem-
ber payable to shareholders of record on a
date in one of those months but actually pays
the dividend during January of the next cal-
endar year, you are considered to have re-
ceived the dividend on December 31. You
report the dividend in the year it was declared.
Page 18 Chapter 1  Investment Income

Ordinary Dividends 
Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most
common type of distribution from a corpo-
ration. They are paid out of the earnings and
profits of a corporation and are ordinary in-
come to you. This means they are not capital
gains. You can assume that any dividend you
receive on common or preferred stock is an
ordinary dividend unless the paying corpo-
ration tells you otherwise. Ordinary dividends
will be shown in box 1 of the Form 1099–DIV
you receive.
Dividends used to buy more stock. The
corporation in which you own stock may have
a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan lets
you choose to use your dividends to buy
(through an agent) more shares of stock in
the corporation instead of receiving the divi-
dends in cash. If you are a member of this
type of plan and you use your dividends to
buy more stock at a price equal to its fair
market value, you still must report the divi-
dends as income.
If you are a member of a dividend rein-
vestment plan that lets you buy more stock
at a price less than its fair market value, you
must report as dividend income the fair mar-
ket value of the additional stock on the divi-
dend payment date.
You also must report as dividend income
any service charge subtracted from your cash
dividends before the dividends are used to
buy the additional stock. But you may be able
to deduct the service charge. See Expenses
of Producing Income in chapter 3.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, you
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock
at a price less than fair market value. If you
choose to do this, you must report as dividend
income the difference between the cash you
invest and the fair market value of the stock
you buy. When figuring this amount, use the
fair market value of the stock on the dividend
payment date.
Money market funds.  Report amounts you
receive from money market funds as dividend
income. Money market funds are a type of
mutual fund and should not be confused with
bank money market accounts that pay inter-
est.
Capital Gain Distributions 
Capital gain distributions (also called capital
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to
your account by regulated investment
companies (commonly called mutual
funds) and real estate investment trusts
(REITs). They will be shown in box 2a of the
Form 1099–DIV you receive from the mutual
fund or REIT.
Report capital gain distributions as long-
term capital gains, regardless of how long you
owned your shares in the mutual fund or
REIT. See Capital gain distributions under
How To Report Dividend Income, later in this
chapter.
If you receive capital gain distributions on
mutual fund or REIT stock you hold 6 months
or less and sell at a loss, see Loss on mutual
fund or REIT stock held 6 months or less
under Holding Period in chapter 4.
Undistributed capital gains of mutual
funds and REITs.  Some mutual funds and
REITs keep their long-term capital gains and
pay tax on them. You must treat your share
of these gains as distributions, even though
you did not actually receive them. However,
they are not included on Form 1099–DIV.
Instead, they are reported to you on Form
2439,  Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed
Long-Term Capital Gains.
The Form 2439 will also show how much,
if any, of the undistributed capital gains is
unrecaptured section 1250 gain or gain from
qualified small business stock (section 1202
gain). (For information about these terms,
see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.)
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a
of Form 2439) as long-term capital gains in
column (f) on line 11 of Schedule D (Form
1040). Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured
Section 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Sched-
ule D instructions the part reported to you as
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. For any gain
on qualified small business stock, follow the
reporting instructions under Section 1202
Exclusion in chapter 4.
The tax paid on these gains by the mutual
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.
You take credit for this tax by including it on
line 64, Form 1040, and checking box a on
that line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your
return, and keep Copy C for your records.
Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT,
by the difference between the gain you report
and the credit you claim for the tax paid.
Nontaxable Distributions 
You may receive a return of capital or a tax-
free distribution of more shares of stock or
stock rights. These distributions are not
treated the same as ordinary dividends or
capital gain distributions.
Return of Capital 
A return of capital is a distribution that is not
paid out of the earnings and profits of a cor-
poration. It is a return of your investment in
the stock of the company. You should receive
a Form 1099–DIV or other statement from the
corporation showing you what part of the
distribution is a return of capital. On Form
1099–DIV, a nontaxable return of capital will
be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such
a statement, you report the distribution as an
ordinary dividend.
Basis adjustment. A return of capital re-
duces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.
If you buy stock in a corporation in different
lots at different times, and you cannot defi-
nitely identify the shares subject to the return
of capital, reduce the basis of your earliest
purchases first.
When the basis of your stock has been
reduced to zero, report any additional return
of capital that you receive as a capital gain.
Whether you report it as a long-term or
short-term capital gain depends on how long
you have held the stock. See Holding Period
in chapter 4.
Example. You bought stock in 1988 for
$100. In 1990, you received a return of capital
of $80. You did not include this amount in
your income, but you reduced the basis of
your stock to $20. You received a return of
capital of $30 in 2000. The first $20 of this
amount reduced your basis to zero. You re-
port the other $10 as a long-term capital gain
for 2000. You must report as a long-term
capital gain any return of capital you receive
on this stock in later years.
Liquidating distributions. Liquidating distri-
butions, sometimes called liquidating divi-
dends, are distributions you receive during a
partial or complete liquidation of a corpo-
ration. These distributions are, at least in part,
one form of a return of capital. They may be
paid in one or more installments. You will re-
ceive Form 1099–DIV from the corporation
showing you the amount of the liquidating
distribution in box 8 or 9.
Any liquidating distribution you receive is
not taxable to you until you have recovered
the basis of your stock. After the basis of your
stock has been reduced to zero, you must
report the liquidating distribution as a capital
gain (except in certain instances involving
collapsible corporations). Whether you report
the gain as a long-term or short-term capital
gain depends on how long you have held the
stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.
Stock acquired at different times.If you
acquired stock in the same corporation in
more than one transaction, you own more
than one block of stock in the corporation. If
you receive distributions from the corporation
in complete liquidation, you must divide the
distribution among the blocks of stock you
own in the following proportion: the number
of shares in that block over the total number
of shares you own. Divide distributions in
partial liquidation among that part of the stock
that is redeemed in the partial liquidation. Af-
ter the basis of a block of stock is reduced to
zero, you must report the part of any later
distribution for that block as a capital gain.
Distributions less than basis.If the total
liquidating distributions you receive are less
than the basis of your stock, you may have
a capital loss. You can report a capital loss
only after you have received the final distri-
bution in liquidation that results in the re-
demption or cancellation of the stock.
Whether you report the loss as a long-term
or short-term capital loss depends on how
long you held the stock. See Holding Period
in chapter 4.
Distributions of Stock
and Stock Rights 
Distributions by a corporation of its own stock
are commonly known as stock dividends.
Stock rights (also known as “stock options”)
are distributions by a corporation of rights to
acquire the corporation's stock. Generally,
stock dividends and stock rights are not tax-
able to you, and you do not report them on
your return.
Taxable stock dividends and stock rights.
Distributions of stock dividends and stock
rights are taxable to you if any of the following
apply.
1) You or any other shareholder has the
choice to receive cash or other property
instead of stock or stock rights.
2) The distribution gives cash or other
property to some shareholders and an
increase in the percentage interest in the
corporation's assets or earnings and
profits to other shareholders.
3) The distribution is in convertible pre-
ferred stock and has the same result as
in (2).
4) The distribution gives preferred stock to
some common stock shareholders and
common stock to other common stock
shareholders.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

5) The distribution is on preferred stock.
(The distribution, however, is not taxable
if it is an increase in the conversion ratio
of convertible preferred stock made
solely to take into account a stock divi-
dend, stock split, or similar event that
would otherwise result in reducing the
conversion right.)
The term “stock” includes rights to acquire
stock, and the term “shareholder” includes a
holder of rights or convertible securities.
If you receive taxable stock dividends or
stock rights, include their fair market value at
the time of the distribution in your income.
Constructive distributions.You must treat
certain transactions that increase your
proportionate interest in the earnings and
profits or assets of a corporation as if they
were distributions of stock or stock rights.
These constructive distributions are taxable
if they have the same result as a distribution
described in (2), (3), (4), or (5) of the above
discussion.
This treatment applies to a change in your
stock's conversion ratio or redemption price,
a difference between your stock's redemption
price and issue price, a redemption that is not
treated as a sale or exchange of your stock,
and any other transaction having a similar
effect on your interest in the corporation.
Preferred stock redeemable at a pre-
mium.  If you hold preferred stock having a
redemption price higher than its issue price,
the difference (the redemption premium)
generally is taxable as a constructive distri-
bution of additional stock on the preferred
stock.
For stock issued before October 10, 1990,
you include the redemption premium in your
income ratably over the period during which
the stock cannot be redeemed. For stock is-
sued after October 9, 1990, you include the
redemption premium on the basis of its eco-
nomic accrual over the period during which
the stock cannot be redeemed, as if it were
original issue discount on a debt instrument.
See Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier in
this chapter.
The redemption premium is not a con-
structive distribution, and therefore is not
taxable, in the following situations.
1) The stock was issued before October 10,
1990 (before December 20, 1995, if
redeemable solely at the option of the
issuer), and the redemption premium is
“reasonable.” (For stock issued before
October 10, 1990, only the part of the
redemption premium that is not “reason-
able” is a constructive distribution.) The
redemption premium is reasonable if it
is not more than 10% of the issue price
on stock not redeemable for 5 years from
the issue date or is in the nature of a
penalty for making a premature re-
demption.
2) The stock was issued after October 9,
1990 (after December 19, 1995, if
redeemable solely at the option of the
issuer), and the redemption premium is
“de minimis.” The redemption premium
is de minimis if it is less than one-fourth
of 1% (.0025) of the redemption price
multiplied by the number of full years
from the date of issue to the date
redeemable.
3) The stock was issued after October 9,
1990, and must be redeemed at a
specified time or is redeemable at your
option, but the redemption is unlikely
because it is subject to a contingency
outside your control (not including the
possibility of default, insolvency, etc.).
4) The stock was issued after December
19, 1995, and is redeemable solely at
the option of the issuer, but the re-
demption premium is in the nature of a
penalty for premature redemption or re-
demption is not more likely than not to
occur. The redemption will be treated
under a “safe harbor” as not more likely
than not to occur if all of the following
are true.
a) You and the issuer are not related
under the rules discussed in chap-
ter 4 under Losses on Sales or
Trades of Property, substituting
“20%” for “50%.”
b) There are no plans, arrangements,
or agreements that effectively re-
quire or are intended to compel the
issuer to redeem the stock.
c) The redemption would not reduce
the stock's yield.
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair
market value when distributed. If you receive
stock or stock rights that are not taxable to
you, see Stocks and Bonds in chapter 4 for
information on how to figure their basis.
Fractional shares.  You may not own
enough stock in a corporation to receive a full
share of stock if the corporation declares a
stock dividend. However, with the approval
of the shareholders, the corporation may set
up a plan in which fractional shares are not
issued, but instead are sold, and the cash
proceeds are given to the shareholders. Any
cash you receive for fractional shares under
such a plan is treated as an amount realized
on the sale of the fractional shares. You must
determine your gain or loss and report it as
a capital gain or loss on Schedule D (Form
1040). Your gain or loss is the difference be-
tween the cash you receive and the basis of
the fractional shares sold.
Example. You own one share of common
stock that you bought on January 3, 1992, for
$100. The corporation declared a common
stock dividend of 5% on June 30, 2000. The
fair market value of the stock at the time the
stock dividend was declared was $200. You
were paid $10 for the fractional-share stock
dividend under a plan described in the above
paragraph. You figure your gain or loss as
follows:
Because you had held the share of stock
for more than 1 year at the time the stock
dividend was declared, your gain on the stock
dividend is a long-term capital gain.
Scrip dividends.A corporation that de-
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip
certificate that entitles you to a fractional
share. The certificate is generally nontaxable
when you receive it. If you choose to have the
corporation sell the certificate for you and give
you the proceeds, your gain or loss is the
difference between the proceeds and the part
of your basis in the corporation's stock that is
allocated to the certificate.
However, if you receive a scrip certificate
that you can choose to redeem for cash in-
stead of stock, the certificate is taxable when
you receive it. You must include its fair market
value in income on the date you receive it.
Other Distributions
You may receive any of the following distri-
butions during the year.
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest
dividends you receive from a regulated in-
vestment company (mutual fund) are not in-
cluded in your taxable income. You will re-
ceive a notice from the mutual fund telling you
the amount of the exempt-interest dividends
you received. Exempt-interest dividends are
not shown on Form 1099–DIV or Form
1099–INT.
If you receive exempt-interest dividends
on stock you hold 6 months or less and sell
at a loss, see Loss on mutual fund or REIT
stock held 6 months or less under Holding
Period in chapter 4.
Information reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends are not
taxable, you must show them on your tax re-
turn if you have to file a return. This is an
information reporting requirement and does
not change the exempt-interest dividends to
taxable income. See Reporting tax-exempt
interest under How To Report Interest In-
come, earlier.
Alternative minimum tax treatment.
Exempt-interest dividends paid from specified
private activity bonds may be subject to the
alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 and
its instructions for more information.
Dividends on insurance policies.  Insur-
ance policy dividends that the insurer keeps
and uses to pay your premiums are not tax-
able. However, you must report as taxable
interest income the interest that is paid or
credited on dividends left with the insurance
company.
 If dividends on an insurance contract
(other than a modified endowment contract)
are distributed to you, they are a partial return
of the premiums you paid. Do not include
them in your gross income until they are more
than the total of all net premiums you paid for
the contract. (For information on the treatment
of a distribution from a modified endowment
contract, see Distribution Before Annuity
Starting Date From a Nonqualified Plan under
Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments in Publi-
cation 575, Pension and Annuity Income.)
Report any taxable distributions on insurance
policies on line 16b (Form 1040) or line 12b
(Form 1040A).
Dividends on veterans' insurance.Divi-
dends you receive on veterans' insurance
policies are not taxable. In addition, interest
on dividends left with the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs is not taxable.
Fair market value of old stock ................... $200.00
Fair market value of stock dividend (cash
received) .................................................... + 10.00
Fair market value of old stock and stock
dividend ...................................................... $210.00
Basis (cost) of old stock after the stock
dividend
(($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ............................. $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend
(($10 ÷ $210) × $100) ............................... + 4.76
Total ........................................................... $100.00
Cash received ............................................ $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend ....................− 4.76
Gain $5.24
Page 20 Chapter 1  Investment Income

Patronage dividends.Generally, patronage
dividends you receive in money from a coop-
erative organization are included in your in-
come.
Do not include in your income patronage
dividends you receive on:
1) Property bought for your personal use,
or 
2) Capital assets or depreciable property
bought for use in your business. But you
must reduce the basis (cost) of the items
bought. If the dividend is more than the
adjusted basis of the assets, you must
report the excess as income. 
These rules are the same whether the
cooperative paying the dividend is a taxable
or tax-exempt cooperative.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.Do not
report these amounts as dividends. Instead,
report these amounts on line 21 of Form
1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form
1040EZ.
How To Report
Dividend Income 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Nominee
Restricted stock
Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
Form 1040A to report your dividend income.
Report the total of your ordinary dividend in-
come on line 9 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
If you receive capital gain distributions,
you may be able to use Form 1040A or you
may have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain
distributions, later. If you receive nontaxable
distributions required to be reported as capital
gains, you must use Form 1040. You cannot
use Form 1040EZ if you receive any dividend
income.
Form 1099–DIV.  If you owned stock on
which you received $10 or more in dividends
and other distributions, you should receive a
Form 1099–DIV. Even if you do not receive
a Form 1099–DIV, you must report all of your
taxable dividend income.
See Form 1099–DIV for more information
on how to report dividend income.
Form 1040A. You must complete Part II of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) and attach it to
your Form 1040A, if:
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Form
1099–DIV) are more than $400, or 
2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
that actually belong to someone else. 
List on line 5 each payer's name and the
amount of ordinary dividends you received. If
you received a Form 1099–DIV from a bro-
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the
payer.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts
listed on line 5. Also enter this total on line
9, Form 1040A.
Form 1040. You must fill in Part II of
Schedule B and attach it to your Form 1040,
if:
1) Your ordinary dividends (box 1 of Form
1099–DIV) are more than $400, or 
2) You received, as a nominee, dividends
that actually belong to someone else. 
If your ordinary dividends are more than
$400, you must also complete Part III of
Schedule B.
List on line 5, Part II of Schedule B, each
payer's name and the amount of ordinary
dividends you received. If your securities are
held by a brokerage firm (in “street name”),
list the name of the brokerage firm that is
shown on Form 1099–DIV as the payer. If
your stock is held by a nominee who is the
owner of record, and the nominee credited
or paid you dividends on the stock, show the
name of the nominee and the dividends you
received or for which you were credited.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts
listed on line 5. (However, if you hold stock
as a nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also
enter this total on line 9, Form 1040.
Dividends received on restricted stock.
Restricted stock is stock that you get from
your employer for services you perform and
that is nontransferable and subject to a sub-
stantial risk of forfeiture. You do not have to
include the value of the stock in your income
when you receive it. However, if you get divi-
dends on restricted stock, you must include
them in your income as wages, not dividends.
See Restricted Property in Publication 525 for
information on restricted stock dividends.
Your employer should include these divi-
dends in the wages shown on your Form
W–2. If you also get a Form 1099–DIV for
these dividends, list them on line 5 of
Schedule B (Form 1040), with the other divi-
dends you received. Enter a subtotal of all
your dividend income several lines above line
6. Below the subtotal, write “Dividends on re-
stricted stock reported as wages on line 7,
Form 1040,” and enter the amount of the
dividends included in your wages on line 7,
Form 1040. Subtract this amount from the
subtotal and enter the result on line 6, Part II
of Schedule B.
Election.You can choose to include the
value of restricted stock in gross income as
pay for services. If you make this choice, re-
port the dividends on the stock like any other
dividends. List them on line 5, Part II of
Schedule B, along with your other dividends
(if the amount of ordinary dividends received
from all sources is more than $400). If you
receive both a Form 1099–DIV and a Form
W–2 showing these dividends, do not include
the dividends in your wages reported on line
7, Form 1040. Attach a statement to your
Form 1040 explaining why the amount shown
on line 7 of your Form 1040 is different from
the amount shown on your Form W–2.
Independent contractor.If you received
restricted stock for services as an independ-
ent contractor, the rules in the previous dis-
cussion apply. Generally, you must treat
dividends you receive on the stock as income
from self-employment.
Capital gain distributions. How to report
capital gain distributions depends on whether
you have any other capital gains or losses. If
you do, report capital gain distributions (box
2a of Form 1099–DIV) in column (f) of line
13, Part II of Schedule D (Form 1040). If you
do not have any other capital gains or losses,
you may be able to report your capital gain
distributions directly on line 13 of Form 1040
or line 10 of Form 1040A. In either case, see
Reporting Capital Gains and Losses in chap-
ter 4 for more information.
The mutual fund or real estate investment
trust (REIT) making the distribution should tell
you how much of it is unrecaptured section
1250 gain (box 2c) and how much is section
1202 gain (box 2d). (For information about
these terms, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in
chapter 4.)
Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured
Section 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Sched-
ule D instructions the part reported to you as
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. If you have
a gain on qualified small business stock
(section 1202 gain), follow the reporting in-
structions under Section 1202 Exclusion in
chapter 4.
Nontaxable (return of capital) distribu-
tions. Report return of capital distributions
(box 3 of Form 1099–DIV) only after your
basis in the stock has been reduced to zero.
After the basis of your stock has been re-
duced to zero, you must show this amount
on line 1, Part I of Schedule D, if you held the
stock 1 year or less. Show it on line 8, Part
II of Schedule D, if you held the stock for more
than 1 year. Write “Dividend R.O.C. Exceed-
ing Basis” in column (a) of Schedule D and
the name of the company. Report your gain
in column (f). Your gain is the amount of the
distribution that is more than your basis in the
stock.
Nominees.  If you received ordinary divi-
dends as a nominee (that is, the dividends
are in your name but actually belong to
someone else), include them on line 5 of
Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B
(Form 1040). Several lines above line 6, put
a subtotal of all dividend income listed on line
5. Below this subtotal, write “Nominee Distri-
butions” and show the amounts received as
a nominee. Subtract the total of your nominee
distributions from the subtotal. Enter the re-
sult on line 6.
File Form 1099–DIV with the IRS. If you
received dividends as a nominee in 2000, you
must file a Form 1099–DIV for those divi-
dends with the IRS. Send the Form 1099–DIV
with a Form 1096, Annual Summary and
Transmittal of U.S. Information Returns, to
your Internal Revenue Service Center by
February 28, 2001 (April 2, 2001 if filing
electronically). Give the actual owner of the
dividends Copy B of the Form 1099–DIV by
January 31, 2001. On Form 1099–DIV, you
should be listed as the “Payer.” The other
owner should be listed as the “Recipient.” You
do not, however, have to file a Form
1099–DIV to show payments for your spouse.
For more information about the reporting re-
quirements and the penalties for failure to file
(or furnish) certain information returns, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099,
1098, 5498, and W–2G.
Liquidating distributions.  If you receive a
liquidating distribution on stock, the corpo-
ration will give you a Form 1099–DIV showing
the amount of the liquidating distribution in
boxes 8 and 9. 
For a discussion of the treatment of liqui-
dating distributions, see Return of Capital
under Nontaxable Distributions, earlier in this
chapter.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0110
Dividends and
Distributions
RECIPIENT’S identification numberPAYER’S Federal identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (optional)
Form 1099-DIV Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue Service
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(Keep for your records.)
Form 1099-DIV
Federal income tax withheld4
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
$
28% rate gain2b
$
Section 1202 gain2d
$
Cash liquidation distr.8
$
$
Foreign tax paid6
$
Ordinary dividends1
2c Unrecap. sec. 1250 gain
$
3 Nontaxable distributions
$
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation distr.9
$
7 Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
2000
Stripped
Preferred Stock
If the dividend rights are stripped from
certain preferred stock, the holder of the
stripped preferred stock may have to include
amounts in income equal to the amounts that
would have been included if the stock were
a bond with original issue discount (OID).
Stripped preferred stock defined.Stripped
preferred stock is any stock that meets both
of the following tests.
1) There has been a separation in owner-
ship between the stock and any dividend
on the stock that has not become pay-
able. 
2) The stock: 
a) Is limited and preferred as to divi-
dends, 
b) Does not participate in corporate
growth to any significant extent, and
c) Has a fixed redemption price.
Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped
preferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must
include certain amounts in your gross income
while you hold the stock. These amounts are
ordinary income. They are equal to the
amounts you would have included in gross
income if the stock were a bond that:
1) Was issued on the purchase date of the
stock, and 
2) Has OID equal to: 
a) The redemption price for the stock,
minus 
b) The price at which you bought the
stock.
Report these amounts as other income on
line 21 of Form 1040. For information about
OID, see Original Issue Discount (OID), ear-
lier.
This treatment also applies to you if you
acquire the stock in such a way (for example,
by gift) that your basis in the stock is deter-
mined by using a buyer's basis.
Treatment of person stripping stock.You
are treated as having purchased stripped
preferred stock if you:
1) Strip the rights to one or more dividends
from stock that meets test (2) under
Stripped preferred stock defined, earlier,
and 
2) Dispose of those dividend rights after
April 30, 1993.
You are treated as making the purchase on
the date you disposed of the dividend rights.
Your adjusted basis in the stripped preferred
stock is treated as your purchase price. The
rules described in Treatment of buyer, earlier,
apply to you.
REMICs, FASITs,
and Other CDOs 
Holders of interests in real estate mortgage
investment conduits (REMICs), financial as-
set securitization investment trusts (FASITs),
and other collateralized debt obligations
(CDOs) must follow special rules for reporting
income and any expenses from these invest-
ment products.
REMICs
A real estate mortgage investment conduit
(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the
purpose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages
secured by interests in real property. A
REMIC issues regular and residual interests
to investors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is
generally treated as a partnership with the
residual interest holders treated as the part-
ners. The regular interests are treated as debt
instruments.
REMIC income or loss is not income or
loss from a passive activity.
For more information about the qualifica-
tions and the tax treatment that apply to a
REMIC and the interests of investors in a
REMIC, see sections 860A through 860G of
the Internal Revenue Code, and the regu-
lations under those sections.
Regular interest defined.  A REMIC can
have several classes (also known as
“tranches”) of regular interests. A regular in-
terest unconditionally entitles the holder to
receive a specified principal amount (or other
similar amount).
Residual interest defined.A residual inter-
est is an interest in a REMIC that is not a
regular interest. It is designated as a residual
interest by the REMIC.
Tax Treatment of
REMIC Regular Interests
A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debt
instrument for income tax purposes. Accord-
ingly, the OID, market discount, and income
reporting rules that apply to bonds and other
debt instruments as described earlier in this
publication under Discount on Debt Instru-
ments apply, with certain modifications dis-
cussed below.
Generally, you report your income from a
regular interest on line 8a, Form 1040. For
more information on how to report interest
and OID, see How To Report Interest Income,
earlier.
Holders must use accrual method. Holders
of regular interests must use an accrual
method of accounting to report OID and in-
terest income. Because income under an ac-
crual method is not determined by the receipt
of cash, you may have to include OID or in-
terest income in your taxable income even if
you have not received any cash payments.
Forms 1099–INT and 1099–OID.  You
should receive a copy of Form 1099–INT or
Form 1099–OID from the REMIC. You will
also receive a written statement by March 15,
2001 (if you are a calendar year taxpayer),
that provides additional information. The
Page 22 Chapter 1  Investment Income

statement should contain enough information
to enable you to figure your accrual of market
discount or amortizable bond premium.
Form 1099–INT shows the amount of in-
terest income that accrued to you for the pe-
riod you held the regular interest.
Form 1099–OID shows the amount of OID
and interest, if any, that accrued to you for the
period you held the regular interest. You will
not need to make any adjustments to the
amounts reported even if you held the regular
interest for only a part of the calendar year.
However, if you bought the regular interest
at a premium or acquisition premium, see
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099–OID
under Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.
You may not get a Form 1099. Corpo-
rations and other persons specified in Regu-
lation 1.6049–7(c) will not receive Forms
1099. These persons and fiscal year taxpay-
ers may obtain tax information by contacting
the REMIC or the issuer of the CDO, if they
hold directly from the REMIC or issuer of the
CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgage
Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting In-
formation, explains how to request this infor-
mation.
Publication 938 is only available on
the Internet at www.irs.gov.
If you hold a regular interest or CDO
through a nominee (rather than directly), you
can request the information from the nominee
in the manner prescribed in Regulation
1.6049–7(f)(7)(i).
Allocated investment expenses of a
REMIC. Regular interest holders in a REMIC
may be allowed to deduct the REMIC's in-
vestment expenses, but only if the REMIC is
a single-class REMIC. A single-class REMIC
is one that generally would be classified as a
trust for tax purposes if it had not elected
REMIC status.
The single-class REMIC will report your
share of its investment expenses in box 5 of
Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form 1099–OID.
It will also include this amount in box 1 of
Form 1099–INT or box 2 of Form 1099–OID,
and on the additional written statement.
You may be able to take a deduction for
these expenses subject to a 2% limit that also
applies to certain other miscellaneous item-
ized deductions. See chapter 3 for more in-
formation.
Redemption of REMIC regular interests at
maturity. Redemption of debt instruments
at their maturity is treated as a sale or ex-
change. You must report redemptions on your
tax return whether or not you realize gain or
loss on the transaction. Your basis is your
adjusted issue price, which includes any OID
you previously reported in income.
Any amount that you receive on the re-
tirement of a debt instrument is treated in the
same way as if you had sold or exchanged
that instrument. A debt instrument is retired
when it is reacquired or redeemed by the
issuer and canceled.
Sale or exchange of a REMIC regular
interest.Some of your gain on the sale or
exchange of a REMIC regular interest may
be ordinary income. The ordinary income
part, if any, is:
 The amount that would have been in-
cluded in your income if the yield to ma-
turity on the regular interest had been
110% of the applicable federal rate at the
beginning of your holding period, minus 
 The amount you included in your income.
Tax Treatment of
REMIC Residual Interests 
If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,
you must take into account, on a quarterly
basis, your daily portion of the taxable income
or net loss of the REMIC for each day during
the tax year that you hold the residual inter-
est. You must report these amounts as ordi-
nary income or loss.
Basis in the residual interest. Your basis in
the residual interest is increased by the
amount of taxable income you take into ac-
count. Your basis is decreased (but not below
zero) by the amount of cash or the fair market
value of any property distributed to you, and
by the amount of any net loss you have taken
into account. If you sell your residual interest,
you must adjust your basis to reflect your
share of the REMIC's taxable income or net
loss immediately before the sale. See Wash
Sales, in chapter 4, for more information
about selling a residual interest.
Treatment of distributions.You must in-
clude in your gross income the part of any
distribution that is more than your adjusted
basis. Treat the distribution as a gain from the
sale or exchange of your residual interest.
Schedule Q.  If you hold a REMIC residual
interest, you should receive Schedule Q
(Form 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual
Interest Holder of REMIC Taxable Income or
Net Loss Allocation, and instructions from the
REMIC each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate
your share of the REMIC's quarterly taxable
income (or loss). Do not attach the Schedule
Q to your tax return. Keep it for your records.
Use Part IV of Schedule E (Form 1040) to
report your total share of the REMIC's taxable
income (or loss) for each quarter included in
your tax year.
For more information about reporting your
income (or loss) from a residual interest in a
REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066)
and Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-
gross-income limit, you may be able to claim
a miscellaneous itemized deduction for cer-
tain ordinary and necessary expenses that
you paid or incurred in connection with your
investment in a REMIC. These expenses
may include certain expense items incurred
by the REMIC and passed through to you.
The REMIC will report these expenses to you
on line 3b of Schedule Q. See chapter 3 for
information on how to report these expenses.
Collateralized Debt
Obligations (CDOs) 
A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a
debt instrument, other than a REMIC regular
interest, that is secured by a pool of mort-
gages or other evidence of debt and that has
principal payments that are subject to accel-
eration. (Note: While REMIC regular interests
are collateralized debt obligations, they have
unique rules that do not apply to CDOs issued
before 1987.) CDOs, also known as “pay-
through bonds,” are commonly divided into
different classes (also called “tranches”).
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-
gages, automobile loans, equipment leases,
or credit card receivables.
For more information about the qualifica-
tions and the tax treatment that apply to an
issuer of a CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the
Internal Revenue Code and the regulations
under that section.
Tax treatment of CDOs. The OID, market
discount, and income-reporting rules that ap-
ply to bonds and other debt instruments, as
described earlier in this chapter under Dis-
count on Debt Instruments, also apply to a
CDO.
You must include interest income from
your CDO in your gross income under your
regular method of accounting. Also include
any OID accrued on your CDO during the tax
year.
Generally, you report your income from a
CDO on line 8a, Form 1040. For more infor-
mation about reporting these amounts on
your return, see How To Report Interest In-
come, earlier.
Forms 1099 –INT and 1099–OID.  You
should receive a copy of Form 1099–INT or
Form 1099–OID. You will also receive a
written statement by March 15, 2001, that
provides additional information. The state-
ment should contain enough information
about the CDO to enable you to figure your
accrual of market discount or amortizable
bond premium.
Form 1099–INT shows the amount of in-
terest income paid to you for the period you
held the CDO.
Form 1099–OID shows the amount of OID
accrued to you and the interest, if any, paid
to you for the period you held the CDO. You
should not need to make any adjustments to
the amounts reported even if you held the
CDO for only a part of the calendar year.
However, if you bought the CDO at a pre-
mium or acquisition premium, see Refiguring
OID shown on Form 1099–OID under Original
Issue Discount (OID), earlier.
If you did not receive a Form 1099, see
You may not get a Form 1099 under Tax
Treatment of REMIC Regular Interests, ear-
lier.
FASITs
A financial asset securitization investment
trust (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt
obligations such as credit card receivables,
home equity loans, and automobile loans.
A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as
a debt instrument. The rules described under
Tax Treatment of CDOs, earlier, apply to a
regular interest in a FASIT, except that a
holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must
use an accrual method of accounting to report
OID and interest income.
For more information about FASITs, see
sections 860H through 860L of the Internal
Revenue Code.
S Corporations 
In general, an S corporation does not pay a
tax on its income. Instead, its income and
expenses are passed through to the share-
holders, who then report these items on their
own income tax returns.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

If you are an S corporation shareholder,
all current year income or loss and other tax
items are taxed to you at the corporation's
year end (generally, the end of the calendar
year) whether or not you actually receive any
amount. Generally, those items increase or
decrease the basis of your S corporation
stock as appropriate. For more information
on basis adjustments for S corporation stock,
see Stocks and Bonds under Basis of In-
vestment Property in chapter 4.
Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-
cept dividend distributions, are considered a
return of capital and reduce your basis in the
stock of the corporation. The part of any dis-
tribution that is more than your basis is
treated as a gain from the sale or exchange
of property. The corporation's distributions
may be in the form of cash or property.
Dividends of an S corporation generally
are paid only from accumulated earnings and
profits from years before 1983 or before it
became an S corporation.
Reporting S corporation income, de-
ductions, and credits.  The S corporation
should send you a copy of Schedule K–1
(Form 1120S) showing your share of the S
corporation's income, credits, and deductions
for the tax year. You must report your dis-
tributive share of the S corporation's income,
gain, loss, deductions, or credits on the ap-
propriate lines and schedules of your Form
1040.
For more information about your treatment
of S corporation tax items, see Shareholder's
Instructions for Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S).
Limit on losses and deductions.The
deduction for your share of losses and de-
ductions shown on Schedule K–1 (Form
1120S) is limited to the adjusted basis of your
stock and any debt the corporation owes you.
Any loss or deduction not allowed because
of this limit is carried over and treated as a
loss or deduction in the next tax year.
Passive activity losses.  Rules apply that
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy
of Schedule K–1 and its instructions will ex-
plain the limits and tell you where on your
return to report your share of S corporation
items from passive activities.
Form 8582. If you have a passive activity
loss from an S corporation, you must com-
plete Form  8582, Passive Activity Loss Lim-
itations, to figure the amount of the allowable
loss to enter on your return. See Publication
925 for more information.
Investment Clubs 
An investment club is formed when a group
of friends, neighbors, business associates,
or others pool their money to invest in stock
or other securities. The club may or may not
have a written agreement, a charter, or by-
laws.
Usually the group operates informally with
members pledging to pay a regular amount
into the club monthly. Some clubs have a
committee that gathers information on secu-
rities, selects the most promising securities,
and recommends that the club invest in them.
Other clubs rotate these responsibilities
among all their members. Most clubs require
all members to vote for or against all invest-
ments, sales, trades, and other transactions.
Identifying number.Each club must have
an employer identification number (EIN) to
use when filing its return. The club's EIN also
may have to be given to the payer of divi-
dends or other income from investments re-
corded in the club's name. To obtain an EIN,
first get Form SS–4 , Application for Employer
Identification Number, from the Internal Rev-
enue Service or your nearest Social Security
Administration office. See chapter 5 of this
publication for more information about how to
get this form.
Investments in name of member.When
an investment is recorded in the name of one
club member, this member must give his or
her social security number (SSN) to the payer
of investment income. (When an investment
is held in the names of two or more club
members, the SSN of only one member must
be given to the payer.) This member is con-
sidered as the record owner for the actual
owner, the investment club. This member is
a “nominee” and must file an information re-
turn with the IRS. For example, the nominee
member must file Form 1099–DIV for divi-
dend income, showing the club as the owner
of the dividend, his or her SSN, and the EIN
of the club.
Tax treatment of the club.Generally, an
investment club is treated as a partnership for
federal tax purposes unless it chooses other-
wise. In some situations, however, it is taxed
as a corporation or a trust.
Clubs formed before 1997.Before 1997,
the rules for determining how an investment
club is treated were different from those ex-
plained in the following discussions. An in-
vestment club that existed before 1997 is
treated for later years the same way it was
treated before 1997, unless it chooses to be
treated a different way under the new rules.
To make that choice, the club must file Form
8832,  Entity Classification Election.
Club as a Partnership
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or
a trust, it will be treated as a partnership.
Club files Form 1065.  If your investment
club is treated as a partnership, it must file
Form 1065. However, as a partner in the club,
you must report on your individual return your
share of the club's income, gains, losses,
deductions, and credits for the club's tax year.
(Its tax year generally must be the same tax
year as that of the partners owning a majority
interest.) You must report these items
whether or not you actually receive any dis-
tribution from the partnership.
You should receive a copy of Schedule
K–1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of Income,
Credits, Deductions, etc., from the partner-
ship. The amounts shown on Schedule K–1
are your share of the partnership's income,
deductions, and credits. Report each amount
on the appropriate lines and schedules of
your income tax return.
The club's expenses for producing or col-
lecting income, for managing investment
property, or for determining any tax are listed
separately on Schedule K–1. Each individual
partner who itemizes deductions on Schedule
A (Form 1040) can deduct his or her share
of those expenses. The expenses are listed
on line 22 of Schedule A along with other
miscellaneous deductions subject to the 2%
limit. See chapter 3 for more information on
the 2% limit. 
For more information about reporting your
income from a partnership, see the Schedule
K–1 instructions. Also see Publication 541,
Partnerships.
Passive activity losses.  Rules apply that
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy
of Schedule K–1 (Form 1065) and its in-
structions will tell you where on your return to
report your share of partnership items from
passive activities. If you have a passive ac-
tivity loss from a partnership, you must com-
plete Form  8582 to figure the amount of the
allowable loss to enter on your tax return.
No social security coverage for invest-
ment club earnings.  If an investment club
partnership's activities are limited to investing
in savings certificates, stock, or securities,
and collecting interest or dividends for its
members' accounts, a member's share of in-
come is not earnings from self-employment.
You cannot voluntarily pay the self-employ-
ment tax to increase your social security
coverage and ultimate benefits.
For more information on self-employment
tax, see Publication 533, Self-Employment
Tax.
Club as a Corporation
An investment club formed after 1996 is taxed
as a corporation if:
1) It is formed under a federal or state law
that refers to it as a corporation, body
corporate, or body politic. It is formed
under a state law that refers to it as a
joint-stock company or joint-stock asso-
ciation, or
2) It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.
Choosing to be taxed as a corporation.
To choose to be taxed as a corporation, the
club cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust,
later) or otherwise subject to special treat-
ment under the tax law. The club must file
Form 8832 to make the choice.
Club files Form 1120.  If your club is taxed
as a corporation, it must file Form 1120 (or
Form 1120–A). In that case, you do not report
any of its income or expenses on your indi-
vidual return. All ordinary income and ex-
penses and capital gains and losses must be
reported on the Form 1120 (or Form 1120–A).
Any distribution the club makes that qualifies
as a dividend must be reported on Forms
1096 and 1099–DIV if total distributions to the
shareholder are $10 or more for the year.
You must report any distributions that you
receive from the club on your individual re-
turn. You should receive a copy of Form
1099–DIV from the club showing the distri-
butions you received.
Some corporations can choose not to be
taxed and have earnings taxed to the share-
holders. See S Corporations, earlier.
For more information about corporations,
see Publication 542, Corporations.
Club as a Trust
In a few cases, an investment club is taxed
as a trust. In general, a trust is an arrange-
ment through which trustees take title to
property for the purpose of protecting or con-
serving it for the beneficiaries under the ordi-
nary rules applied in chancery or probate
courts. An arrangement is treated as a trust
for tax purposes if its purpose is to vest in
trustees responsibility for protecting and con-
Page 24 Chapter 1  Investment Income

serving property for beneficiaries who cannot
share in that responsibility and so are not
associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct
of business for profit. If you need more infor-
mation about trusts, see section 301.7701–4
of the regulations.
Club files Form 1041.  If your club is taxed
as a trust, it must file Form 1041. You should
receive a copy of Schedule K–1 (Form 1041)
from the trust. Report the amounts shown on
Schedule K–1 on the appropriate lines and
schedules of your income tax return.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

2.
Tax Shelters
Introduction
Investments that yield tax benefits are some-
times called “tax shelters.” In some cases,
Congress has concluded that the loss of rev-
enue is an acceptable side effect of special
tax provisions designed to encourage tax-
payers to make certain types of investments.
In many cases, however, losses from tax
shelters produce little or no benefit to society,
or the tax benefits are exaggerated beyond
those intended. Those cases are called
“abusive tax shelters.” An investment that is
considered a tax shelter is subject to re-
strictions, including the requirement that it be
registered, as discussed later, unless it is a
projected income investment (defined later).
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 How to recognize an abusive tax shelter,
 Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax
shelters, 
 Investors' reporting requirements, and
 Penalties that may apply.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554538 Accounting Periods and Methods
/H18554556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund 
/H18554561 Determining the Value of Donated
Property 
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form (and Instructions)
/H185548271 Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter
Registration Number 
/H185548275 Disclosure Statement 
/H185548275–R  Regulation Disclosure State-
ment 
See chapter 5 for information about get-
ting these publications and forms.
Abusive Tax Shelters
Abusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
that involve artificial transactions with little or
no economic reality. They often make use
of unrealistic allocations, inflated appraisals,
losses in connection with nonrecourse loans,
mismatching of income and deductions, fi-
nancing techniques that do not conform to
standard commercial business practices, or
the mischaracterization of the substance of
the transaction. Despite appearances to the
contrary, the taxpayer generally risks little.
Abusive tax shelters commonly involve
package deals that are designed from the
start to generate losses, deductions, or cred-
its that will be far more than present or future
investment. Or, they may promise investors
from the start that future inflated appraisals
will enable them, for example, to reap chari-
table contribution deductions based on those
appraisals. (But see the appraisal require-
ments discussed under Curbing Abusive Tax
Shelters.) They are commonly marketed in
terms of the ratio of tax deductions allegedly
available to each dollar invested. This ratio (or
“write-off”) is frequently said to be several
times greater than one-to-one.
Since there are many abusive tax shelters,
it is not possible to list all the factors you
should consider in determining whether an
offering is an abusive tax shelter. However,
you should ask the following questions, which
might provide a clue to the abusive nature of
the plan.
 Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-
nomic benefits? 
 Is this a transaction you would seriously
consider, apart from the tax benefits, if
you hoped to make a profit? 
 Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,
are they insured for less than their pur-
chase price? 
 Is there a nontax justification for the way
profits and losses are allocated to part-
ners? 
 Do the facts and supporting documents
make economic sense? In that con-
nection, are there sales and resales of
the tax shelter property at ever increasing
prices? 
 Does the investment plan involve a gim-
mick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
nomic reality of the transaction? 
 Does the promoter offer to backdate
documents after the close of the year?
Are you instructed to backdate checks
covering your investment? 
 Is your debt a real debt or are you as-
sured by the promoter that you will never
have to pay it?
 Does this transaction involve laundering
United States-source income through
foreign corporations incorporated in a tax
haven and owned by United States
shareholders?
Curbing Abusive
Tax Shelters
Congress has enacted a series of income tax
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive
tax shelters. These provisions include the
following.
1) Passive activity losses and credits. 
The passive activity loss and credit rules
limit the amount of losses and credits
that can be claimed from passive activ-
ities and limit the amount that can offset
nonpassive income, such as certain
portfolio income from investments. For
more detailed information about deter-
mining and reporting income, losses,
and credits from passive activities, see
Publication 925.
2) Registration of tax shelters. Generally,
the organizers of certain tax shelters
must register the shelter with the IRS.
The IRS will then assign the tax shelter
a registration number. If you are an in-
vestor in a tax shelter, the seller (or the
transferor) must provide you with the tax
shelter registration number at the time
of sale (or transfer) or within 20 days
after the seller or transferor receives the
number if that date is later. See Investor
Reporting, later, for more information
about reporting this number when filing
your tax return.
3) List of tax shelter investors.
Organizers and sellers of any potentially
abusive tax shelter must maintain a list
identifying each investor. The list must
be available for inspection by the IRS,
and the information required to be in-
cluded on the list generally must be kept
for 7 years. See Transfer of interests in
a tax shelter, later, for more information.
4) Appraisals of donated property. Gen-
erally, if you donate property valued at
more than $5,000 ($10,000 in the case
of privately traded stock), you must get
a written “qualified” appraisal of the
property's fair market value and attach
an appraisal summary to your income
tax return. The appraisal must be done
by a “qualified” appraiser who is not the
taxpayer, a party to a transaction in
which the taxpayer acquired the prop-
erty, the donee, or an employee or re-
lated party of any of the preceding per-
sons. (Related parties are defined under
Related Party Transactions in chapter
4.) For more information about ap-
praisals, see Publication 561.
5) Interest on penalties. If you are as-
sessed an accuracy-related or civil fraud
penalty (as discussed under Penalties,
later), interest will be imposed on the
amount of the penalty from the due date
of the return (including any extensions)
to the date you pay the penalty.
6) Accounting methods and capitaliza-
tion rules. Tax shelters generally cannot
use the cash method of accounting.
Also, uniform capitalization rules gener-
ally apply to producing property or ac-
quiring it for resale. Under those rules,
the direct cost and part of the indirect
cost of the property must be capitalized
or included in inventory. For more infor-
mation, see Publication 538.
Projected income investment. Special
rules apply to a projected income investment.
To qualify as a projected income investment,
a tax shelter must not be expected to reduce
the cumulative tax liability of any investor
during any year of the first 5 years ending
after the date the investment was offered for
sale. In addition, the assets of a projected
income investment must not include or relate
to more than an incidental interest in:
1) Master sound recordings, 
2) Motion picture or television films, 
 3) Videotapes,
4) Lithograph plates, 
 5) Copyrights,
6) Literary, musical, or artistic compos-
itions, or 
7) Collectibles (such as works of art, rugs,
antiques, metals, gems, stamps, coins,
or alcoholic beverages). 
Page 26 Chapter 2  Tax Shelters

Tax shelters that qualify as projected in-
come investments are not subject to the reg-
istration rules for tax shelters, described ear-
lier. However, the requirement to maintain a
list of investors that is in effect for tax shelters
also applies to any projected income invest-
ment, except for one an investor later trans-
fers. See Transfer of interests in a tax shel-
ter, later.
A tax shelter that previously qualified as
a projected income investment may later be
disqualified if, in one of its first 5 years, it re-
duces the cumulative tax liability of any in-
vestor. In that case, the tax shelter becomes
subject to the registration rules for tax shel-
ters, described earlier.
Pre-filing notification letter.If you are an
investor in an abusive tax shelter promotion,
the IRS may send you a “pre-filing notification
letter” if it determines that it is highly likely that
there is:
1) A gross valuation overstatement, or 
2) A false or fraudulent statement regarding
the tax benefits to be derived from the
tax shelter entity or arrangement. 
This letter will advise you that, based upon a
review of the promotion, it is believed that the
purported tax benefits are not allowable. The
letter also will advise you of the possible tax
consequences if you claim the benefits on
your income tax return.
You also may receive a notification letter
after you file your tax return. If you have al-
ready claimed the benefits on your tax return,
you will be advised that you can file an
amended return. However, any penalties that
apply still can be asserted.
If you claim the benefits after receiving the
pre-filing notification or if you fail to amend
your return, you will be notified that your tax
return is being examined. Normal audit and
appeal procedures will be followed during the
examination, and accuracy-related, civil or
criminal fraud, and other penalties will be
considered and, when appropriate, asserted.
For information on the examination of returns,
see Publication 556.
Revenue rulings. The IRS has published
numerous revenue rulings concluding that the
claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax
shelters should be disallowed. A revenue rul-
ing is the conclusion of the IRS on how the
law is applied to a particular set of facts.
Revenue rulings are published in the Internal
Revenue Bulletin for taxpayers' guidance and
information and also for use by IRS officials.
So, if your return is examined and an abusive
tax shelter is identified and challenged, a
published revenue ruling dealing with that
type of shelter, which disallows certain
claimed tax shelter benefits, could serve as
the basis for the examining official's challenge
of the tax benefits that you claimed. In such
a case, the examiner will not compromise
even if you or your representative believe that
you have authority for the positions taken on
your tax return.
CAUTION
!
The courts have generally been un-
sympathetic to taxpayers involved in
abusive tax shelter schemes and
have ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority
of the cases in which these shelters have
been challenged.
Investor Reporting
If you include on your tax return any de-
duction, loss, credit or other tax benefit, or
any income, from an interest in a tax shelter
required to be registered, you must report the
registration number that the tax shelter pro-
vided to you. (See Registration of tax shel-
ters, earlier.) Complete and attach Form 8271
to your return to report the number and to
provide other information about the tax shelter
and its benefits. You must also attach Form
8271 to any application for tentative refund
(Form 1045) and to any amended return
(Form 1040X) on which these benefits are
claimed or income is reported. If you do not
include the registration number with your re-
turn, you will be subject to a penalty of $250
for each such failure, unless the failure is due
to reasonable cause.
Transfer of interests in a tax shelter.If you
hold an investment interest in a tax shelter
and later transfer that interest to another
person, you must provide the tax shelter's
registration number to each person to whom
you transferred your interest. (However, this
does not apply if your interest is in a projected
income investment, described earlier.) You
must also provide a notice substantially in the
following form:
The following requirements also apply.
1) Maintaining a list. You must maintain
a list identifying each person to whom
you transferred your interest. Or, you
may require a designated person or
seller to maintain the list. However, see
Special rule for projected income invest-
ment, later, for an exception to this re-
quirement. If you choose to delegate this
requirement, you must give the desig-
nated person or seller all of the informa-
tion that you would otherwise have to
maintain on the list.
2) Providing notice. If the tax shelter is not
a projected income investment, de-
scribed earlier, you must provide a notice
to each person to whom you transferred
your interest. This notice must be sub-
stantially in the following form: 
If you do not maintain the required list of
investors, or do not delegate a designated
person or seller to maintain the list, you will
be subject to a penalty of $50 for each person
required to be on the list. But, you will not
have to pay the penalty if you can show that
the failure to comply with this requirement
was due to reasonable cause and not willful
neglect. The maximum penalty under this
provision is $100,000 for each tax shelter in
each calendar year.
Special rule for projected income in-
vestment. If you are an investor who later
transfers an interest in a projected income
investment, described earlier, you are not re-
quired to maintain a list of investors unless
the tax shelter was no longer a projected in-
come investment, or otherwise became sub-
ject to the registration requirements, before
the transfer.
Penalties
Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be an
expensive proposition when you consider all
of the consequences. First, the promoter
generally charges a substantial fee. If your
return is examined by the IRS and a tax de-
ficiency is determined, you will be faced with
payment of more tax, interest on the under-
payment, possibly a 20% accuracy-related
penalty, or a 75% civil fraud penalty. You may
also be subject to the penalty for failure to pay
tax. These penalties are explained in the fol-
lowing paragraphs.
Accuracy-related penalties.  An accuracy-
related penalty of 20% can be imposed for
underpayments of tax due to:
1) Negligence or disregard of rules or reg-
ulations, 
2) Substantial understatement of tax, or 
3) Substantial valuation misstatement. 
This penalty will not be imposed if you can
show that you had reasonable cause for any
understatement of tax and that you acted in
good faith.
If you are charged an accuracy-related
penalty, interest will be imposed on the
amount of the penalty from the due date of
the return (including extensions) to the date
you pay the penalty.
Negligence or disregard of rules or
regulations.The penalty for negligence or
disregard of rules or regulations is imposed
only on the part of the underpayment that is
due to negligence or disregard of rules or
regulations. The penalty will not be charged
if you can show that you had reasonable
cause for understating your tax and that you
acted in good faith.
Negligence includes any failure to make
a reasonable attempt to comply with the pro-
visions of the Internal Revenue Code.
Disregard includes any careless, reckless,
or intentional disregard. The penalty for dis-
You have acquired an interest in [name and ad-
dress of tax shelter]. If you transfer your interest
in this tax shelter to another person, you are re-
quired by the Internal Revenue Service to keep a
list containing that person's name, address, tax-
payer identification number, the date on which you
transferred the interest, and the name, address,
and tax shelter registration number of this tax
shelter. If you do not want to keep such a list, you
must (1) send the information specified above to
[name and address of designated person], who
will keep the list for this tax shelter, and (2) give
a copy of this notice to the person to whom you
transfer your interest.
You have acquired an interest in [name and ad-
dress of tax shelter] whose taxpayer identification
number is [if any]. The Internal Revenue Service
has issued [name of tax shelter] the following tax
shelter registration number: [number]. You must
report this registration number to the Internal
Revenue Service, if you claim any deduction, loss,
credit, or other tax benefit or report any income
by reason of your investment in [name of tax
shelter]. You must report the registration number
(as well as the name and taxpayer identification
number of [name of tax shelter]) on Form 8271.
Form 8271 must be attached to the return on
which you claim the deduction, loss, credit, or
other tax benefit or report any income. Issuance
of a registration number does not indicate that this
investment or the claimed tax benefits have been
reviewed, examined, or approved by the Internal
Revenue Service.
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters Page 27

regard of rules and regulations can be
avoided if both of the following are true.
 You have a reasonable basis for your
position on the tax issue.
 You make an adequate disclosure of your
position. 
Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and
attach it to your tax return. To disclose a po-
sition contrary to a regulation, use Form
8275–R.
Substantial understatement of tax.  An
understatement is considered to be substan-
tial if it is more than the greater of:
1) 10% of the tax required to be shown on
the return, or 
 2) $5,000.
An “understatement” is the amount of tax re-
quired to be shown on your return for a tax
year minus the amount of tax shown on the
return, reduced by any rebates. The term
“rebate” generally means a decrease in the
tax shown on your original return as the result
of your filing an amended return or claim for
refund.
Two special rules apply in the case of an
understatement due to a tax shelter.
1) An understatement of tax does not in-
clude any tax due to a tax shelter item
(such as an item of income, gain, loss,
deduction, or credit) if you had substan-
tial authority for the tax treatment of the
item and reasonably believed that the
tax treatment chosen was more likely
than not the proper one.
2) Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a
tax return does not reduce the amount
of the understatement.
For other than tax shelters, you can file Form
8275 or Form 8275–R to disclose items that
could cause a substantial understatement of
income tax. In that way, you can avoid the
substantial understatement penalty if you
have a reasonable basis for your position on
the tax issue.
Also, the understatement penalty will not
be imposed if you can show that there was
reasonable cause for the underpayment
caused by the understatement and that you
acted in good faith. An important factor in
establishing reasonable cause and good faith
will be the extent of your effort to determine
your proper tax liability under the law.
Valuation misstatement.  In general, you
are liable for a 20% penalty for a substantial
valuation misstatement if all of the following
are true.
1) The value or adjusted basis of any
property claimed on the return is 200%
or more of the correct amount.
2) You underpaid your tax by more than
$5,000 because of the misstatement.
3) You cannot establish that you had rea-
sonable cause for the underpayment and
that you acted in good faith. 
You may be assessed a penalty of 40%
for a gross valuation misstatement. If you
misstate the value or the adjusted basis of
property by 400% or more of the amount de-
termined to be correct, you will be assessed
a penalty of 40%, instead of 20%, of the
amount you underpaid because of the gross
valuation misstatement. The penalty rate is
also 40% if the property's correct value or
adjusted basis is zero.
Civil fraud penalty.If there is any under-
payment of tax on your return due to fraud,
a penalty of 75% of the underpayment will be
added to your tax.
Joint return.The fraud penalty on a joint
return applies to a spouse only if some part
of the underpayment is due to the fraud of
that spouse.
Failure to pay tax.  If a deficiency is as-
sessed and is not paid within 10 days of the
demand for payment, an investor can be pe-
nalized with up to a 25% addition to tax if the
failure to pay continues.
Whether To Invest
In light of the adverse tax consequences and
the substantial amount of penalties and in-
terest that will result if the claimed tax benefits
are disallowed, you should consider tax shel-
ter investments carefully and seek competent
legal and financial advice. 
Page 28 Chapter 2  Tax Shelters

3.
Investment
Expenses
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
At-risk rules 
Passive activity 
Portfolio income 
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 Limits on deductions, 
 Interest expenses, 
 Bond premium amortization, 
 Expenses of producing income, 
 Nondeductible expenses, and 
 How to report investment expenses. 
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554535 Business Expenses 
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
/H18554929 Tax Rules for Children and De-
pendents
/H18554936 Home Mortgage Interest De-
duction 
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized De-
ductions 
/H185544952 Investment Interest Expense De-
duction 
See chapter 5 for information about get-
ting these publications and forms.
Limits on Deductions
Your deductions for investment expenses
may be limited by:
 The at-risk rules, 
 The passive activity loss limits, 
 The limit on investment interest, or 
 The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous
itemized deductions. 
The at-risk rules and passive activity rules
are explained briefly in this section. The limit
on investment interest is explained later in
this chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2%
limit is explained later in this chapter under
Expenses of Producing Income.
At-risk rules.  Special at-risk rules apply to
most income-producing activities. These
rules limit the amount of loss you can deduct
to the amount you risk losing in the activity.
Generally, this is the amount of cash and the
adjusted basis of property you contribute to
the activity. It also includes money you borrow
for use in the activity if you are personally
liable for repayment or if you use property not
used in the activity as security for the loan.
For more information, see Publication 925.
Passive activity losses and credits.  The
amount of losses and tax credits you can
claim from passive activities is limited. Gen-
erally, you are allowed to deduct passive ac-
tivity losses only up to the amount of your
passive activity income. Also, you can use
credits from passive activities only against tax
on the income from passive activities. There
are exceptions for certain activities, such as
rental real estate activities.
Passive activity.A passive activity gen-
erally is any activity involving the conduct of
any trade or business in which you do not
materially participate and any rental activity.
However, if you are involved in renting real
estate, the activity is not a passive activity if
both of the following are true.
1) More than one-half of the personal ser-
vices you perform during the year in all
trades or businesses are performed in
real property trades or businesses in
which you materially participate.
2) You perform more than 750 hours of
services during the year in real property
trades or businesses in which you
materially participate.
The term trade or business generally means
any activity that involves the conduct of a
trade or business, is conducted in anticipation
of starting a trade or business, or involves
certain research or experimental expendi-
tures. However, it does not include rental ac-
tivities or certain activities treated as inci-
dental to holding property for investment. 
You are considered to materially partic-
ipate in an activity if you are involved on a
regular, continuous, and substantial basis in
the operations of the activity.
Other income (nonpassive income).
Generally, you can use losses from passive
activities only to offset income from passive
activities. You generally cannot use passive
activity losses to offset your other income,
such as your wages or your portfolio income.
Portfolio income includes gross income from
interest, dividends, annuities, or royalties that
is not derived in the ordinary course of a trade
or business. It also includes gains or losses
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade
or business) from the sale or trade of property
(other than an interest in a passive activity)
producing portfolio income or held for invest-
ment. This includes capital gain distributions
from mutual funds and real estate investment
trusts.
You cannot use passive activity losses to
offset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
Expenses. Do not include in the compu-
tation of your passive activity income or loss:
1) Expenses (other than interest) that are
clearly and directly allocable to your
portfolio income, or 
2) Interest expense properly allocable to
portfolio income. 
However, this interest and other expenses
may be subject to other limits. These limits
are explained in the rest of this chapter.
Additional information.For more infor-
mation about determining and reporting in-
come and losses from passive activities, see
Publication 925.
Interest Expenses 
This section discusses interest expenses you
may be able to deduct as an investor.
For information on business interest, see
chapter 5 of Publication 535.
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-
penses other than qualified home mortgage
interest, as explained in Publication 936, and
interest on certain student loans, as explained
in Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Higher
Education.
Investment Interest 
If you borrow money and use it to buy prop-
erty you hold for investment, the interest you
pay is investment interest. You can deduct
investment interest subject to the limit dis-
cussed later. However, you cannot deduct
interest you incurred to produce tax-exempt
income. See Tax-exempt income under Non-
deductible Expenses, later. Nor can you de-
duct interest expenses on straddles, also
discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.
Investment interest does not include any
qualified home mortgage interest or any in-
terest taken into account in computing income
or loss from a passive activity.
Investment property.  Property held for in-
vestment includes property that produces in-
terest, dividends, annuities, or royalties not
derived in the ordinary course of a trade or
business. It also includes property that
produces gain or loss (not derived in the or-
dinary course of a trade or business) from the
sale or trade of property producing these
types of income or held for investment (other
than an interest in a passive activity). In-
vestment property also includes an interest in
a trade or business activity in which you did
not materially participate (other than a pas-
sive activity).
Partners, shareholders, and beneficia-
ries.To determine your investment interest,
combine your share of investment interest
from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or
trust with your other investment interest.
Allocation of Interest Expense 
If you use borrowed money for business or
personal purposes as well as for investment,
you must allocate the debt among those pur-
poses. Only the interest expense on the part
of the debt used for investment purposes is
treated as investment interest. The allocation
is not affected by the use of property that
secures the debt. However, fully deductible
home mortgage interest is not treated as in-
vestment interest and the debt does not have
to be allocated, regardless of how the pro-
ceeds are used.
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000
to buy items for your home. Since 80% of the
debt is used for, and allocated to, investment
purposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is
investment interest. The other 20% is non-
deductible personal interest.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 29

Debt proceeds received in cash.Interest
you pay on debt proceeds that you received
in cash is generally treated as nondeductible
personal interest. However, you can treat any
payment you make within 30 days before or
after you receive the proceeds as made from
those proceeds. This applies to any payment
(up to the amount of the proceeds) made from
any account you own, or from cash. Also, you
can treat the payment as made on the date
you received the cash instead of on the date
you actually made the payment.
Debt proceeds deposited in account. If you
deposit debt proceeds in an account, that
deposit is treated as an investment expendi-
ture. Amounts held in the account are treated
as investment property, regardless of whether
the account bears interest. Any interest you
pay on the deposited proceeds is investment
interest. But, if you withdraw the funds and
use them for another purpose, you must re-
allocate the debt and any interest you pay.
Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that
you borrowed the money on March 1 and
immediately bought the stock for $8,000. You
did not buy the household items until June 1.
You had deposited the $2,000 in the bank.
You had no other transactions on the bank
account and made no principal payments on
the debt. The $2,000 is treated as being used
for an investment purpose for the 3-month
period. Your total interest expense for 3
months on this debt is investment interest. In
June, you must begin to allocate 80% of the
debt and the interest expense to investment
purposes and 20% to personal purposes.
Payments on debt require new allocation.
As you repay the debt, you must reallocate
the balance. You must first reduce the
amount allocated to personal purposes by the
repayment. You then reallocate the rest of the
debt to find what part is for investment pur-
poses.
Example 3. If, in Example 2, you repay
$500 on November 1, the entire repayment
is applied against the amount allocated to
personal purposes. The debt balance is now
allocated as $8,000 for investment purposes,
and $1,500 for personal purposes. Until the
next reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000
÷ $9,500) of the debt and the interest expense
is allocated to investment.
Pass-through entities.If you use borrowed
funds to buy an interest in a partnership or S
corporation, then the interest on those funds
must be allocated based on the assets of the
entity. If you contribute to the capital of the
entity, you can make the allocation using any
reasonable method.
Additional allocation rules.For more in-
formation about allocating interest expense,
see chapter 5 of Publication 535.
When To Deduct
Investment Interest
If you use the cash method of accounting, you
must pay the interest before you can deduct
it.
If you use an accrual method of account-
ing, you can deduct interest over the period
it accrues, regardless of when you pay it. For
an exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to
related party under When To Report Invest-
ment Expenses, later in this chapter.
Example. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
tember 6, 2000, payable in 90 days at 12%
interest. On December 5, 2000, you paid this
with a new note for $1,030, due on March 5,
2001. If you use the cash method of ac-
counting, you cannot deduct any part of the
$30 interest on your return for 2000 because
you did not actually pay it. If you use an ac-
crual method, you may be able to deduct a
portion of the interest on the loans through
December 31, 2000, on your return for 2000.
Interest paid in advance.  Generally, if you
pay interest in advance for a period that goes
beyond the end of the tax year, you must
spread the interest over the tax years to which
it belongs under the OID rules. You can de-
duct in each year only the interest for that
year.
Interest on margin accounts.  If you are a
cash method taxpayer, you can deduct inter-
est on margin accounts to buy taxable secu-
rities as investment interest in the year you
paid it. You are considered to have paid in-
terest on these accounts only when you ac-
tually pay the broker or when payment be-
comes available to the broker through your
account. Payment may become available to
the broker through your account when the
broker collects dividends or interest for your
account, or sells securities held for you or
received from you.
You cannot deduct any interest on money
borrowed for personal reasons.
Deferral of interest deduction for market
discount bonds. The amount you can de-
duct for interest expense you paid or accrued
during the year to buy or carry a market dis-
count bond may be limited. This limit does not
apply if you accrue the market discount and
include it in your income currently.
Under this limit, the interest is deductible
only to the extent it is more than:
1) The total interest and OID includible in
gross income for the bond for the year,
plus
2) The market discount for the number of
days you held the bond during the year.
Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
for figuring accrued market discount in chap-
ter 1 under Market Discount Bonds.
Disallowed interest expense. In the
year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
the amount of any interest expense you were
not allowed to deduct in earlier years.
Choosing to deduct disallowed interest
expense before the year of disposition.
You can choose to deduct disallowed interest
expense in any year before the year you dis-
pose of the bond, up to your net interest in-
come from the bond during the year. The rest
of the disallowed interest expense remains
deductible in the year you dispose of the
bond.
Net interest income.This is the interest
income (including OID) from the bond that
you include in income for the year, minus the
interest expense paid or accrued during the
year to purchase or carry the bond.
Deferral of interest deduction for short-
term obligations. If the current income
inclusion rules discussed in chapter 1 under
Discount on Short-Term Obligations do not
apply to you, the amount you can deduct for
interest expense you paid or accrued during
the year to buy or carry a short-term obli-
gation is limited.
The interest is deductible only to the ex-
tent it is more than:
1) The amount of acquisition discount or
OID on the obligation for the tax year,
plus 
2) The amount of any interest payable on
the obligation for the year that is not in-
cluded in income because of your ac-
counting method (other than interest
taken into account in determining the
amount of acquisition discount or OID). 
The method of determining acquisition dis-
count and OID for short-term obligations is
discussed in chapter 1 under Discount on
Short-Term Obligations.
Disallowed interest expense. In the
year you dispose of the obligation, or if you
choose, in another year in which you have
net interest income from the obligation, you
can deduct the amount of any interest ex-
pense you were not allowed to deduct for an
earlier year. Follow the same rules provided
in the earlier discussion under Deferral of in-
terest deduction for market discount bonds.
Limit on Deduction
Generally, your deduction for investment in-
terest expense is limited to the amount of your
net investment income.
You can carry over the amount of invest-
ment interest that you could not deduct be-
cause of this limit to the next tax year. The
interest carried over is treated as investment
interest paid or accrued in that next year.
You can carry over disallowed investment
interest to the next tax year even if it is more
than your taxable income in the year the in-
terest was paid or accrued.
Net Investment Income
Determine the amount of your net investment
income by subtracting your investment ex-
penses (other than interest expense) from
your investment income.
Investment income.This generally includes
your gross income from property held for in-
vestment (such as interest, dividends, annui-
ties, and royalties). Investment income does
not include Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends.
Choosing to include net capital gain.
Investment income generally does not include
net capital gain from disposing of investment
property (including capital gain distributions
from mutual funds). However, you can choose
to include all or part of your net capital gain
in investment income.
You make this choice by completing line
4e of Form 4952 according to its instructions.
If you choose to include any amount of
your net capital gain in investment income,
you must reduce your net capital gain that is
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates
by the same amount.
For more information about the capital
gains rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in
chapter 4.
TIP
Before making this choice, consider
the overall effect on your tax liability.
Compare your tax if you make this
choice with your tax if you do not.
Page 30 Chapter 3  Investment Expenses

Investment income of child reported on
parent's return.Investment income includes
the part of your child's interest and dividend
income that you choose to report on your re-
turn. If the child does not have Alaska Per-
manent Fund dividends or capital gain distri-
butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form
8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's In-
terest and Dividends.
Example. Your 8-year-old son has inter-
est income of $2,000, which you choose to
report on your own return. You enter $2,000
on lines 1a and 4 of Form 8814 and $600 on
line 6 of Form 8814 and line 21 of Form 1040.
Your investment income includes this $600.
Child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends.  If part of the amount you report is
your child's Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends, that part does not count as investment
income. To figure the amount of your child's
income that you can consider your investment
income, start with the amount on line 6 of
Form 8814. Multiply that amount by a per-
centage that is equal to the Alaska Perma-
nent Fund dividends divided by the total
amount on line 4 of Form 8814. Subtract the
result from the amount on line 6 of Form
8814.
Example. Your 10-year-old child has in-
terest and dividend income of $4,000, includ-
ing $500 in Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends. You choose to report this on your
return. You enter $4,000 on line 4 of Form
8814 and $2,600 on line 6 of Form 8814 and
line 21 of Form 1040. You figure the amount
of your child's income that you can consider
your investment income as follows:
Child's capital gain distributions. If your
child has capital gain distributions, fill out the
following worksheet before completing Form
4952.
Example. Your 9-year old daughter has
ordinary dividends of $1,360 and a $340
capital gain distribution from a mutual fund.
You choose to report this income on your tax
return. On Form 8814, you enter $1,360 on
line 2, $340 on line 3, $1,700 on line 4, and
$300 on line 6. Then you fill out the worksheet
above. The amount on line 7 of the worksheet
($240) is investment income, which you in-
clude on line 4a of Form 4952. The amount
on line 6 of the worksheet ($60) is included
on lines 4b and 4c of Form 4952. You must
decide whether to make the choice to include
this $60 in investment income on line 4e.
Investment expenses. Investment ex-
penses include all income-producing ex-
penses (other than interest expense) relating
to the investment property that are allowable
deductions after applying the 2% limit that
applies to miscellaneous itemized deductions.
Use the smaller of:
1) The investment expenses included on
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040), or
2) The amount on line 26 of Schedule A.
See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for
a discussion of the 2% limit.
Losses from passive  activities.Income
or expenses that you used in computing in-
come or loss from a passive activity are not
included in determining your investment in-
come or investment expenses (including in-
vestment interest expense). See Publication
925 for information about passive activities.
Example. Ted is a partner in a partner-
ship that operates a business. However, he
does not materially participate in the partner-
ship's business. Ted's interest in the partner-
ship is considered a passive activity.
Ted's investment income from interest and
dividends is $10,000. His investment ex-
penses (other than interest) are $3,200 after
taking into account the 2% limit on miscella-
neous itemized deductions. His investment
interest expense is $8,000. Ted also has in-
come from the partnership of $2,000.
Ted figures his net investment income and
the limit on his investment interest expense
deduction in the following way:
The $2,000 of income from the passive
activity is not used in determining Ted's net
investment income. His investment interest
deduction for the year is limited to $6,800, the
amount of his net investment income.
Form 4952 
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense
Deduction, to figure your deduction for in-
vestment interest. 
Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2000
income includes $3,000 in dividends and a
net capital gain of $9,000 from the sale of
investment property. She incurred $12,500
of investment interest expense. Her other in-
vestment expenses directly connected with
the production of investment income total
$980 after applying the 2% limit on miscella-
neous itemized deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). 
For 2000, Jane chooses to include all of
her net capital gain in investment income. Her
total investment income is $12,000 ($3,000
dividends + $9,000 net capital gain). Her net
investment income is $11,020 ($12,000 total
investment income − $980 other investment
expenses).
Jane's Form 4952 is illustrated at the end
of the chapter. Her investment interest ex-
pense deduction is limited to $11,020, the
amount of her net investment income. The
$1,480 disallowed investment interest ex-
pense is carried forward to 2001.
Exception to use of Form 4952.You do not
have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to
your return if you meet all of the following
tests.
 Your investment interest expense is not
more than your investment income from
interest and ordinary dividends.
 You do not have any other deductible in-
vestment expenses.
 You have no carryover of investment in-
terest expense from 1999.
If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct
all of your investment interest.
Bond Premium
Amortization 
If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
bond yields taxable interest, you can choose
to amortize the premium. This generally
means that each year, over the life of the
bond, you use a part of the premium to re-
duce the amount of interest includible in your
income. If you make this choice, you must
reduce your basis in the bond by the amorti-
zation for the year.
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you
must amortize the premium. This amortized
amount is not deductible in determining taxa-
ble income. However, each year you must
reduce your basis in the bond by the amorti-
zation for the year.
Bond premium. Bond premium is the
amount by which your basis in the bond right
after you get it is more than the total of all
amounts payable on the bond after you get it
(other than payments of qualified stated in-
terest). For example, a bond with a maturity
value of $1,000 generally would have a $50
premium if you buy it for $1,050.
Basis. In general, your basis for figuring
bond premium amortization is the same as
your basis for figuring any loss on the sale
of the bond. However, you may need to use
a different basis for convertible bonds, bonds
you got in a trade, and bonds whose basis
has to be determined using the basis of the
person who transferred the bond to you. See
section 1.171–1(e) of the regulations.
Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or any-
one who holds them mainly for sale to cus-
tomers in the ordinary course of a trade or
business or who would properly include
bonds in inventory at the close of the tax year)
cannot claim a deduction for amortizable
bond premium.
See section 75 of the Internal Revenue
Code for the treatment of bond premium by
a dealer in tax-exempt bonds.
How To Figure
Amortization
For bonds issued after September 27, 1985,
you must amortize bond premium using a
constant yield method on the basis of the
bond's yield to maturity, determined by using
the bond's basis and compounding at the
close of each accrual period.
Constant yield method. Figure the bond
premium amortization for each accrual period
as follows.
Step 1: determine your yield.Your yield
is the discount rate that, when used in figuring
the present value of all remaining payments
to be made on the bond (including payments
Total investment income .......................... $10,000
Minus: Investment expenses (other than
interest) .................................................... 3,200
Net investment income ............................ $6,800
Deductible investment interest expense
for the year .............................................. $6,800
$2,600 − ($2,600 × ($500 ÷ $4,000))  = $2,275
Worksheet
(Keep for your records)
1. Enter amount from Form 8814, line 3 ..
2. Enter amount from Form 8814, line 4 ..
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ...........................
4. Base amount ......................................... $1,400
5. Subtract line 4 from line 2 .....................
6. Multiply line 5 by the decimal on line 3.
Enter the result here. Also include it in
figuring the amounts to enter on lines
4b and 4c of Form 4952. ......................
7. Subtract line 6 from line 5. Enter the
result here. Also include it on line 4a of
Form 4952. ............................................
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

of qualified stated interest), produces an
amount equal to your basis in the bond. Fig-
ure the yield as of the date you got the bond.
It must be constant over the term of the bond
and must be figured to at least two decimal
places when expressed as a percentage.
If you do not know the yield, consult your
broker or tax advisor.
Step 2: determine the accrual periods.
You can choose the accrual periods to use.
They may be of any length and may vary in
length over the term of the bond, but each
accrual period can be no longer than 1 year
and each scheduled payment of principal or
interest must occur either on the first or the
final day of an accrual period. The computa-
tion is simplest if accrual periods are the
same as the intervals between interest pay-
ment dates.
Step 3: determine the bond premium
for the accrual period.To do this, multiply
your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-
ning of the accrual period by your yield. Then
subtract the result from the qualified stated
interest for the period.
Your adjusted acquisition price at the be-
ginning of the first accrual period is the same
as your basis. After that, it is your basis de-
creased by the amount of bond premium
amortized for earlier periods and the amount
of any payment previously made on the bond
other than a payment of qualified stated in-
terest.
Example. On February 1, 1999, you
bought a taxable bond for $110,000. The
bond has a stated principal amount of
$100,000, payable at maturity on February
1, 2006, making your premium $10,000
($110,000 − $100,000). The bond pays qual-
ified stated interest of $10,000 on February
1 of each year. Your yield is 8.0745% com-
pounded annually. You choose to use annual
accrual periods ending on February 1 of each
year. To find your bond premium amortization
for the accrual period ending on February 1,
2000, you multiply the adjusted acquisition
price at the beginning of the period
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract
the result ($8,882) from the qualified stated
interest for the period ($10,000), you find that
your bond premium amortization for the pe-
riod is $1,118.
Special rules.For special rules that ap-
ply to variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed
bonds, and bonds that provide for alternative
payment schedules or remote or incidental
contingencies, see section 1.171–3 of the
regulations.
Bonds Issued Before
September 28, 1985
For these bonds, you can amortize bond
premium using any reasonable method.
Reasonable methods include:
1) The straight-line method, and
2) The Revenue Ruling 82–10 method.
Straight-line method.Under this method,
the amount of your bond premium amorti-
zation is the same each month. Divide the
number of months you held the bond during
the year by the number of months from the
beginning of the tax year (or, if later, the date
of acquisition) to the date of maturity or earlier
call date. Then multiply the result by the bond
premium (reduced by any bond premium
amortization claimed in earlier years). This
gives you your bond premium amortization for
the year.
Revenue Ruling 82–10 method.Under this
method, the amount of your bond premium
amortization increases each month over the
life of the bond. This method is explained in
Revenue Ruling 82–10.
Choosing To Amortize
You choose to amortize the premium on tax-
able bonds by reporting the amortization for
the year on your income tax return for the first
tax year for which you want the choice to
apply. You should attach a statement to your
return that you are making this choice under
section 171. See How To Report Amorti-
zation, next.
This choice is binding for the year you
make it and for later tax years. It applies to
all taxable bonds you own in the year you
make the choice and also to those you ac-
quire in later years.
You can change your decision to amortize
bond premium only with the written approval
of the IRS. To request approval, use Form
3115, Application for Change in Accounting
Method.
How To Report
Amortization 
Subtract the bond premium amortization from
your interest income from these bonds.
Report the bond's interest on line 1 of
Schedule B (Form 1040). Several lines
above line 2, put a subtotal of all interest
listed on line 1. Below this subtotal, print “ABP
Adjustment,” and the amortization amount.
Subtract this amount from the subtotal, and
enter the result on line 2.
Bond premium amortization more than
interest.If the amount of your bond premium
amortization for an accrual period is more
than the qualified stated interest for the pe-
riod, you can deduct the difference as a mis-
cellaneous itemized deduction on line 27 of
Schedule A (Form 1040).
 But your deduction is limited to the
amount by which your total interest inclusions
on the bond in prior accrual periods is more
than your total bond premium deductions on
the bond in prior periods. Any amount you
cannot deduct because of this limit can be
carried forward to the next accrual period.
Pre-1998 election to amortize bond pre-
mium. Generally, if you first elected to amor-
tize bond premium before 1998, the above
treatment of the premium does not apply to
bonds you acquired before 1988.
Bond acquired before October 23,
1986. The amortization of the premium is a
miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.
Bond acquired after October 22, 1986,
but before 1988. The amortization of the
premium is investment interest expense sub-
ject to the investment interest limit, unless you
choose to treat it as an offset to interest in-
come on the bond.
Expenses of
Producing Income 
You deduct investment expenses (other than
interest expenses) as miscellaneous item-
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
To be deductible, these expenses must be
ordinary and necessary expenses paid or in-
curred:
1) To produce or collect income, or
2) To manage property held for producing
income. 
The expenses must be directly related to the
income or income-producing property, and
the income must be taxable to you.
The deduction for most income-producing
expenses is subject to a 2% limit that also
applies to certain other miscellaneous item-
ized deductions. The amount deductible is
limited to the total of these miscellaneous
deductions that is more than 2% of your ad-
justed gross income.
For information on how to report expenses
of producing income, see How To Report In-
vestment Expenses, later.
Attorney or accounting fees.  You can de-
duct attorney or accounting fees that are
necessary to produce or collect taxable in-
come. However, in some cases, attorney or
accounting fees are part of the basis of
property. See Basis of Investment Property
in chapter 4.
Automatic investment service and divi-
dend reinvestment plans.  A bank may offer
its checking account customers an automatic
investment service so that, for a charge, each
customer can choose to invest a part of the
checking account each month in common
stock. Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing
agent for a number of publicly-owned corpo-
rations may set up an automatic dividend re-
investment service. Through that service,
cash dividends are reinvested in more shares
of stock, after the bank deducts a service
charge.
A corporation in which you own stock also
may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This
plan lets you choose to use your dividends to
buy more shares of stock in the corporation
instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
You can deduct the monthly service
charge you pay to a bank to participate in an
automatic investment service. If you partic-
ipate in a dividend reinvestment plan, you can
deduct any service charge subtracted from
your cash dividends before the dividends are
used to buy more shares of stock. Deduct the
charges in the year you pay them.
Clerical help and office rent.  You can de-
duct office expenses, such as rent and cler-
ical help, that you pay in connection with your
investments and collecting the taxable in-
come on them.
Cost of replacing missing securities.  To
replace your taxable securities that are mis-
laid, lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have
to post an indemnity bond. You can deduct
the premium you pay to buy the indemnity
bond and the related incidental expenses.
You may, however, get a refund of part
of the bond premium if the missing securities
are recovered within a specified time. Under
certain types of insurance policies, you can
recover some of the expenses.
If you receive the refund in the tax year
you pay the amounts, you can deduct only the
difference between the expenses paid and
the amount refunded. If the refund is made in
a later tax year, you must include the refund
in income in the year you received it, but only
Page 32 Chapter 3  Investment Expenses

to the extent that the expenses decreased
your tax in the year you deducted them.
Fees to collect income.You can deduct
fees you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or
similar agent to collect investment income,
such as your taxable bond or mortgage in-
terest, or your dividends on shares of stock.
Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct
a fee you pay to a broker to acquire invest-
ment property, such as stocks or bonds. You
must add the fee to the cost of the property.
See Basis of Investment Property in chapter
4.
You cannot deduct any broker's fees,
commissions, or option premiums you pay (or
that were netted out) in connection with the
sale of investment property. They can be
used only to figure gain or loss from the sale.
See Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, in
chapter 4, for more information about the
treatment of these sale expenses.
Investment counsel and advice.You can
deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice
about investments that produce taxable in-
come. This includes amounts you pay for in-
vestment advisory services.
Safe deposit box rent.  You can deduct rent
you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the
box to store taxable income-producing stocks,
bonds, or other investment-related papers
and documents. If you also use the box to
store tax-exempt securities or personal items,
you can deduct only part of the rent. See
Tax-exempt income under Nondeductible
Expenses, later, to figure what part you can
deduct.
State and local transfer taxes.  You cannot
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you
pay when you buy or sell securities. If you pay
these transfer taxes when you buy securities,
you must treat them as part of the cost of the
property. If you pay these transfer taxes when
you sell securities, you must treat them as a
reduction in the amount realized.
Trustee's commissions for revocable
trust.  If you set up a revocable trust and
have its income distributed to you, you can
deduct the commission you pay the trustee
for managing the trust to the extent it is to
produce or collect taxable income or to man-
age property. However, you cannot deduct
any part of the commission that is for
producing or collecting tax-exempt income or
for managing property that produces tax-
exempt income.
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay
the commissions for several years in ad-
vance, you must deduct a part of the com-
mission each year. You cannot deduct the
entire amount in the year you pay it.
Investment expenses from pass-through
entities.  If you hold an interest in a partner-
ship, S corporation, real estate mortgage in-
vestment conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly
offered regulated investment company (mu-
tual fund), you can deduct your share of that
entity's investment expenses. A partnership
or S corporation will show your share of these
expenses on your Schedule K–1. A nonpub-
licly offered mutual fund will indicate your
share of these expenses in box 5 of Form
1099–DIV, or on an equivalent statement.
Publicly-offered mutual funds are discussed
later.
If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any
expenses relating to your residual interest in-
vestment will be shown on line 3b of Sched-
ule Q (Form 1066). Any expenses relating to
your regular interest investment will appear in
box 5 of Form 1099–INT or box 7 of Form
1099–OID.
Report your share of these investment
expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), sub-
ject to the 2% limit, in the same manner as
your other investment expenses.
Including mutual fund or REMIC ex-
penses in income. Your share of the invest-
ment expenses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly
offered mutual fund, as described above, are
considered to be indirect deductions through
that pass-through entity. You must include in
your gross income an amount equal to the
amount of the expenses allocated to you,
whether or not you are able to claim a de-
duction for those expenses. If you are a
shareholder in a nonpublicly offered mutual
fund, you must include on your return the full
amount of ordinary dividends or other distri-
butions of stock, as shown in box 1 of Form
1099–DIV or an equivalent statement. If you
are a residual interest holder in a REMIC, you
must report as ordinary income on Schedule
E (Form 1040) the total amounts shown on
lines 1b and 3b of Schedule Q (Form 1066).
If you are a REMIC regular interest holder,
you must include the amount of any expense
allocation you received on line 8a of Form
1040.
Publicly-offered mutual funds. Publicly-
offered mutual funds, generally, are funds that
are traded on an established securities ex-
change. These funds do not pass investment
expenses through to you. Instead, the divi-
dend income they report to you in box 1 of
Form 1099–DIV is already reduced by your
share of investment expenses. Therefore,
you cannot deduct the expenses on your re-
turn.
Include the amount from box 1 of Form
1099–DIV in your income.
Nondeductible
Expenses 
Some expenses that you incur as an investor
are not deductible.
Stockholders' meetings.  You cannot de-
duct transportation and other expenses that
you pay to attend stockholders' meetings of
companies in which you have no interest
other than owning stock. This is true even if
your purpose in attending is to get information
that would be useful in making further invest-
ments.
Investment-related seminar.You cannot
deduct expenses for attending a convention,
seminar, or similar meeting for investment
purposes.
Single-premium life insurance, endow-
ment, and annuity contracts.  You cannot
deduct interest on money you borrow to buy
or carry a single-premium life insurance, en-
dowment, or annuity contract.
Single premium annuity contract as
collateral.If you use a single premium an-
nuity contract as collateral to obtain or con-
tinue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct any
interest on the loan that is collateralized by
the annuity contract. Figure the amount of
interest expense disallowed by multiplying the
current interest rate on the mortgage loan by
the lesser of the amount of the annuity con-
tract used as collateral or the amount of the
loan.
Systematic borrowing on insurance. Gen-
erally, you cannot deduct interest on money
you borrow to buy or carry a life insurance,
endowment, or annuity contract if you plan to
systematically borrow part or all of the in-
creases in the cash value of the contract. This
rule applies to the interest on the total amount
borrowed to buy or carry the contract, not just
the interest on the borrowed increases in the
cash value.
Tax-exempt income.  You cannot deduct
expenses you incur to produce tax-exempt
income. Nor can you deduct interest on
money you borrow to buy tax-exempt securi-
ties or shares in a regulated investment
company (mutual fund) that distributes only
exempt-interest dividends.
Short-sale expenses.The rule disallow-
ing a deduction for interest expenses on tax-
exempt securities applies to amounts you pay
in connection with personal property used in
a short sale or amounts paid by others for the
use of any collateral in connection with the
short sale. However, it does not apply to the
expenses you incur if you deposit cash as
collateral for the property used in the short
sale and the cash does not earn a material
return during the period of the sale. Short
sales are discussed in chapter 4.
Expenses for both tax-exempt and tax-
able income. You may have expenses that
are for both tax-exempt and taxable income.
If you cannot specifically identify what part of
the expenses is for each type of income, you
can divide the expenses, using reasonable
proportions based on facts and circum-
stances. You must attach a statement to your
return showing how you divided the expenses
and stating that each deduction claimed is not
based on tax-exempt income.
One accepted method for dividing ex-
penses is to do it in the same proportion that
each type of income is to the total income. If
the expenses relate in part to capital gains
and losses, include the gains, but not the
losses, in figuring this proportion. To find the
part of the expenses that is for the tax-exempt
income, divide your tax-exempt income by the
total income and multiply your expenses by
the result.
Example. You received $6,000 interest;
$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was tax-
able. In earning this income, you had $500
of expenses. You cannot specifically identify
the amount of each expense item that is for
each income item, so you must divide your
expenses. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest
divided by $6,000 total interest) of your ex-
penses is for the tax-exempt income. You
cannot deduct $400 (80% of $500) of the ex-
penses. You can deduct $100 (the rest of the
expenses) because they are for the taxable
interest.
State income taxes.  If you itemize your
deductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state
income taxes on interest income that is ex-
empt from federal income tax. But you cannot
deduct, as either taxes or investment ex-
penses, state income taxes on other exempt
income.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Interest expense and carrying charges on
straddles. You cannot deduct interest and
carrying charges that are allocable to per-
sonal property that is part of a straddle. The
nondeductible interest and carrying charges
are added to the basis of the straddle prop-
erty. However, this treatment does not apply
if:
1) All the offsetting positions making up the
straddle either consist of one or more
qualified covered call options and the
optioned stock or consist of section 1256
contracts (and the straddle is not part of
a larger straddle), or
2) The straddle is a hedging transaction.
For information about straddles, including
definitions of the terms used in this dis-
cussion, see chapter 4.
Interest includes any amount you pay or
incur in connection with personal property
used in a short sale. However, you must first
apply the rules discussed in Short Sale Ex-
penses under Short Sales in chapter 4.
To determine the interest on market dis-
count bonds and short-term obligations that
are part of a straddle, you must first apply the
rules discussed under Deferral of interest
deduction for market discount bonds and
Deferral of interest deduction for short-term
obligations (both under Interest Expenses,
earlier).
Nondeductible amount and basis adjust-
ment. Figure the nondeductible amount of
interest and carrying charges that must be
added to the basis of the straddle property
as follows.
 1) Add together:
a) Interest on indebtedness incurred
or continued to buy or carry the
personal property, and
b) All other amounts (including
charges to insure, store, or trans-
port the personal property) paid or
incurred to carry the personal
property.
2) Subtract from the amount in (1):
a) Interest (including OID) includible in
gross income for the year on the
personal property,
b) Any income from the personal
property treated as ordinary income
on the disposition of of short-term
government obligations or as ordi-
nary income under the market dis-
count and short-term bond pro-
visions — see Discount on Debt
Instruments in chapter 1,
c) The dividends includible in gross
income for the year from the per-
sonal property, and 
d) Any payment on a loan of the per-
sonal property for use in a short
sale that is includible in gross in-
come.
How To Report
Investment Expenses 
To deduct your investment expenses, you
must itemize deductions on Schedule A
(Form 1040). Enter your deductible invest-
ment interest expense on line 13, Schedule
A. Include any deductible short sale ex-
penses. (See Short Sales in chapter 4 for in-
formation on these expenses.) Also attach a
completed Form 4952 if you used that form
to figure your investment interest expense.
Enter the total amount for your other in-
vestment expenses (other than interest ex-
penses) on line 22, Schedule A. List the type
and amount of each expense on the dotted
lines next to line 22. (If necessary, you can
show the required information on an attached
statement.) Include the total on line 23 with
your other miscellaneous deductions that are
subject to the 2% limit.
For information on how to report amortiz-
able bond premium, see Bond Premium
Amortization, earlier in this chapter.
When To Report
Investment Expenses
If you use the cash method to report income
and expenses, you generally deduct your ex-
penses, except for certain prepaid interest, in
the year you pay them.
If you use an accrual method, you gener-
ally deduct your expenses when you incur a
liability for them, rather than when you pay
them.
Also see When To Deduct Investment In-
terest, earlier in this chapter.
Unpaid expenses owed to related party.
If you use an accrual method, you cannot
deduct interest and other expenses owed to
a related cash-basis person until payment is
made and the amount is includible in the
gross income of that person. The relationship,
for purposes of this rule, is determined as of
the end of the tax year for which the interest
or expense would otherwise be deductible.
If a deduction is denied under this rule, this
rule will continue to apply even if your re-
lationship with the person ceases to exist
before the amount is includible in the gross
income of that person.
This rule generally applies to those re-
lationships listed in chapter 4 under Related
Party Transactions. It also applies to accruals
by partnerships to partners, partners to part-
nerships, shareholders to S corporations, and
S corporations to shareholders.
The postponement of deductions for un-
paid expenses and interest under the related
party rule does not apply to original issue
discount (OID), regardless of when payment
is made. This rule also does not apply to
loans with below-market interest rates or to
certain payments for the use of property and
services when the lender or recipient has to
include payments periodically in income, even
though a payment has not been made.
Page 34 Chapter 3  Investment Expenses

Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
9,000
9,000
0
9,000
12,000
980
11,020
1,480
11,020
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 72
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2000. See instructions1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 1999 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net gain from the disposition of
property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses. See instructions5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4f. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
c Net capital gain from the disposition of property held for investment
d Subtract line 4c from line 4b. If zero or less, enter -0-
e Enter all or part of the amount on line 4c, if any, that you elect to include in investment income.
Do not enter more than the amount on line 4b. See instructions /H17075
f Investment income. Add lines 4a, 4d, and 4e. See instructions
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2001. Subtract line 6 from
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
4d
4e
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
(99)
2000
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

4.
Sales and
Trades of
Investment
Property
Introduction
This chapter explains the tax treatment of
sales and trades of investment property. 
Investment property.This is property that
produces investment income. Examples in-
clude stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and
notes. Property used in a trade or business
is not investment property.
Form 1099–B.  If you sold property such as
stocks, bonds, or certain commodities
through a broker during the year, you should
receive, for each sale, a Form 1099–B, Pro-
ceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange
Transactions, or an equivalent statement from
the broker. You should receive the statement
by January 31 of the next year. It will show
the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS
will also get a copy of Form 1099–B from the
broker.
Use Form 1099–B (or an equivalent
statement received from your broker) to
complete Schedule D of Form 1040. For more
information, see Form 1099–B transactions
under Reporting Capital Gains and Losses,
later.
Other property transactions. Certain
transfers of property are discussed in other
IRS publications. These include:
 Sale of your main home, discussed in
Publication 523, Selling Your Home,
 Installment sales, covered in Publication
537, Installment Sales,
 Various types of transactions involving
business property, discussed in Publica-
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions
of Assets,
 Transfers of property at death, covered
in Publication 559, Survivors, Executors,
and Administrators, and
 Disposition of an interest in a passive
activity, discussed in Publication 925,
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
 What a sale or trade is, 
 Basis,
 Adjusted basis, 
 Figuring gain or loss, 
 Nontaxable trades, 
 Capital gains and losses, and 
 How to report your gain or loss.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554551 Basis of Assets 
/H18554564 Mutual Fund Distributions 
Form (and Instructions)
/H18554Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
and Losses 
/H185546781 Gains and Losses From Section
1256 Contracts and Straddles 
/H185548582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations 
/H185548824 Like-Kind Exchanges 
See chapter 5 for information about get-
ting these publications and forms.
What Is a
Sale or Trade?
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Equity option
Futures contract
Marked to market
Nonequity option
Options dealer
Regulated futures contract
Section 1256 contract
Short sale
This section explains what is a sale or trade.
It also explains certain transactions and
events that are treated as sales or trades.
A sale is generally a transfer of property
for money or a mortgage, note, or other
promise to pay money. A trade is a transfer
of property for other property or services, and
may be taxed in the same way as a sale.
Sale and purchase.Ordinarily, a transaction
is not a trade when you voluntarily sell prop-
erty for cash and immediately buy similar
property to replace it. The sale and purchase
are two separate transactions. But see Like-
Kind Exchanges under Nontaxable Trades,
later.
Redemption of stock.  A redemption of stock
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to
the capital gain or loss provisions unless the
redemption is a dividend or other distribution
on stock.
Dividend versus sale or trade.  Whether
a redemption is treated as a sale, trade, divi-
dend, or other distribution depends on the
circumstances in each case. Both direct and
indirect ownership of stock will be considered.
The redemption is treated as a sale or trade
of stock if:
1) The redemption is not essentially equiv-
alent to a dividend — see Dividends and
Other Corporate Distributions in chapter
1,
2) There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,
3) There is a complete redemption of all the
stock of the corporation owned by the
shareholder, or
4) The redemption is a distribution in partial
liquidation of a corporation. 
Redemption or retirement of bonds.  A re-
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at
their maturity generally is treated as a sale
or trade. See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds
and Discounted Debt Instruments under
Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss, later.
In addition, a significant modification of a
bond is treated as a trade of the original bond
for a new bond. For details, see section
1.1001–3 of the regulations.
Surrender of stock.  A surrender of stock
by a dominant shareholder who retains con-
trol of the corporation is treated as a contri-
bution to capital rather than as an immediate
loss deductible from taxable income. The
surrendering shareholder must reallocate his
or her basis in the surrendered shares to the
shares he or she retains.
Trade of investment property for an annu-
ity.  The transfer of investment property to a
corporation, trust, fund, foundation, or other
organization, in exchange for a fixed annuity
contract that will make guaranteed annual
payments to you for life, is a taxable trade. If
the present value of the annuity is more than
your basis in the property traded, you have a
taxable gain in the year of the trade. Figure
the present value of the annuity according to
factors used by commercial insurance com-
panies issuing annuities.
Transfer by inheritance.  The transfer of
property of a decedent to the executor or ad-
ministrator of the estate, or to the heirs or
beneficiaries, is not a sale or other disposi-
tion. No taxable gain or deductible loss results
from the transfer.
Termination of certain rights and obli-
gations.The cancellation, lapse, expiration,
or other termination of a right or obligation
with respect to property that is a capital asset
(or that would be a capital asset if you ac-
quired it) is treated as a sale. Any gain or loss
is treated as a capital gain or loss.
This rule does not apply to the retirement
of a debt instrument. See Redemption or re-
tirement of bonds, earlier.
Worthless Securities 
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than
those held for sale by a securities dealer) that
became worthless during the tax year are
treated as though they were sold on the last
day of the tax year. This affects whether your
capital loss is long-term or short-term. See
Holding Period, later.
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make
payments on a negotiable promissory note
that you issued for stock that became
worthless, you can deduct these payments
as losses in the years you actually make the
payments. Do not deduct them in the year the
stock became worthless.
How to report loss.Report worthless secu-
rities on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form
1040), whichever applies. In columns (c) and
(d), print “Worthless.” Enter the amount of
your loss in parentheses in column (f).
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not claim
a loss for a worthless security on your original
return for the year it becomes worthless, you
can file a claim for a credit or refund due to
Page 36 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

the loss. You must use Form 1040X,
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,
to amend your return for the year the security
became worthless. You must file it within 7
years from the date your original return for
that year had to be filed, or 2 years from the
date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
(Claims not due to worthless securities or bad
debts generally must be filed within 3 years
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from
the date the tax is paid.) For more information
about filing a claim, see Publication 556, Ex-
amination of Returns, Appeal Rights, and
Claims for Refund.
Constructive Sales
of Appreciated
Financial Positions
You are treated as having made a construc-
tive sale when you enter into certain trans-
actions involving an appreciated financial po-
sition (defined later) in stock, a partnership
interest, or certain debt instruments. You
must recognize gain as if the position were
disposed of at its fair market value on the date
of the constructive sale. This gives you a new
holding period for the position that begins on
the date of the constructive sale. Then, when
you close the transaction, you reduce your
gain (or increase your loss) by the gain rec-
ognized on the constructive sale.
Constructive sale.You are treated as hav-
ing made a constructive sale of an appreci-
ated financial position if you:
1) Enter into a short sale of the same or
substantially identical property, 
2) Enter into an offsetting notional principal
contract relating to the same or sub-
stantially identical property,
3) Enter into a futures or forward contract
to deliver the same or substantially
identical property (including a forward
contract that provides for cash settle-
ment), or
4) Acquire the same or substantially identi-
cal property (if the appreciated financial
position is a short sale, an offsetting
notional principal contract, or a futures
or forward contract).
You are also treated as having made a
constructive sale of an appreciated financial
position if a person related to you enters into
a transaction described above with a view
toward avoiding the constructive sale treat-
ment. For this purpose, a related person is
any related party described under Related
Party Transactions, later in this chapter.
Exception for nonmarketable securi-
ties.A contract for sale of any stock, debt
instrument, or partnership interest that is not
a marketable security is not a constructive
sale if it settles within 1 year of the date you
enter into it.
Exception for certain closed trans-
actions. Do not treat a transaction as a
constructive sale if all of the following are true.
1) You closed the transaction before the
end of the 30th day after the end of your
tax year.
2) You held the appreciated financial posi-
tion throughout the 60-day period be-
ginning on the date you closed the
transaction.
3) Your risk of loss was not reduced at any
time during that 60-day period by holding
certain other positions.
If a closed transaction is reestablished in
a substantially similar position during the
60-day period beginning on the date the first
transaction was closed, this exception still
applies if the reestablished position is closed
before the end of the 30th day after the end
of your tax year in which the first transaction
was closed and, after that closing, (2) and (3)
above are true.
Appreciated financial position.This is any
interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a
debt instrument (including a futures or forward
contract, a short sale, or an option) if dispos-
ing of the interest would result in a gain.
Exceptions. An appreciated financial
position does not include the following.
1) Any position from which all of the ap-
preciation is accounted for under marked
to market rules, including section 1256
contracts (described later under Section
1256 Contracts Marked to Market).
2) Any position in a debt instrument if:
a) The position unconditionally entitles
the holder to receive a specified
principal amount,
b) The interest payments (or other
similar amounts) with respect to the
position are payable at a fixed rate
or a variable rate described in sec-
tion 1.860G–1(a)(3) of the regu-
lations, and
c) The position is not convertible, ei-
ther directly or indirectly, into stock
of the issuer (or any related per-
son).
3) Any hedge with respect to a position
described in (2).
Certain trust instruments treated as
stock. For the constructive sale rules, an
interest in an actively traded trust is treated
as stock unless substantially all of the value
of the property held by the trust is debt that
qualifies for the exception to the definition of
an appreciated financial position (explained
in (2) above).
Sale of appreciated financial position.A
transaction treated as a constructive sale of
an appreciated financial position is not treated
as a constructive sale of any other appreci-
ated financial position, as long as you con-
tinue to hold the original position. However,
if you hold another appreciated financial po-
sition and dispose of the original position be-
fore closing the transaction that resulted in
the constructive sale, you are treated as if,
at the same time, you constructively sold the
other appreciated financial position.
Transitional rules.A special rule may apply
if you entered into a transaction before June
9, 1997, that was a constructive sale of an
appreciated financial position. Under this rule,
you do not take either the position or the
transaction into account to determine whether
any other constructive sale has occurred after
June 8, 1997. This rule applies only if, before
September 4, 1997, you clearly identified the
transaction and the position in your records
as offsetting. This rule does not apply as of
the date you close the transaction or stop
holding the position.
Transitional rule for decedents.A spe-
cial rule may apply if there was a constructive
sale before June 9, 1997, of an appreciated
financial position held by a decedent dying
after June 8, 1997. Under this rule, treat the
position and the transaction that resulted in
the constructive sale as property constituting
rights to receive an item of income in respect
of a decedent. However, gain on the position
that accrues after the transaction is closed is
not treated as income in respect of a dece-
dent.
This rule applies only if both the following
requirements are met.
1) The transaction resulting in the con-
structive sale remains open (with respect
to the decedent or any related person)—
a) For at least 2 years after the date
of the transaction, and
b) At any time during the 3-year period
ending on the date of the dece-
dent's death.
2) The transaction was not closed before
September 5, 1997.
Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market 
If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end
of the tax year, you generally must treat it as
sold at its fair market value on the last busi-
ness day of the tax year.
Section 1256 Contract
A section 1256 contract is any:
1) Regulated futures contract, 
2) Foreign currency contract, 
3) Nonequity option, or 
4) Dealer equity option.
Regulated futures contract.  This is a con-
tract that:
1) Provides that amounts that must be de-
posited to, or can be withdrawn from,
your margin account depend on daily
market conditions (a system of marking
to market), and 
2) Is traded on, or subject to the rules of,
a qualified board of exchange. 
A qualified board of exchange is a do-
mestic board of trade designated as a con-
tract market by the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, any board of trade or
exchange approved by the Secretary of the
Treasury, or a national securities exchange
registered with the Securities and Exchange
Commission.
Foreign currency contract.  This is a con-
tract that:
1) Requires delivery of a foreign currency
that has positions traded through regu-
lated futures contracts (or settlement of
which depends on the value of that type
of foreign currency), 
2) Is traded in the interbank market, and 
3) Is entered into at arm's length at a price
determined by reference to the price in
the interbank market.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 37

Bank forward contracts with maturity dates
that are longer than the maturities ordinarily
available for regulated futures contracts are
considered to meet the definition of a foreign
currency contract if the above three condi-
tions are satisfied.
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur-
rency transactions. These transactions may
result in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For
details, see Internal Revenue Code section
988 and regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7)
and 1.988-3.
Nonequity option.  This is any listed option
(defined below) that is not an equity option.
Nonequity options include debt options, com-
modity futures options, currency options, and
broad-based stock index options. A broad-
based stock index is based upon the value
of a group of diversified stocks or securities
(such as the Standard and Poor's 500 index).
Warrants based on a stock index that are
economically, substantially identical in all
material respects to options based on a stock
index are treated as options based on a stock
index.
Cash-settled options. Cash-settled
options based on a stock index and either
traded on or subject to the rules of a qualified
board of exchange are nonequity options if
the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) determines that the stock index is
broad based.
This rule does not apply to options estab-
lished by November 10, 1994, or before the
SEC determines that the stock index is broad
based.
Listed option.This is any option that is
traded on, or subject to the rules of, a qual-
ified board or exchange (as discussed earlier
under Regulated futures contract). A listed
option, however, does not include an option
that is a right to acquire stock from the issuer.
Dealer equity option.  This is any listed op-
tion that, for an options dealer:
1) Is an equity option, 
2) Is bought or granted by that dealer in the
normal course of the dealer's business
activity of dealing in options, and 
3) Is listed on the qualified board of ex-
change where that dealer is registered.
An options dealer is any person regis-
tered with an appropriate national securities
exchange as a market maker or specialist in
listed options.
Equity option.  This is any option:
1) To buy or sell stock, or 
2) That is valued directly or indirectly by
reference to any stock, group of stocks,
or stock index.
Equity options include options on certain
narrow-based stock indexes, but exclude
options on broad-based stock indexes and
options on stock index futures.
An equity option, however, does not in-
clude an option for any group of stocks or
stock index if:
1) The Commodities Futures Trading
Commission has designated a contract
market for a contract based on that
group or index, and that designation is
in effect, or 
2) The Secretary of the Treasury deter-
mines that the option meets the legal
requirements for such a designation.
Marked to Market Rules
A section 1256 contract that you hold at the
end of the tax year will generally be treated
as sold at its fair market value on the last
business day of the tax year, and you must
recognize any gain or loss that results. That
gain or loss is taken into account in figuring
your gain or loss when you later dispose of
the contract, as shown in the example under
60/40 rule, below.
Hedging exception.The marked to market
rules do not apply to hedging transactions.
See Hedging Transactions, later.
60/40 rule.  Under the marked to market
system, 60% of your capital gain or loss will
be treated as a long-term capital gain or loss,
and 40% will be treated as a short-term cap-
ital gain or loss. This is true regardless of how
long you actually held the property.
Example. On June 23, 1999, you bought
a regulated futures contract for $50,000. On
December 31, 1999 (the last business day of
your tax year), the fair market value of the
contract was $57,000. You have a $7,000
gain recognized on your 1999 tax return,
treated as 60% long-term and 40% short-term
capital gain.
On February 2, 2000, you sold the con-
tract for $56,000. Because you already rec-
ognized a $7,000 gain on your 1999 return,
you recognize a $1,000 loss ($57,000 −
$56,000) on your 2000 tax return, treated as
60% long-term and 40% short-term capital
loss.
Limited partners or entrepreneurs.The
60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity
options that result in capital gain or loss
allocable to limited partners or limited entre-
preneurs (defined later under Hedging
Transactions). Instead, these persons should
treat all these gains or losses as short term
under the marked to market system.
Terminations and transfers.The marked
to market rules also apply if your obligation
or rights under section 1256 contracts are
terminated or transferred during the tax year.
In this case, use the fair market value of each
section 1256 contract at the time of termi-
nation or transfer to determine the gain or
loss. Terminations or transfers may result
from any offsetting, delivery, exercise, as-
signment, or lapse of your obligation or rights
under section 1256 contracts.
Loss carryback election.An individual or
partnership having a net section 1256 con-
tracts loss (defined later) for 2000 can elect
to carry this loss back 3 years, instead of
carrying it over to the next year. See How To
Report, later, for information about reporting
this election on your return.
The loss carried back to any year under
this election cannot be more than the net
section 1256 contracts gain in that year. In
addition, the amount of loss carried back to
an earlier tax year cannot increase or produce
a net operating loss for that year.
The loss is carried to the earliest
carryback year first, and any unabsorbed loss
amount can then be carried to each of the
next 2 tax years. In each carryback year, treat
60% of the carryback amount as a long-term
capital loss and 40% as a short-term capital
loss from section 1256 contracts.
TIP
Do not treat any part of a net section
1256 contracts loss carried to 1997
as a 28% rate gain or loss. (For 1997,
certain long-term capital gains and losses
from property held 18 months or less were
treated as 28% rate gains and losses (dis-
cussed under Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses)).
If only a portion of the net section 1256
contracts loss is absorbed by carrying the
loss back, the unabsorbed portion can be
carried forward, under the capital loss carry-
over rules, to the year following the loss. (See
Capital Losses under Reporting Capital Gains
and Losses, later.) Figure your capital loss
carryover as if, for the loss year, you had an
additional short-term capital gain of 40% of
the amount of net section 1256 contracts loss
absorbed in the carryback years and an ad-
ditional long-term capital gain of 60% of the
absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treat any
capital loss carryover from losses on section
1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sec-
tion 1256 contracts for that year.
Net section 1256 contracts loss.This
loss is the lesser of:
1) The net capital loss for your tax year
determined by taking into account only
the gains and losses from section 1256
contracts, or 
2) The capital loss carryover to the next tax
year determined without this election.
Net section 1256 contracts gain.This
gain is the lesser of:
1) The capital gain net income for the
carryback year determined by taking into
account only gains and losses from
section 1256 contracts, or 
2) The capital gain net income for that year.
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain
for any carryback year without regard to the
net section 1256 contracts loss for the loss
year or any later tax year.
Traders in section 1256 contracts.Gain
or loss from the trading of section 1256 con-
tracts is capital gain or loss subject to the
marked to market rules. However, this does
not apply to contracts held for purposes of
hedging property if any loss from the property
would be an ordinary loss.
Treatment of underlying property. The
determination of whether an individual's gain
or loss from any property is ordinary or capital
gain or loss is made without regard to the fact
that the individual is actively engaged in
dealing in or trading section 1256 contracts
related to that property.
How To Report 
If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign
currency contracts in 2000 (or had unrealized
profit or loss on these contracts that were
open at the end of 1999 or 2000), you should
receive Form 1099–B, or an equivalent
statement, from your broker.
Form 6781.  Use Part I of Form 6781, Gains
and Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and
Straddles, to report your gains and losses
from all section 1256 contracts that are open
at the end of the year or that were closed out
Page 38 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

during the year. This includes the amount
shown in box 9 of Form 1099–B. Then enter
the net amount of these gains and losses on
Schedule D (Form 1040). Include a copy of
Form 6781 with your income tax return.
If the Form 1099–B you receive includes
a straddle or hedging transaction, defined
later, it may be necessary to show certain
adjustments on Form 6781. Follow the Form
6781 instructions for completing Part I.
Loss carryback election. To carry back
your loss under the election procedures de-
scribed earlier, file Form 1040X or appropriate
amended return for the year to which you are
carrying the loss with an amended Form 6781
attached. Follow the instructions for complet-
ing Form 6781 for the loss year to make this
election.
Hedging Transactions 
The marked to market rules, described ear-
lier, do not apply to hedging transactions. A
transaction is a hedging transaction if both of
the following conditions are met.
1) You entered into the transaction in the
normal course of your trade or business
primarily to manage the risk of: 
a) Price changes or currency fluctu-
ations on ordinary property you hold
(or will hold), or 
b) Interest rate or price changes, or
currency fluctuations, on your cur-
rent or future borrowings or ordinary
obligations.
2) You clearly identified the transaction as
being a hedging transaction before the
close of the day on which you entered
into it.
This hedging transaction exception does not
apply to transactions entered into by or for
any syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership,
S corporation, or other entity (other than a
regular corporation) that allocates more than
35% of its losses to limited partners or limited
entrepreneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a
person who has an interest in an enterprise
(but not as a limited partner) and who does
not actively participate in its management.
However, an interest is not considered held
by a limited partner or entrepreneur if the in-
terest holder actively participates (or did so
for at least 5 full years) in the management
of the entity, or is the spouse, child (including
a legally adopted child), grandchild, or parent
of an individual who actively participates in
the management of the entity.
Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited
partner or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the
amount of a hedging loss you can claim is
limited. A “hedging loss” is the amount by
which the allowable deductions in a tax year
that resulted from a hedging transaction (de-
termined without regard to the limit) are more
than the income received or accrued during
the tax year from this transaction.
Any hedging loss that is allocated to you
for the tax year is limited to your taxable in-
come for that year from the trade or business
in which the hedging transaction occurred.
Ignore any hedging transaction items in de-
termining this taxable income. If you have a
hedging loss that is disallowed because of
this limit, you can carry it over to the next tax
year as a deduction resulting from a hedging
transaction.
If the hedging transaction relates to prop-
erty other than stock or securities, the limit
on hedging losses applies if the limited part-
ner or entrepreneur is an individual.
The limit on hedging losses does not apply
to any hedging loss to the extent that it is
more than all your unrecognized gains from
hedging transactions at the end of the tax
year that are from the trade or business in
which the hedging transaction occurred. The
term “unrecognized gain” has the same
meaning as defined under Straddles, later.
Sale of property used in a hedge.Once
you identify personal property as being part
of a hedging transaction, you must treat gain
from its sale or exchange as ordinary income,
not capital gain.
Self-Employment Income 
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary
course of a commodity or option dealer's
trading in section 1256 contracts and property
related to these contracts are included in net
earnings from self-employment. In addition,
the rules relating to contributions to self-
employment retirement plans apply. For in-
formation on retirement plan contributions,
see chapter 3 of Publication 535, Business
Expenses, Publication 560, Retirement Plans
for Small Business, and Publication 590, In-
dividual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).
Basis of
Investment Property 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Basis
Fair market value 
Original issue discount (OID) 
Basis is a way of measuring your investment
in property for tax purposes. You must know
the basis of your property to determine
whether you have a gain or loss on its sale
or other disposition.
Investment property you buy normally has
an original basis equal to its cost. If you get
property in some way other than buying it,
such as by gift or inheritance, its fair market
value may be important in figuring the basis.
Cost Basis 
The basis of property you buy is usually its
cost. The cost is the amount you pay in cash,
debt obligations, or other property or services.
Unstated interest.  If you buy property under
a deferred-payment plan that charges little or
no interest, you may have to treat part of the
purchase price as interest. You must subtract
this amount, if any, from your cost to find your
basis. For more information, see Unstated
Interest in Publication 537.
Basis Other Than Cost 
There are times when you must use a basis
other than cost. In these cases, the fair
market value or the adjusted basis of certain
property may be used.
Fair market value.  This is the price at which
the property would change hands between a
buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy
or sell and both having reasonable knowledge
of all the relevant facts. Sales of similar
property, around the same date, may be
helpful in figuring fair market value.
Property Received for Services
If you receive investment property for ser-
vices, you must include the property's fair
market value in income. The amount you in-
clude in income then becomes your basis in
the property. If the services were performed
for a price that was agreed to beforehand, this
price will be accepted as the fair market value
of the property if there is no evidence to the
contrary.
Restricted property.If you receive, as pay-
ment for services, property that is subject to
certain restrictions, your basis in the property
generally is its fair market value when it be-
comes substantially vested. Property be-
comes substantially vested when it is
transferable or is no longer subject to sub-
stantial risk of forfeiture, whichever happens
first. See Restricted Property in Publication
525 for more information.
Bargain purchases.  If you buy investment
property at less than fair market value, as
payment for services, you must include the
difference in income. Your basis in the prop-
erty is the price you pay plus the amount you
include in income.
Property Received
in Taxable Trades 
If you received investment property in trade
for other property, the basis of the new prop-
erty is its fair market value at the time of the
trade unless you received the property in a
nontaxable trade.
Example. You trade A Company stock for
B Company stock having a fair market value
of $1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A
Company stock is less than $1,200, you have
a taxable gain on the trade. If the adjusted
basis of the A company stock is more than
$1,200, you have a deductible loss on the
trade. The basis of your B Company stock is
$1,200. If you later sell the B Company stock
for $1,300, you will have a gain of $100.
Property Received
in Nontaxable Trades 
If you have a nontaxable trade, you do not
recognize gain or loss until you dispose of the
property you received in the trade. See Non-
taxable Trades, later.
The basis of property you received in a
nontaxable or partly nontaxable trade is gen-
erally the same as the adjusted basis of the
property you gave up. Increase this amount
by any cash you paid, additional costs you
had, and any gain recognized. Reduce this
amount by any cash or unlike property you
received, any loss recognized, any liability of
yours that was assumed or treated as as-
sumed.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 39

Property Received
From Your Spouse 
If property is transferred to you from your
spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is
incident to your divorce), your basis is the
same as your spouse's or former spouse's
adjusted basis just before the transfer. See
Transfers Between Spouses, later.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. The transferor must
give you the records necessary to
determine the adjusted basis and
holding period of the property as of the date
of the transfer.
Property Received as a Gift 
To figure your basis in property that you re-
ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted
basis to the donor just before it was given to
you, its fair market value at the time it was
given to you, the amount of any gift tax paid
on it, and the date it was given to you.
Fair market value less than donor's ad-
justed basis.If the fair market value of the
property at the time of the gift was less than
the donor's adjusted basis just before the gift,
your basis for gain on its sale or other dis-
position is the same as the donor's adjusted
basis plus or minus any required adjustments
to basis during the period you hold the prop-
erty. Your basis for loss is its fair market
value at the time of the gift plus or minus any
required adjustments to basis during the pe-
riod you hold the property.
No gain or loss.If you use the basis for
figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and
then use the basis for figuring a loss and the
result is a gain, you will have neither a gain
nor a loss.
Example. You receive a gift of investment
property having an adjusted basis of $10,000
at the time of the gift. The fair market value
at the time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell
the property for $9,500. You have neither gain
nor loss. Your basis for figuring gain is
$10,000, and $10,000 minus $9,500 results
in a $500 loss. Your basis for figuring loss is
$9,000, and $9,500 minus $9,000 results in
a $500 gain.
Fair market value equal to or more than
donor's adjusted basis. If the fair market
value of the property at the time of the gift
was equal to or more than the donor's ad-
justed basis just before the gift, your basis for
gain or loss on its sale or other disposition
is the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus
any required adjustments to basis during the
period you hold the property. Also, you may
be allowed to add to the donor's adjusted
basis all or part of any gift tax paid, depending
on the date of the gift.
Gift received before 1977.If you re-
ceived property as a gift before 1977, your
basis in the property is the donor's adjusted
basis increased by the total gift tax paid on
the gift. However, your basis cannot be more
than the fair market value of the gift at the
time it was given to you.
Example 1. You were given XYZ Com-
pany stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the
stock had a fair market value of $21,000. The
donor's adjusted basis was $20,000. The do-
nor paid a gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your
basis for gain or loss is $20,500, the donor's
adjusted basis plus the amount of gift tax
paid.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1 except that the gift tax paid was
$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's
adjusted basis plus the gift tax paid, but lim-
ited to the fair market value of the stock at the
time of the gift.
Gift received after 1976.If you received
property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the
donor's adjusted basis increased by the part
of the gift tax paid that was for the net in-
crease in value of the gift. You figure this part
by multiplying the gift tax paid on the gift by
a fraction. The numerator (top part) is the net
increase in value of the gift and the denomi-
nator (bottom part) is the amount of the gift.
The net increase in value of the gift is the
fair market value of the gift minus the donor's
adjusted basis. The amount of the gift is its
value for gift tax purposes after reduction by
any annual exclusion and marital or charitable
deduction that applies to the gift.
Example. In 2000, you received a gift of
property from your mother. At the time of the
gift, the property had a fair market value of
$100,000 and an adjusted basis to her of
$40,000. The amount of the gift for gift tax
purposes was $90,000 ($100,000 minus the
$10,000 annual exclusion), and your mother
paid a gift tax of $21,000. You figure your
basis in the following way:
Part sale, part gift.If you get property in a
transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift,
your basis is the larger of the amount you
paid for the property or the transferor's ad-
justed basis in the property at the time of the
transfer. Add to that amount the amount of
any gift tax paid on the gift, as described in
the preceding discussion. For figuring loss,
your basis is limited to the property's fair
market value at the time of the transfer.
Gift tax information.For information on gift
tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to Es-
tate and Gift Taxes.
Inherited Property 
If you inherited property, your basis in that
property generally is its fair market value (its
appraised value on the federal estate tax re-
turn) on:
1) The date of the decedent's death, or 
2) The later alternate valuation date if the
estate qualifies for, and elects to use,
alternate valuation. 
If no federal estate tax return was filed, use
the appraised value on the date of death for
state inheritance or transmission taxes.
Appreciated property you gave the dece-
dent. Your basis in certain appreciated
property that you inherited is the decedent's
adjusted basis in the property immediately
before death rather than its fair market value.
This applies to appreciated property that you
or your spouse gave the decedent as a gift
during the one-year period ending on the date
of death. Appreciated property is any property
whose fair market value on the day you gave
it to the decedent was more than its adjusted
basis.
More information. See Publication 551,
Basis of Assets, for more information on the
basis of inherited property, including commu-
nity property, a joint tenancy or tenancy by the
entirety, a qualified joint interest, and a farm
or business.
Adjusted Basis 
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a
sale, exchange, or other disposition of prop-
erty or figure allowable depreciation, de-
pletion, or amortization, you usually must
make certain adjustments (increases and de-
creases) to the basis of the property. The re-
sult of these adjustments to the basis is the
adjusted basis.
Adjustments to the basis of stocks and
bonds are explained in the following dis-
cussion. For information about other adjust-
ments to basis, see Publication 551.
Stocks and Bonds 
The basis of stocks or bonds you own gen-
erally is the purchase price plus the costs of
purchase, such as commissions and record-
ing or transfer fees. If you acquired stock or
bonds other than by purchase, your basis is
usually determined by fair market value or the
previous owner's adjusted basis as discussed
earlier under Basis Other Than Cost.
The basis of stock must be adjusted for
certain events that occur after purchase. For
example, if you receive more stock from
nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits,
you must reduce the basis of your original
stock. You must also reduce your basis when
you receive nontaxable distributions, because
these are a return of capital.
Identifying stock or bonds sold.If you can
adequately identify the shares of stock or the
bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
basis of the particular shares of stock or
bonds.
Identification not possible.If you buy
and sell securities at various times in varying
quantities and you cannot adequately identify
the shares you sell, the basis of the securities
you sell is the basis of the securities you ac-
quired first. Except for certain mutual fund
shares, discussed later, you cannot use the
average price per share to figure gain or loss
on the sale of the shares.
Example. You bought 100 shares of
stock of XYZ Corporation in 1986 for $10 a
share. In January 1987 you bought another
200 shares for $11 a share. In July 1987 you
gave your son 50 shares. In December 1989
you bought 100 shares for $9 a share. In April
2000 you sold 130 shares. You cannot iden-
tify the shares you disposed of, so you must
use the stock you acquired first to figure the
basis. The shares of stock you gave your son
had a basis of $500 (50 × $10). You figure the
basis of the 130 shares of stock you sold in
2000 as follows:
Fair market value ..................................... $100,000
Minus: Adjusted basis .............................. 40,000
Net increase in value of gift ..................... $60,000
Gift tax paid ............................................. $21,000
Multiplied by .667 ($60,000 ÷ $90,000) ... .667
Gift tax due to net increase in value ....... $14,007
Plus: Adjusted basis of property to your
mother ...................................................... 40,000
Your basis in the property $54,007
Page 40 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Adequate identification.  You will make an
adequate identification if you show that cer-
tificates representing shares of stock from a
lot that you bought on a certain date or for a
certain price were delivered to your broker or
other agent.
Broker holds stock.If you have left the
stock certificates with your broker or other
agent, you will make an adequate identifica-
tion if you:
1) Tell your broker or other agent the par-
ticular stock to be sold or transferred at
the time of the sale or transfer, and 
2) Receive a written confirmation of this
from your broker or other agent within a
reasonable time.
Single stock certificate.If you bought
stock in different lots at different times and
you hold a single stock certificate for this
stock, you will make an adequate identifica-
tion if you:
1) Tell your broker or other agent the par-
ticular stock to be sold or transferred
when you deliver the certificate to your
broker or other agent, and 
2) Receive a written confirmation of this
from your broker or other agent within a
reasonable time.
Stock identified this way is the stock sold or
transferred even if stock certificates from a
different lot are delivered to the broker or
other agent.
If you sell part of the stock represented
by a single certificate directly to the buyer in-
stead of through a broker, you will make an
adequate identification if you keep a written
record of the particular stock that you intend
to sell.
Bonds. These methods of identification
also apply to bonds sold or transferred.
Stock in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis
of stock in a regulated investment company
(mutual fund) or a real estate investment trust
(REIT) is generally figured in the same way
as the basis of other stock.
Mutual fund load charges. Your cost
basis in mutual fund stock often includes a
sales fee, also known as a load charge. But,
in certain cases, you cannot include the entire
amount of a load charge in your basis if the
charge gives you a reinvestment right. For
more information, see Publication 564.
Choosing average basis for mutual
fund stock.You can choose to use the av-
erage basis of mutual fund stock if you ac-
quired the stock at various times and prices
and left it on deposit in an account kept by a
custodian or agent who acquires or redeems
the stock. The methods you can use to figure
average basis are explained in Publication
564.
Undistributed capital gains.If you had
to include in your income any undistributed
capital gains of the mutual fund or REIT, in-
crease your basis in the stock by the differ-
ence between the amount you included and
the amount of tax paid for you by the fund or
REIT. See Undistributed capital gains of
mutual funds and REITs under Capital Gain
Distributions in chapter 1.
50 shares (50 × $10) balance of stock
bought in 1986 ............................................. $500
Automatic investment service.  If you par-
ticipate in an automatic investment service,
your basis for each share of stock, including
fractional shares, bought by the bank or other
agent is the purchase price plus a share of
the broker's commission.
Dividend reinvestment plans.  If you par-
ticipate in a dividend reinvestment plan and
receive stock from the corporation at a dis-
count, your basis is the full fair market value
of the stock on the dividend payment date.
You must include the amount of the discount
in your income.
Public utilities.  If, before 1986, you ex-
cluded from income the value of stock you
had received under a qualified public utility
reinvestment plan, your basis in that stock is
zero.
Stock dividends.  Stock dividends are dis-
tributions made by a corporation of its own
stock. Generally, stock dividends are not tax-
able to you. However, see Distributions of
Stock and Stock Rights under Nontaxable
Distributions in chapter 1 for some ex-
ceptions. If the stock dividends are not taxa-
ble, you must divide your basis for the old
stock between the old and new stock.
New and old stock identical.If the new
stock you received as a nontaxable dividend
is identical to the old stock on which the divi-
dend was declared, divide the adjusted basis
of the old stock by the number of shares of
old and new stock. The result is your basis for
each share of stock.
Example 1. You owned one share of
common stock that you bought for $45. The
corporation distributed two new shares of
common stock for each share held. You then
had three shares of common stock. Your ba-
sis in each share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3). 
Example 2. You owned two shares of
common stock. You had bought one for $30
and the other for $45. The corporation dis-
tributed two new shares of common stock for
each share held. You had six shares after the
distribution—three with a basis of $10 each
($30 ÷ 3) and three with a basis of $15 each
($45 ÷ 3).
New and old stock not identical.If the
new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-
dend is not identical to the old stock on which
it was declared, the basis of the new stock is
calculated differently. Divide the adjusted ba-
sis of the old stock between the old and the
new stock in the ratio of the fair market value
of each lot of stock to the total fair market
value of both lots on the date of distribution
of the new stock.
Example. You bought a share of common
stock for $100. Later, the corporation distrib-
uted a share of preferred stock for each share
of common stock held. At the date of distri-
bution, your common stock had a fair market
value of $150 and the preferred stock had a
fair market value of $50. You figure the basis
of the old and new stock by dividing your
$100 basis between them. The basis of your
common stock is $75 ($150/$200 × $100),
and the basis of the new preferred stock is
$25 ($50/$200 × $100).
Stock bought at various times.Figure
the basis of stock dividends received on stock
you bought at various times and at different
prices by allocating to each lot of stock the
share of the stock dividends due to it.
Stock splits.  Figure the basis of stock
splits in the same way as stock dividends if
identical stock is distributed on the stock held.
Taxable stock dividends.If your stock
dividend is taxable when you receive it, the
basis of your new stock is its fair market value
on the date of distribution. The basis of your
old stock does not change.
Stock rights.  A stock right is a right to ac-
quire a corporation's stock. It may be exer-
cised, it may be sold if it has a market value,
or it may expire. Stock rights are rarely taxa-
ble when you receive them. See Distributions
of Stock and Stock Rights under Nontaxable
Distributions in chapter 1.
Taxable stock rights. If you receive
stock rights that are taxable, the basis of the
rights is their fair market value at the time of
distribution. The basis of the old stock does
not change.
Nontaxable stock rights.If you receive
nontaxable stock rights and allow them to
expire, they have no basis.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock
rights and if, at the time of distribution, the
stock rights had a fair market value of 15%
or more of the fair market value of the old
stock, you must divide the adjusted basis of
the old stock between the old stock and the
stock rights. Use a ratio of the fair market
value of each to the total fair market value of
both at the time of distribution.
If the fair market value of the stock rights
was less than 15%, their basis is zero. How-
ever, you can choose to divide the basis of
the old stock between the old stock and the
stock rights. To make the choice, attach a
statement to your return for the year in which
you received the rights, stating that you
choose to divide the basis of the stock.
Basis of new stock.If you exercise the
stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its
cost plus the basis of the stock rights exer-
cised.
Example. You own 100 shares of ABC
Company stock, which cost you $22 per
share. The ABC Company gave you 10 non-
taxable stock rights that would allow you to
buy 10 more shares at $26 per share. At the
time the stock rights were distributed, the
stock had a market value of $30, not including
the stock rights. Each stock right had a mar-
ket value of $3. The market value of the stock
rights was less than 15% of the market value
of the stock, but you chose to divide the basis
of your stock between the stock and the
rights. You figure the basis of the rights and
the basis of the old stock as follows:
If you sell the rights, the basis for figuring
gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right.
If you exercise the rights, the basis of the
stock you acquire is the price you pay ($26)
plus the basis of the right exercised ($2.18),
or $28.18 per share. The remaining basis of
the old stock is $21.78 per share.
80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in Janu-
ary 1987 ....................................................... 880
Total basis of stock sold in 2000 $1,380
100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old stock
100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of old
stock
10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights
($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, new
basis of old stock
($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of rights
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 41

Investment property received in liqui-
dation.  In general, if you receive investment
property as a distribution in partial or com-
plete liquidation of a corporation and if you
recognize gain or loss when you acquire the
property, your basis in the property is its fair
market value at the time of the distribution.
S corporation stock.  You must increase
your basis in stock of an S corporation by
your pro rata share of the following items.
 All income items of the S corporation, in-
cluding tax-exempt income, that are sep-
arately stated and passed through to you
as a shareholder.
 The nonseparately stated income of the
S corporation.
 The amount of the deduction for depletion
(other than oil and gas depletion) that is
more than the basis of the property being
depleted.
You must decrease your basis in stock
of an S corporation by your pro rata share of
the following items.
 Distributions by the S corporation that
were not included in your income.
 All loss and deduction items of the S
corporation that are separately stated and
passed through to you.
 Any nonseparately stated loss of the S
corporation.
 Any expense of the S corporation that is
not deductible in figuring its taxable in-
come and not properly chargeable to a
capital account.
 The amount of your deduction for de-
pletion of oil and gas wells to the extent
the deduction is not more than your share
of the adjusted basis of the wells.
However, your basis in the stock cannot be
reduced below zero.
Specialized small business investment
company stock or partnership interest. If
you bought this stock or interest as replace-
ment property for publicly traded securities
you sold at a gain, you must reduce the basis
of the stock or interest by the amount of any
postponed gain on that sale. See Rollover of
Gain From Publicly Traded Securities, later.
Qualified small business stock. If you
bought this stock as replacement property for
other qualified small business stock you sold
at a gain, you must reduce the basis of this
replacement stock by the amount of any
postponed gain on the earlier sale. See Gains
on Qualified Small Business Stock, later.
Short sales.  If you cannot deduct payments
you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on
stock used in a short sale, the amount you
pay to the lender is a capital expense, and
you must add it to the basis of the stock used
to close the short sale.
See Short Sales, later, for information
about deducting payments in lieu of divi-
dends.
Premiums on bonds.  If you buy a bond at
a premium, the premium is treated as part of
your basis in the bond. If you choose to
amortize the premium paid on a taxable bond,
you must reduce the basis of the bond by the
amortized part of the premium each year over
the life of the bond.
Although you cannot deduct the premium
on a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it
to determine your adjusted basis in the bond.
You must reduce the basis of the bond by the
premium you amortized for the period you
held the bond.
See Bond Premium Amortization in chap-
ter 3 for more information.
Market discount on bonds.  If you include
market discount on a bond in income cur-
rently, increase the basis of your bond by the
amount of market discount you include in your
income. See Market Discount Bonds in
chapter 1 for more information.
Acquisition discount on short-term obli-
gations.  If you include acquisition discount
on a short-term obligation in your income
currently, increase the basis of the obligation
by the amount of acquisition discount you in-
clude in your income. See Discount on
Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 for more
information.
Original issue discount (OID) on debt in-
struments.  Increase the basis of a debt in-
strument by the amount of OID that you in-
clude in your income. See Original Issue
Discount (OID) in chapter 1.
Discounted tax-exempt obligations.
OID on tax-exempt obligations is generally
not taxable. However, when you dispose of
a tax-exempt obligation issued after Septem-
ber 3, 1982, that you acquired after March 1,
1984, you must accrue OID on the obligation
to determine its adjusted basis. The accrued
OID is added to the basis of the obligation to
determine your gain or loss.
For information on determining OID on a
long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments
Issued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985
or Debt Instruments Issued After 1984,
whichever applies, in Publication 1212 under
Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt
Instruments.
If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity
of 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules
for acquisition discount on short-term obli-
gations. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-
gations in chapter 1.
Stripped tax-exempt obligation.If you
acquired a stripped tax-exempt bond or cou-
pon after October 22, 1986, you must accrue
OID on it to determine its adjusted basis when
you dispose of it. For stripped tax-exempt
bonds or coupons acquired after June 10,
1987, part of this OID may be taxable. You
accrue the OID on these obligations in the
manner described in chapter 1 under Stripped
Bonds and Coupons.
Increase your basis in the stripped tax-
exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and
nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your
basis by the interest that accrued (but was
not paid, and was not previously reflected in
your basis) before the date you sold the bond
or coupon. In addition, for bonds acquired
after June 10, 1987, add to your basis any
accrued market discount not previously re-
flected in basis.
How To Figure
Gain or Loss 
You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of
property by comparing the amount you realize
with the adjusted basis of the property.
Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale
or trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property
you transfer is more than the amount you re-
alize, the difference is a loss.
Amount realized. The amount you realize
from a sale or trade of property is everything
you receive for the property. This includes the
money you receive plus the fair market value
of any property or services you receive.
If you finance the buyer's purchase of your
property and the debt instrument does not
provide for adequate stated interest, the un-
stated interest will reduce the amount real-
ized. For more information, see Publication
537.
Fair market value.  Fair market value is
the price at which property would change
hands between a buyer and a seller, neither
being forced to buy or sell and both having
reasonable knowledge of all the relevant
facts.
The fair market value of notes or other
debt instruments you receive as a part of the
sale price is usually the best amount you can
get from selling them to, or discounting them
with, a bank or other buyer of debt instru-
ments.
Example. You trade A Company stock
with an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Com-
pany stock with a fair market value of
$10,000, which is your amount realized. Your
gain is $3,000 ($10,000 minus $7,000). If you
also receive a note for $6,000 that has a dis-
count value of $4,000, your gain is $7,000
($10,000 plus $4,000 minus $7,000).
Debt paid off.A debt against the prop-
erty, or against you, that is paid off as a part
of the transaction or that is assumed by the
buyer must be included in the amount real-
ized. This is true even if neither you nor the
buyer is personally liable for the debt. For
example, if you sell or trade property that is
subject to a nonrecourse loan, the amount
you realize generally includes the full amount
of the note assumed by the buyer even if the
amount of the note is more than the fair
market value of the property.
Example. You sell stock that you had
pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000
in cash. The amount realized is $28,000
($20,000 plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000
($28,000 minus $6,000).
Payment of cash. If you trade property
and cash for other property, the amount you
realize is the fair market value of the property
you receive. Determine your gain or loss by
subtracting the cash you pay and the adjusted
basis of the property you traded in from the
amount you realize. If the result is a positive
number, it is a gain. If the result is a negative
number, it is a loss.
Page 42 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

No gain or loss. You may have to use a
basis for figuring gain that is different from the
basis used for figuring loss. In this case, you
may have neither a gain nor a loss. See No
gain or loss in the discussion on the basis of
property you received as a gift under Basis
Other Than Cost, earlier.
Nontaxable Trades
This section discusses trades that generally
do not result in a taxable gain or a deductible
loss. For more information on nontaxable
trades, see chapter 1 of Publication 544.
Like-Kind Exchanges
If you trade business or investment property
for other business or investment property of
a like kind, you do not pay tax on any gain
or deduct any loss until you sell or dispose
of the property you receive. To be nontaxable,
a trade must meet all six of the following
conditions.
1) The property must be business or in-
vestment property. You must hold both
the property you trade and the property
you receive for productive use in your
trade or business or for investment.
Neither property may be property used
for personal purposes, such as your
home or family car.
2) The property must not be held primarily
for sale. The property you trade and the
property you receive must not be prop-
erty you sell to customers, such as mer-
chandise.
3) The property must not be stocks, bonds,
notes, choses in action, certificates of
trust or beneficial interest, or other se-
curities or evidences of indebtedness or
interest, including partnership interests.
However, you can have a nontaxable
trade of corporate stocks under a differ-
ent rule, as discussed later.
4) There must be a trade of like property.
The trade of real estate for real estate,
or personal property for similar personal
property, is a trade of like property. The
trade of an apartment house for a store
building, or a panel truck for a pickup
truck, is a trade of like property. The
trade of a piece of machinery for a store
building is not a trade of like property.
Real property located in the United
States and real property located outside
the United States are not like property.
Also, personal property used predomi-
nantly within the United States and per-
sonal property used predominantly out-
side the United States are not like
property.
5) The property to be received must be
identified within 45 days after the date
you transfer the property given up in the
trade.
6) The property to be received must be re-
ceived by the earlier of: 
a) The 180th day after the date on
which you transfer the property
given up in the trade, or 
b) The due date, including extensions,
for your tax return for the year in
which the transfer of the property
given up occurs.
If you trade property with a related party
in a like-kind exchange, a special rule may
apply. See Related Party Transactions, later
in this chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publi-
cation 544 for more information on exchanges
of business property and special rules for
exchanges using qualified intermediaries or
involving multiple properties.
Partly nontaxable exchange.If you receive
cash or unlike property in addition to the like
property, and the preceding six conditions are
met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You
are taxed on any gain you realize, but only
up to the amount of the cash and the fair
market value of the unlike property you re-
ceive. You cannot deduct a loss.
Like property and unlike property
transferred.If you give up unlike property in
addition to the like property, you must recog-
nize gain or loss on the unlike property you
give up. The gain or loss is the difference
between the adjusted basis of the unlike
property and its fair market value.
Like property and money transferred.If
conditions (1) — (6) are met, you have a
nontaxable trade even if you pay money in
addition to the like property.
Basis of property received.You figure your
basis in property received in a nontaxable or
partly nontaxable trade as explained earlier
under Basis Other Than Cost, earlier.
How to report.  You must report the trade
of like property on Form 8824. If you figure
a recognized gain or loss on Form 8824, re-
port it on Schedule D of Form 1040 or on
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,
whichever applies.
For information on using Form 4797, see
chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Corporate Stocks
The following trades of corporate stocks
generally do not result in a taxable gain or a
deductible loss.
Stock for stock of the same corporation.
You can exchange common stock for com-
mon stock or preferred stock for preferred
stock in the same corporation without having
a recognized gain or loss. This is true for a
trade between two stockholders as well as a
trade between a stockholder and the corpo-
ration.
Money or other property received.If in
an otherwise nontaxable trade you receive
money or other property in addition to stock,
then your gain on the trade, if any, is taxed,
but only up to the amount of the money or
other property. Any loss is not recognized.
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonqual-
ified preferred stock is generally treated as
property other than stock. Generally, this ap-
plies to preferred stock with one or more of
the following features.
 The holder has the right to require the
issuer or a related person to redeem or
purchase the stock.
 The issuer or a related person is required
to redeem or purchase the stock.
 The issuer or a related person has the
right to redeem the stock, and on the is-
sue date, it is more likely than not that the
right will be exercised.
 The dividend rate on the stock varies with
reference to interest rates, commodity
prices, or similar indices.
For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre-
ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
stances, you can trade common stock for
preferred stock, preferred stock for common
stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
another corporation without having a recog-
nized gain or loss. These trades must be part
of mergers, recapitalizations, transfers to
controlled corporations, bankruptcies, corpo-
rate divisions, corporate acquisitions, or other
corporate reorganizations.
Convertible stocks and bonds.  You gen-
erally will not have a recognized gain or loss
if you convert bonds into stock or preferred
stock into common stock of the same corpo-
ration according to a conversion privilege in
the terms of the bond or the preferred stock
certificate.
Example. In November, you bought for
$1 a right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling
you, on payment of $99, to subscribe to a
bond issued by that corporation.
On December 2, you subscribed to the
bond, which was issued on December 9. The
bond contained a clause stating that you
would receive one share of XYZ Corporation
common stock on surrender of one bond and
the payment of $50.
Later, you presented the bond and $50
and received one share of XYZ Corporation
common stock. You did not have a recog-
nized gain or loss. This is true whether the fair
market value of the stock was more or less
than $150 on the date of the conversion.
The basis of your share of stock is $150
($1 + $99 + $50). Your holding period is split.
Your holding period for the part based on your
ownership of the bond ($100 basis) begins
on December 2. Your holding period for the
part based on your cash investment ($50 ba-
sis) begins on the day after you acquired the
share of stock.
Bonds for stock of another corporation.
Generally, if you convert the bonds of one
corporation into common stock of another
corporation, according to the terms of the
bond issue, you must recognize gain or loss
up to the difference between the fair market
value of the stock received and the adjusted
basis of the bonds exchanged. In some in-
stances, however, such as trades that are
part of mergers or other corporate reorgan-
izations, you will have no recognized gain or
loss if certain requirements are met. For more
information about the tax consequences of
converting securities of one corporation into
common stock of another corporation, under
circumstances such as those just described,
consult the respective corporations and the
terms of the bond issue. This information is
also available on the prospectus of the bond
issue.
Property for stock of a controlled corpo-
ration.If you transfer property to a corpo-
ration solely in exchange for stock in that
corporation, and immediately after the trade
you are in control of the corporation, you or-
dinarily will not recognize a gain or loss. This
rule applies both to individuals and to groups
who transfer property to a corporation. It does
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 43

not apply if the corporation is an investment
company.
If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar
proceeding and you transfer property to a
controlled corporation under a plan, other
than a reorganization, you must recognize
gain to the extent the stock you receive in the
exchange is used to pay off your debts.
For this purpose, to be in control of a
corporation, you or your group of transferors
must own, immediately after the exchange,
at least 80% of the total combined voting
power of all classes of stock entitled to vote
and at least 80% of the outstanding shares
of each class of nonvoting stock of the cor-
poration.
If this provision applies to you, you must
attach to your return a complete statement
of all facts pertinent to the exchange.
Money or other property received.If,
in an otherwise nontaxable trade of property
for corporate stock, you also receive money
or property other than stock, you may have
a taxable gain. However, you are taxed only
up to the amount of money plus the fair mar-
ket value of the other property you receive.
The rules for figuring taxable gain in this sit-
uation generally follow those for a partially
nontaxable exchange discussed earlier under
Like-Kind Exchanges. If the property you give
up includes depreciable property, the taxable
gain may have to be reported as ordinary in-
come because of depreciation. (See chapter
3 of Publication 544.) No loss is recognized.
Nonqualified preferred stock (described
earlier under Stock for stock of the same
corporation) received is generally treated as
property other than stock.
Basis of stock or other property re-
ceived. The basis of the stock you receive
is generally the adjusted basis of the property
you transfer. Increase this amount by any
amount that was treated as a dividend, plus
any gain recognized on the trade. Decrease
this amount by any cash you received and the
fair market value of any other property you
received.
The basis of any other property you re-
ceive is its fair market value on the date of the
trade.
Insurance Policies
and Annuities
You will not have a recognized gain or loss if
you trade:
1) A life insurance contract for another life
insurance contract or for an endowment
or annuity contract, 
2) An endowment contract for an annuity
contract or for another endowment con-
tract that provides for regular payments
beginning at a date not later than the
beginning date under the old contract,
or 
3) An annuity contract for another annuity
contract.
The insured or annuitant must be the same
under both contracts. Exchanges of contracts
not included in this list, such as an annuity
contract for an endowment contract, or an
annuity or endowment contract for a life in-
surance contract, are taxable.
U.S. Treasury
Notes or Bonds
You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury
obligations for other issues, designated by the
Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss
recognized on the trade.
See the discussion in chapter 1 under
U.S. Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for in-
formation about income from these invest-
ments.
Transfers Between
Spouses
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a
transfer of property from an individual to (or
in trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if inci-
dent to a divorce, a former spouse. This
nonrecognition rule does not apply if the re-
cipient spouse or former spouse is a nonres-
ident alien. The rule also does not apply to a
transfer in trust to the extent the adjusted
basis of the property is less than the amount
of the liabilities assumed plus any liabilities
on the property.
Any transfer of property to a spouse or
former spouse on which gain or loss is not
recognized is treated by the recipient as a gift
and is not considered a sale or exchange.
The recipient's basis in the property will be
the same as the adjusted basis of the giver
immediately before the transfer. This carry-
over basis rule applies whether the adjusted
basis of the transferred property is less than,
equal to, or greater than either its fair market
value at the time of transfer or any consider-
ation paid by the recipient. This rule applies
for purposes of determining loss as well as
gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer in
trust increases the basis.
A transfer of property is incident to a di-
vorce if the transfer occurs within 1 year after
the date on which the marriage ends, or if the
transfer is related to the ending of the mar-
riage. For more information, see Property
Settlements in Publication 504, Divorced or
Separated Individuals.
Related Party
Transactions
Special rules apply to the sale or trade of
property between related parties.
Gain on Sale or Trade
of Depreciable Property 
Your gain from the sale or trade of property
to a related party may be ordinary income,
rather than capital gain, if the property can
be depreciated by the party receiving it. See
chapter 2 in Publication 544 for more infor-
mation.
Like-Kind Exchanges 
Generally, if you trade business or investment
property for other business or investment
property of a like kind, no gain or loss is rec-
ognized. See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier,
under Nontaxable Trades.
This rule also applies to trades of property
between related parties, defined next under
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property.
However, if either you or the related party
disposes of the like property within 2 years
after the trade, you both must report any gain
or loss not recognized on the original trade
on your return for the year in which the later
disposition occurs.
This rule generally does not apply to:
 Dispositions due to the death of either
related party,
 Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1
of Publication 544), or 
 Trades and later dispositions whose main
purpose is not the avoidance of federal
income tax. 
If a property holder's risk of loss on the
property is substantially diminished during
any period, that period is not counted in de-
termining whether the property was disposed
of within 2 years. The property holder's risk
of loss is substantially diminished by:
 The holding of a put on the property, 
 The holding by another person of a right
to acquire the property, or 
 A short sale or any other transaction.
Losses on Sales or
Trades of Property
You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade
of property, other than a distribution in com-
plete liquidation of a corporation, if the trans-
action is directly or indirectly between you and
the following related parties.
1) Members of your family. This includes
only your brothers and sisters, half-
brothers and half-sisters, spouse, an-
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
and lineal descendants (children, grand-
children, etc.). 
2) A partnership in which you directly or
indirectly own more than 50% of the
capital interest or the profits interest.
3) A corporation in which you directly or
indirectly own more than 50% in value
of the outstanding stock (see Construc-
tive ownership of stock, later).
4) A tax-exempt charitable or educational
organization that is directly or indirectly
controlled, in any manner or by any
method, by you or by a member of your
family, whether or not this control is le-
gally enforceable.
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of
property is not deductible if the transaction is
directly or indirectly between the following
related parties.
1) A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciary
and beneficiary, of any trust.
2) Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the
fiduciary and beneficiary of two different
trusts, if the same person is the grantor
of both trusts.
3) A trust fiduciary and a corporation of
which more than 50% in value of the
outstanding stock is directly or indirectly
owned by or for the trust, or by or for the
grantor of the trust.
4) A corporation and a partnership if the
same persons own more than 50% in
value of the outstanding stock of the
corporation and more than 50% of the
Page 44 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

capital interest, or the profits interest, in
the partnership.
5) Two S corporations if the same persons
own more than 50% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation.
6) Two corporations, one of which is an S
corporation, if the same persons own
more than 50% in value of the out-
standing stock of each corporation.
7) An executor and a beneficiary of an es-
tate (except in the case of a sale or trade
to satisfy a pecuniary bequest).
8) Two corporations that are members of
the same controlled group (under certain
conditions, however, these losses are
not disallowed but must be deferred).
9) Two partnerships if the same persons
own, directly or indirectly, more than
50% of the capital interests or the profit
interests in both partnerships.
Multiple property sales or trades.If you
sell or trade to a related party a number of
blocks of stock or pieces of property in a lump
sum, you must figure the gain or loss sepa-
rately for each block of stock or piece of
property. The gain on each item may be tax-
able. However, you cannot deduct the loss
on any item. Also, you cannot reduce gains
from the sales of any of these items by losses
on the sales of any of the other items.
Indirect transactions.You cannot deduct
your loss on the sale of stock through your
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
party buys the same stock you had owned.
This does not apply to a trade between re-
lated parties through an exchange that is
purely coincidental and is not prearranged.
Constructive ownership of stock.  In de-
termining whether a person directly or indi-
rectly owns any of the outstanding stock of a
corporation, the following rules apply.
Rule 1.Stock directly or indirectly owned
by or for a corporation, partnership, estate,
or trust is considered owned proportionately
by or for its shareholders, partners, or ben-
eficiaries.
Rule 2.An individual is considered to own
the stock that is directly or indirectly owned
by or for his or her family. Family includes
only brothers and sisters, half-brothers and
half-sisters, spouse, ancestors, and lineal
descendants.
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than
by applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation
is considered to own the stock that is directly
or indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3,
stock constructively owned by a person under
rule 1 is treated as actually owned by that
person. But stock constructively owned by an
individual under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated
as owned by that individual for again applying
either rule 2 or rule 3 to make another person
the constructive owner of the stock.
Property received from a related party.If
you sell or trade at a gain property that you
acquired from a related party, you recognize
the gain only to the extent that it is more than
the loss previously disallowed to the related
party. This rule applies only if you are the or-
iginal transferee and you acquired the prop-
erty by purchase or exchange. This rule does
not apply if the related party's loss was dis-
allowed because of the wash sale rules, de-
scribed later under Wash Sales.
Example 1. Your brother sells you stock
for $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your
brother cannot deduct the loss of $2,400.
Later, you sell the same stock to an unrelated
party for $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900.
Your reportable gain is $500 — the $2,900
gain minus the $2,400 loss not allowed to
your brother.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the
stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your
recognized loss is only $700 — your $7,600
basis minus $6,900. You cannot deduct the
loss that was not allowed to your brother.
Capital Gains
and Losses 
Terms you may need to know (see
Glossary):
Call 
Commodity future 
Conversion transaction 
Forward contract 
Limited partner 
Listed option 
Nonequity option 
Options dealer
Put 
Regulated futures contract 
Section 1256 contract 
Straddle 
Wash sale 
This section discusses the tax treatment of
gains and losses from different types of in-
vestment transactions.
Character of gain or loss.You need to
classify your gains and losses as either ordi-
nary or capital gains or losses. You then need
to classify your capital gains and losses as
either short term or long term. If you have
long-term gains and losses, you must identify
your 28% rate gains and losses. If you have
a net capital gain, you must also identify any
unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
The correct classification and identification
helps you figure the limit on capital losses and
the correct tax on capital gains. For informa-
tion about determining whether your capital
gain or loss is short term or long term, see
Holding Period, later. For information about
whether your long-term gain or loss is a 28%
rate gain or loss and about unrecaptured
section 1250 gain, see Reporting Capital
Gains and Losses and Capital Gains Tax
Rates, later.
Capital or Ordinary
Gain or Loss
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss
from a transaction, it may be either a capital
gain or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, de-
pending on the circumstances. Generally, a
sale or trade of a capital asset (defined next)
results in a capital gain or loss. A sale or trade
of a noncapital asset generally results in or-
dinary gain or loss. Depending on the cir-
cumstances, a gain or loss on a sale or trade
of property used in a trade or business may
be treated as either capital or ordinary, as
explained in Publication 544. In some situ-
ations, part of your gain or loss may be a
capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi-
nary gain or loss.
Capital Assets and
Noncapital Assets 
For the most part, everything you own and
use for personal purposes, pleasure, or in-
vestment is a capital asset. Some examples
are:
 Stocks or bonds held in your personal
account,
 A house owned and used by you and
your family,
 Household furnishings,
 A car used for pleasure or commuting,
 Coin or stamp collections,
 Gems and jewelry, and
 Gold, silver, or any other metal.
Any property you own is a capital asset,
except the following noncapital assets.
1) Property held mainly for sale to cus-
tomers or property that will physically
become a part of the merchandise that
is for sale to customers.
2) Depreciable property used in your
trade or business, even if fully depreci-
ated.
3) Real property used in your trade or
business.
4) A copyright, a literary, musical, or ar-
tistic composition, a letter or memo-
randum, or similar property —
a) Created by your personal efforts,
b) Prepared or produced for you (in
the case of a letter, memorandum,
or similar property), or
c) Acquired under circumstances (for
example, by gift) entitling you to the
basis of the person who created the
property or for whom it was pre-
pared or produced.
5) Accounts or notes receivable acquired
in the ordinary course of a trade or
business for services rendered or from
the sale of any of the properties de-
scribed in (1).
6) U.S. Government publications that you
received from the government free or for
less than the normal sales price, or that
you acquired under circumstances enti-
tling you to the basis of someone who
received the publications free or for less
than the normal sales price.
7) Certain commodities derivative finan-
cial instruments held, acquired, or en-
tered into by commodities derivatives
dealers after December 16, 1999. For
more information, see section 1221 of
the Internal Revenue Code.
8) Hedging transactions entered into after
December 16, 1999, but only if the
transaction is clearly identified as a
hedging transaction before the close of
the day on which it was acquired, origi-
nated, or entered into. For more infor-
mation, see the definition of “hedging
transaction” earlier, and the discussion
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 45

of hedging transactions under Commod-
ity Futures, later.
9) Supplies of a type you regularly use or
consume in the ordinary course of your
trade or business, that you held or ac-
quired after December 16, 1999.
Investment property.  Investment property
is a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its
sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
loss.
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.
These are capital assets except when they
are held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss
from their sale or trade generally is a capital
gain or loss.
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds.  All of
these, including stock received as a dividend,
are capital assets except when they are held
for sale by a securities dealer. However, see
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)
Stock and Losses on Small Business Invest-
ment Company Stock, later.
Personal use property.Property held for
personal use only, rather than for investment,
is a capital asset, and you must report a gain
from its sale as a capital gain. However, you
cannot deduct a loss from selling personal
use property.
Discounted Debt Instruments 
Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemp-
tion, or retirement of a bond or other debt in-
strument originally issued at a discount or
bought at a discount as capital gain or loss,
except as explained in the following dis-
cussions.
Short-term government obligations.Treat
gains on short-term federal, state, or local
government obligations (other than tax-
exempt obligations) as ordinary income up to
your ratable share of the acquisition discount.
This treatment applies to obligations that have
a fixed maturity date not more than 1 year
from the date of issue. Acquisition discount
is the stated redemption price at maturity mi-
nus your basis in the obligation.
However, do not treat these gains as in-
come to the extent you previously included
the discount in income. See Discount on
Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 for more
information.
Short-term nongovernment obligations.
Treat gains on short-term nongovernment
obligations as ordinary income up to your
ratable share of OID. This treatment applies
to obligations that have a fixed maturity date
of not more than 1 year from the date of issue.
However, to the extent you previously in-
cluded the discount in income, you do not
have to include it in income again. See Dis-
count on Short-Term Obligations, in chapter
1, for more information.
Tax-exempt state and local government
bonds.  If these bonds were originally issued
at a discount before September 4, 1982, or
you acquired them before March 2, 1984,
treat your part of the OID as tax-exempt in-
terest. To figure your gain or loss on the sale
or trade of these bonds, reduce the amount
realized by your part of the OID.
If the bonds were issued after September
3, 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984,
increase the adjusted basis by your part of the
OID to figure gain or loss. For more informa-
tion on the basis of these bonds, see Dis-
counted tax-exempt obligations under Stocks
and Bonds, earlier in this chapter.
Any gain from market discount is usually
taxable on disposition or redemption of tax-
exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds before
May 1, 1993, the gain from market discount
is capital gain. If you bought the bonds after
April 30, 1993, the gain from market discount
is ordinary income.
You figure market discount by subtracting
the price you paid for the bond from the sum
of the original issue price of the bond and the
amount of accumulated OID from the date of
issue that represented interest to any earlier
holders. For more information, see Market
Discount Bonds in chapter 1.
A loss on the sale or other disposition of
a tax-exempt state or local government bond
is deductible as a capital loss.
Redeemed before maturity. If a state
or local bond that was issued before June
9, 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the
OID is not taxable to you.
If a state or local bond issued after June
8, 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the
part of the OID that is earned while you hold
the bond is not taxable to you. However, you
must report the unearned part of the OID as
a capital gain.
Example. On July 1, 1989, the date of
issue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal
bond for $800. The face amount of the bond
was $1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At
the time the bond was issued, the issuer had
no intention of redeeming it before it matured.
The bond was callable at its face amount
beginning 10 years after the issue date.
The issuer redeemed the bond at the end
of 11 years (July 1, 2000) for its face amount
of $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60.
The OID earned during the time you held the
bond, $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued
annual interest also is not taxable. However,
you must report the unearned part of the OID
($127) as a capital gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued after
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before
July 2, 1982, if a government instrument).
If you sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of
these debt instruments, the part of your gain
that is not more than your ratable share of the
OID at the time of sale or redemption is ordi-
nary income. The rest of the gain is capital
gain. If, however, there was an intention to
call the debt instrument before maturity, all
of your gain that is not more than the entire
OID is treated as ordinary income at the time
of the sale. This treatment of taxable gain also
applies to corporate instruments issued after
May 27, 1969, under a written commitment
that was binding on May 27, 1969, and at all
times thereafter.
Example 1. You bought a 30-year, 6%
government bond for $700 at original issue
on April 1, 1982, and sold it for $800 on April
20, 2000. The redemption price is $1,000. At
the time of original issue, there was no in-
tention to call the bond before maturity. You
have held the bond for 216 full months. Do
not count the additional days that are less
than a full month. The number of complete
months from date of issue to date of maturity
is 360 (30 years). The fraction 216/360
multiplied by the discount of $300 ($1,000 −
$700) is equal to $180. This is your ratable
share of OID for the period you owned the
bond. You must treat any part of the gain up
to $180 as ordinary income. As a result, your
$100 gain is treated as ordinary income.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the
bond for $900, you would have a gain of
$200. Of that amount, $180 is ordinary in-
come and $20 is long-term capital gain.
Long-term debt instruments issued after
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a
government instrument). If you hold one of
these debt instruments, you must include a
part of the OID in your gross income each
year that you own the instrument. Your basis
in that debt instrument is increased by the
amount of OID that you have included in your
gross income. See Original Issue Discount
(OID) in chapter 1.
If you sell or trade the debt instrument
before maturity, your gain is a capital gain.
However, if at the time the instrument was
originally issued there was an intention to call
it before its maturity, your gain generally is
ordinary income to the extent of the entire
OID reduced by any amounts of OID previ-
ously includible in your income. In this case,
the rest of the gain is a capital gain.
An intention to call a debt instrument be-
fore maturity means there is a written or oral
agreement or understanding not provided for
in the debt instrument between the issuer and
original holder that the issuer will redeem the
debt instrument before maturity. In the case
of debt instruments that are part of an issue,
the agreement or understanding must be be-
tween the issuer and the original holders of
a substantial amount of the debt instruments
in the issue.
Example 1. On February 4, 1998, you
bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones
Corporation's 10-year, 5% bond which has a
stated redemption price at maturity of
$10,000. On February 3, 2000, you sold the
bond to Susan Green for $9,040. Assume you
have included $334 of the OID in your gross
income and increased your basis in the bond
by that amount. This includes the amount
accrued for 2000. Your basis is now $7,934.
If at the time of the original issue there was
no intention to call the bond before maturity,
your gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized
minus $7,934 adjusted basis) is a long-term
capital gain.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time
of original issue there was an intention to call
the bond before maturity, your entire gain is
ordinary income. You figure this as follows:
Because the amount in (3) is more than your
gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary
income.
Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-
ment has market discount and you chose to
include the discount in income as it accrued,
increase your basis in the debt instrument by
the accrued discount to figure capital gain or
loss on its disposition. If you did not choose
to include the discount in income as it ac-
crued, you must report gain as ordinary in-
terest income up to the instrument's accrued
market discount. See Market Discount Bonds
1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated redemption
price at maturity minus $7,600 issue
price) ....................................................... $2,400
2) Minus: Amount previously included
in income ................................................. 334
3) Maximum amount of ordinary income .... $2,066
Page 46 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

in chapter 1. The rest of the gain is capital
gain.
However, a different rule applies if you
dispose of a market discount bond that was:
1) Issued before July 19, 1984, and 
2) Purchased by you before May 1, 1993. 
In that case, any gain is treated as interest
income up to the amount of your deferred in-
terest deduction for the year you dispose of
the bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain.
(Deferred interest deduction for market dis-
count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under
When To Deduct Investment Interest.)
Report the sale or trade of a market dis-
count bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line
1 or line 8. If the sale or trade results in a gain
and you did not choose to include market
discount in income currently, enter “Accrued
Market Discount” on the next line in column
(a) and the amount of the accrued market
discount as a loss in column (f). Also report
the amount of accrued market discount in
column (f) as interest income on Schedule B
(Form 1040), line 1, and identify it as “Ac-
crued Market Discount.”
Retirement of debt instrument. Any
amount that you receive on the retirement of
a debt instrument is treated in the same way
as if you had sold or traded that instrument.
Notes of individuals.  If you hold an obli-
gation of an individual that was issued with
OID after March 1, 1984, you generally must
include the OID in your income currently, and
your gain or loss on its sale or retirement is
generally capital gain or loss. An exception
to this treatment applies if the obligation is a
loan between individuals and all of the fol-
lowing requirements are met.
1) The lender is not in the business of
lending money.
2) The amount of the loan, plus the amount
of any outstanding prior loans, is
$10,000 or less.
3) Avoiding federal tax is not one of the
principal purposes of the loan. 
If the exception applies, or the obligation
was issued before March 2, 1984, you do not
include the OID in your income currently.
When you sell or redeem the obligation, the
part of your gain that is not more than your
accrued share of the OID at that time is ordi-
nary income. The rest of the gain, if any, is
capital gain. Any loss on the sale or redemp-
tion is capital loss.
Bearer Obligations 
You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation
required to be in registered form that is in-
stead held in bearer form. In addition, any
gain on the sale or other disposition of the
obligation is ordinary income. However, if the
issuer was subject to a tax when the obli-
gation was issued, then you can deduct any
loss, and any gain may qualify for capital gain
treatment.
Obligations required to be in registered
form.  Any obligation must be in registered
form unless:
1) It is issued by a natural person,
2) It is not of a type offered to the public,
3) It has a maturity at the date of issue of
not more than 1 year, or
4) It was issued before 1983.
Deposit in Insolvent or
Bankrupt Financial Institution 
If you lose money you have on deposit in a
qualified financial institution that becomes in-
solvent or bankrupt, you may be able to de-
duct your loss in one of three ways.
 1) Ordinary loss,
2) Casualty loss, or
3) Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capi-
tal loss).
Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you can
reasonably estimate your loss, you can
choose to treat the estimated loss as either
an ordinary loss or a casualty loss in the
current year. Either way, you claim the loss
as an itemized deduction.
If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as
a miscellaneous itemized deduction on line
22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). The maximum
amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if
you are married filing separately) reduced by
any expected state insurance proceeds. Your
loss is subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-
income limit. You cannot choose to claim an
ordinary loss if any part of the deposit is
federally insured.
If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form
4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.
Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your
total casualty losses for the year are reduced
by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
You cannot choose either of these meth-
ods if:
1) You own at least 1% of the financial in-
stitution,
2) You are an officer of the institution, or
3) You are related to such an owner or of-
ficer. You are related if you and the
owner or officer are “related parties,” as
defined earlier under Related Party
Transactions, or if you are the aunt, un-
cle, nephew, or niece of the owner or
officer.
If the actual loss that is finally determined
is more than the amount you deducted as an
estimated loss, you can claim the excess loss
as a bad debt. If the actual loss is less than
the amount deducted as an estimated loss,
you must include in income (in the final de-
termination year) the excess loss claimed.
See Recoveries, in Publication 525, Taxable
and Nontaxable Income.
Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choose
to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty
loss or an ordinary loss, you wait until the
year the amount of the actual loss is deter-
mined and deduct it as a nonbusiness bad
debt in that year. Report it as a short-term
capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040), as
explained under Nonbusiness Bad Debts,
later.
Sale of Annuity 
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity
contract before its maturity date that is based
on interest accumulated on the contract is
ordinary income.
Conversion Transactions
Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion
transaction is treated as ordinary income.
This applies to gain on the disposition or other
termination of any position you held as part
of a conversion transaction that you entered
into after April 30, 1993.
A conversion transaction is any trans-
action that meets both of these tests.
1) Substantially all of your expected return
from the transaction is due to the time
value of your net investment. In other
words, the return on your investment is,
in substance, like interest on a loan.
2) The transaction is one of the following.
a) A straddle as defined under
Straddles, later, but including any
set of offsetting positions on stock.
b) Any transaction in which you ac-
quire property (whether or not ac-
tively traded) at substantially the
same time that you contract to sell
the same property, or substantially
identical property, at a price set in
the contract.
c) Any other transaction that is mar-
keted or sold as producing capital
gains from a transaction described
in (1).
Amount treated as ordinary income.The
amount of gain treated as ordinary income is
the smaller of:
1) The gain recognized on the disposition
or other termination of the position, or 
2) The “applicable imputed income
amount.”
Applicable imputed income amount. Fig-
ure this amount as follows.
1) Figure the amount of interest that would
have accrued on your net investment in
the conversion transaction for the period
ending on the earlier of: 
a) The date when you dispose of the
position, or 
b) The date when the transaction
stops being a conversion trans-
action. 
To figure this amount, use an interest
rate equal to 120% of the “applicable
rate,” defined later.
2) Subtract from (1) the amount treated as
ordinary income from any earlier dispo-
sition or other termination of a position
held as part of the same conversion
transaction.
Applicable rate.If the term of the con-
version transaction is indefinite, the applica-
ble rate is the federal short-term rate in effect
under section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code during the period of the conversion
transaction, compounded daily.
In all other cases, the applicable rate is the
“applicable federal rate” determined as if the
conversion transaction were a debt instru-
ment and compounded semi-annually.
The rates discussed above are published
by the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin.
Or, you can contact the IRS to get these
rates. See chapter 5 for the number to call.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 47

Net investment.To determine your net in-
vestment in a conversion transaction, include
the fair market value of any position at the
time it becomes part of the transaction. This
means that your net investment generally will
be the total amount you invested, less any
amount you received for entering into the
position (for example, a premium you re-
ceived for writing a call).
Position with built-in loss.A special rule
applies when a position with a built-in loss
becomes part of a conversion transaction. A
built-in loss is any loss that you would have
realized if you had disposed of or otherwise
terminated the position at its fair market value
at the time it became part of the conversion
transaction.
When applying the conversion transaction
rules to a position with a built-in loss, use the
position's fair market value at the time it be-
came part of the transaction. But, when you
dispose of or otherwise terminate the position
in a transaction in which you recognize gain
or loss, you must recognize the built-in loss.
The conversion transaction rules do not affect
whether the built-in loss is treated as an or-
dinary or capital loss.
Netting rule for certain conversion trans-
actions. Before determining the amount of
gain treated as ordinary income, you can net
certain gains and losses from positions of the
same conversion transaction. To do this, you
have to dispose of all the positions within a
14-day period that is within a single tax year.
You cannot net the built-in loss against the
gain.
RECORDS
You can net gains and losses only if
you identify the conversion trans-
action as an identified netting trans-
action on your books and records. Each po-
sition of the conversion transaction must be
identified before the end of the day on which
the position becomes part of the conversion
transaction. For conversion transactions en-
tered into before February 20, 1996, this re-
quirement is met if the identification was
made by that date.
Options dealers and commodities traders.
Special rules apply to options dealers and
commodities traders. See section 1258(d)(5)
of the Internal Revenue Code.
How to report.Use Form 6781, Gains and
Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and
Straddles, to report conversion transactions.
See the instructions for lines 11 and 13 of
Form 6781.
Commodity Futures 
A commodity futures contract is a standard-
ized, exchange-traded contract for the sale
or purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity
at a future date for a fixed price.
If the contract is a regulated futures con-
tract, the rules described earlier under Sec-
tion 1256 Contracts Marked To Market, apply
to it.
The termination of a commodity futures
contract generally results in capital gain or
loss unless the contract is a hedging trans-
action.
Hedging transaction. A futures contract that
is a hedging transaction generally produces
ordinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a
hedging transaction if you enter into the con-
tract in the ordinary course of your business
primarily to manage the risk of interest rate
or price changes or currency fluctuations on
borrowings, ordinary property, or ordinary
obligations. (Generally, ordinary property or
obligations are those that cannot produce
capital gain or loss under any circumstances.)
For example, the offset or exercise of a fu-
tures contract that protects against price
changes in your business inventory results in
an ordinary gain or loss.
For more information about hedging
transactions, see section 1.1221–2 of the
regulations. Also, see Hedging Transactions
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market, earlier.
RECORDS
If you have numerous transactions in
the commodity futures market during
the year, the burden of proof is on you
to show which transactions are hedging
transactions. Clearly identify any hedging
transactions on your books and records be-
fore the end of the day you entered into the
transaction. It may be helpful to have sepa-
rate brokerage accounts for your hedging and
nonhedging transactions. For specific re-
quirements concerning identification of hedg-
ing transactions and the underlying item,
items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged,
see section 1.1221–2(e) of the regulations.
Gains From Certain Constructive
Ownership Transactions
If you have a gain from a constructive own-
ership transaction entered into after July 11,
1999, involving a financial asset (discussed
later) and the gain normally would be treated
as long-term capital gain, all or part of the
gain may be treated instead as ordinary in-
come. In addition, if any gain is treated as
ordinary income, your tax is increased by an
interest charge.
Constructive ownership transactions.The
following are constructive ownership trans-
actions.
1) A notional principal contract (discussed
below) in which you have the right to
receive substantially all of the investment
yield on a financial asset and you are
obligated to reimburse substantially all
of any decline in value of the financial
asset.
2) A forward or futures contract to acquire
a financial asset.
3) The holding of a call option and writing
of a put option on a financial asset at
substantially the same strike price and
maturity date.
This provision does not apply if all the
positions are marked to market. Marked to
market rules for section 1256 contracts are
discussed in detail under Section 1256 Con-
tracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Financial asset.A financial asset, for this
purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-
through entity. Pass-through entities include
partnerships, S corporations, trusts, regulated
investment companies, and real estate in-
vestment trusts.
Amount of ordinary income. Long-term
capital gain is treated as ordinary income to
the extent it is more than the net underlying
long-term capital gain. The net underlying
long-term capital gain is the amount of net
capital gain you would have realized if you
acquired the asset for its fair market value on
the date the constructive ownership trans-
action was opened, and sold the asset for its
fair market value on the date the transaction
was closed. If you do not establish the
amount of net underlying long-term capital
gain by clear and convincing evidence, it is
treated as zero.
More information. For more information,
see section 1260 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
Losses on Section 1244
(Small Business) Stock 
You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather
than as a capital loss, a loss on the sale,
trade, or worthlessness of section 1244 stock.
Report the loss on Form 4797, Sales of
Business Property, line 10.
Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capital
gain if the stock is a capital asset in your
hands. Do not offset gains against losses that
are within the ordinary loss limit, explained
later in this discussion, even if the trans-
actions are in stock of the same company.
Report the gain on Schedule D of Form 1040.
If you must figure a net operating loss, any
ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244
stock is a business loss.
Ordinary loss limit.The amount that you
can deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to
$50,000 each year. On a joint return the limit
is $100,000, even if only one spouse has this
type of loss. If your loss is $110,000 and your
spouse has no loss, you can deduct $100,000
as an ordinary loss on a joint return. The re-
maining $10,000 is a capital loss.
Section 1244 (small business) stock.  This
is stock that was issued for money or property
(other than stock and securities) in a domestic
small business corporation. During its 5 most
recent tax years before the loss, this corpo-
ration must have derived more than 50% of
its gross receipts from other than royalties,
rents, dividends, interest, annuities, and gains
from sales and trades of stocks or securities.
If the corporation was in existence for at least
1 year, but less than 5 years, the 50% test
applies to the tax years ending before the
loss. If the corporation was in existence less
than 1 year, the 50% test applies to the entire
period the corporation was in existence be-
fore the day of the loss. However, if the cor-
poration's deductions (other than the net op-
erating loss and dividends received
deductions) were more than its gross income
during this period, this 50% test does not ap-
ply.
The corporation must have been largely
an operating company for ordinary loss treat-
ment to apply.
If the stock was issued before July 19,
1984, the stock must be common stock. If is-
sued after July 18, 1984, the stock may be
either common or preferred. For more infor-
mation about the requirements of a small
business corporation or the qualifications of
section 1244 stock, see section 1244 of the
Internal Revenue Code and its regulations.
The stock must be issued to the person
taking the loss.You must be the original
owner of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss
treatment. To claim a deductible loss on stock
issued to your partnership, you must have
been a partner when the stock was issued
and have remained so until the time of the
loss. You add your distributive share of the
Page 48 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

partnership loss to any individual section
1244 stock loss you may have before apply-
ing the ordinary loss limit.
Stock distributed by partnership.If
your partnership distributes the stock to you,
you cannot treat any later loss on that stock
as an ordinary loss.
Stock sold through underwriter.Stock
sold through an underwriter is not section
1244 stock unless the underwriter only acted
as a selling agent for the corporation.
Stock dividends and reorganizations.
Stock you receive as a stock dividend quali-
fies as section 1244 stock if:
1) You receive it from a small business
corporation in which you own stock, and
2) The stock you own meets the require-
ments when the stock dividend is dis-
tributed. 
If you trade your section 1244 stock for
new stock in the same corporation in a reor-
ganization that qualifies as a recapitalization
or that is only a change in identity, form, or
place of organization, the new stock is section
1244 stock if the stock you trade meets the
requirements when the trade occurs.
If you hold section 1244 stock and other
stock in the same corporation, not all of the
stock you receive as a stock dividend or in a
reorganization will qualify as section 1244
stock. Only that part based on the section
1244 stock you hold will qualify.
Example. Your basis for 100 shares of
X common stock is $1,000. These shares
qualify as section 1244 stock. If, as a non-
taxable stock dividend, you receive 50 more
shares of common stock, the basis of which
is determined from the 100 shares you own,
the 50 shares are also section 1244 stock.
If you also own stock in the corporation
that is not section 1244 stock when you re-
ceive the stock dividend, you must divide the
shares you receive as a dividend between the
section 1244 stock and the other stock. Only
the shares from the former can be section
1244 stock.
Contributed property.To determine ordi-
nary loss on section 1244 stock you receive
in a trade for property, you have to reduce the
basis of the stock if:
1) The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of
the property, immediately before the
trade, was more than its fair market
value, and 
2) The basis of the stock is determined by
the basis of the property. 
Reduce the basis of the stock by the differ-
ence between the adjusted basis of the
property and its fair market value at the time
of the trade. You reduce the basis only to
figure the ordinary loss. Do not reduce the
basis of the stock for any other purpose.
Example. You transfer property with an
adjusted basis of $1,000 and a fair market
value of $250 to a corporation for its section
1244 stock. The basis of your stock is $1,000,
but to figure the ordinary loss under these
rules, the basis of your stock is $250 ($1,000
minus $750). If you later sell the section 1244
stock for $200, your $800 loss is an ordinary
loss of $50 and a capital loss of $750.
Contributions to capital.If the basis of your
section 1244 stock has increased, through
contributions to capital or otherwise, you must
treat this increase as applying to stock that is
not section 1244 stock when you figure an
ordinary loss on its sale.
Example. You buy 100 shares of section
1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original
owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution
to capital that increases the total basis of the
100 shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100
shares for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000.
You can deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 ×
$10,000/$12,000) as an ordinary loss under
these rules. The remaining $500 is a capital
loss.
RECORDS
Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-
ords sufficient to show your stock
qualifies as section 1244 stock. Your
records must also distinguish your section
1244 stock from any other stock you own in
the corporation.
Losses on Small Business
Investment Company Stock
A small business investment company (SBIC)
is one that is licensed and operated under the
Small Business Investment Act of 1958.
If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you
can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a
capital loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or
worthlessness of that stock. A gain from the
sale or trade of that stock is a capital gain.
Do not offset your gains and losses, even if
they are on stock of the same company.
How to report.  You report this type of ordi-
nary loss on line 10, Part II, of Form 4797. In
addition to the information required by the
form, you must include the name and address
of the company that issued the stock. Report
a capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock on
Schedule D of Form 1040.
Short sale.If you close a short sale of SBIC
stock  with other SBIC stock that you bought
only for that purpose, any loss you have on
the sale is a capital loss. See Short Sales,
later in this chapter, for more information.
Holding Period 
If you sold or traded investment property, you
must determine your holding period for the
property. Your holding period determines
whether any capital gain or loss was a short-
term or a long-term capital gain or loss.
Long-term or short-term.  If you hold in-
vestment property more than 1 year, any
capital gain or loss is a long-term capital gain
or loss. If you hold the property 1 year or
less, any capital gain or loss is a short-term
capital gain or loss.
To determine how long you held the in-
vestment property, begin counting on the date
after the day you acquired the property. The
day you disposed of the property is part of
your holding period.
Example. If you bought investment
property on February 5, 1999, and sold it on
February 5, 2000, your holding period is not
more than 1 year and you have a short-term
capital gain or loss. If you sold it on February
6, 2000, your holding period is more than 1
year and you have a long-term capital gain
or loss.
Securities traded on an established mar-
ket.  For securities traded on an established
securities market, your holding period begins
the day after the trade date you bought the
securities, and ends on the trade date you
sold them.
CAUTION
!
Do not confuse the trade date with the
settlement date, which is the date by
which the stock must be delivered and
payment must be made.
Example. You are a cash method, cal-
endar year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain
on December 29, 2000. According to the rules
of the stock exchange, the sale was closed
by delivery of the stock 3 trading days after
the sale, on January 4, 2001. You received
payment of the sale price on that same day.
Report your gain on your 2000 return, even
though you received the payment in 2001.
The gain is long term or short term depending
on whether you held the stock more than 1
year. Your holding period ended on Decem-
ber 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss, you
would also report it on your 2000 return.
U.S. Treasury notes and bonds.  The hold-
ing period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds
sold at auction on the basis of yield starts the
day after the Secretary of the Treasury,
through news releases, gives notification of
acceptance to successful bidders. The hold-
ing period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds
sold through an offering on a subscription
basis at a specified yield starts the day after
the subscription is submitted.
Automatic investment service.In deter-
mining your holding period for shares bought
by the bank or other agent, full shares are
considered bought first and any fractional
shares are considered bought last. Your
holding period starts on the day after the
bank's purchase date. If a share was bought
over more than one purchase date, your
holding period for that share is a split holding
period. A part of the share is considered to
have been bought on each date that stock
was bought by the bank with the proceeds of
available funds.
Nontaxable trades.  If you acquire invest-
ment property in a trade for other investment
property and your basis for the new property
is determined, in whole or in part, by your
basis in the old property, your holding period
for the new property begins on the day fol-
lowing the date you acquired the old property.
Property received as a gift.  If you receive
a gift of property and your basis is determined
by the donor's adjusted basis, your holding
period is considered to have started on the
same day the donor's holding period started.
If your basis is determined by the fair
market value of the property, your holding
period starts on the day after the date of the
gift.
Inherited property.  If you inherit investment
property, your capital gain or loss on any later
disposition of that property is treated as a
long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re-
gardless of how long you actually held the
property.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 49

Real property bought.To figure how long
you have held real property bought under an
unconditional contract, begin counting on the
day after you received title to it or on the day
after you took possession of it and assumed
the burdens and privileges of ownership,
whichever happened first. However, taking
delivery or possession of real property under
an option agreement is not enough to start the
holding period. The holding period cannot
start until there is an actual contract of sale.
The holding period of the seller cannot end
before that time.
Real property repossessed.  If you sell real
property but keep a security interest in it, and
then later repossess the property under the
terms of the sales contract, your holding pe-
riod for a later sale includes the period you
held the property before the original sale and
the period after the repossession. Your hold-
ing period does not include the time between
the original sale and the repossession. That
is, it does not include the period during which
the first buyer held the property.
Stock dividends.  The holding period for
stock you received as a taxable stock divi-
dend begins on the date of distribution.
The holding period for new stock you re-
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins
on the same day as the holding period of the
old stock. This rule also applies to stock ac-
quired in a spin-off, which is a distribution of
stock or securities in a controlled corporation.
Nontaxable stock rights.  Your holding pe-
riod for nontaxable stock rights begins on the
same day as the holding period of the
underlying stock. The holding period for stock
acquired through the exercise of stock rights
begins on the date the right was exercised.
Section 1256 contracts.  Gains or losses on
section 1256 contracts open at the end of the
year, or terminated during the year, are
treated as 60% long term and 40% short term,
regardless of how long the contracts were
held. See Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market, earlier.
Option property.  Your holding period for
property you acquire when you exercise an
option begins the day after you exercise the
option.
Wash sales.  Your holding period for sub-
stantially identical stock or securities you ac-
quire in a wash sale includes the period you
held the old stock or securities.
Qualified small business stock. Your hold-
ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free
rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small
business stock, described later, includes the
period you held the old stock.
Commodity futures.  Futures transactions in
any commodity subject to the rules of a board
of trade or commodity exchange are long
term if the contract was held for more than 6
months.
Your holding period for a commodity re-
ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures
contract, other than a regulated futures con-
tract subject to Internal Revenue Code sec-
tion 1256, includes your holding period for the
futures contract if you held the contract as a
capital asset.
Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
months or less.  If you hold stock in a reg-
ulated investment company (commonly
called a mutual fund) or real estate invest-
ment trust (REIT) for 6 months or less and
then sell it at a loss (other than under a peri-
odic liquidation plan), special rules may apply.
Capital gain distributions received.
The loss (after reduction for any exempt-
interest dividends you received, as explained
next) is treated as a long-term capital loss up
to the total of any capital gain distributions
you received and your share of any undis-
tributed capital gains. Any remaining loss is
short-term capital loss.
Exempt-interest dividends on mutual
fund stock.If you received exempt-interest
dividends on the stock, at least part of your
loss is disallowed. You can deduct only the
amount of loss that is more than the exempt-
interest dividends.
Nonbusiness Bad Debts 
If someone owes you money that you cannot
collect, you have a bad debt. You may be
able to deduct the amount owed to you when
you figure your tax for the year the debt be-
comes worthless.
There are two kinds of bad debts — busi-
ness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,
generally, is one that comes from operating
your trade or business and is deductible as
a business loss. All other bad debts are
nonbusiness bad debts and are deductible
as short-term capital losses.
Example. An architect made personal
loans to several friends who were not clients.
She could not collect on some of these loans.
They are deductible only as nonbusiness bad
debts because the architect was not in the
business of lending money and the loans do
not have any relationship to her business.
Business bad debts. For information on
business bad debts of an employee, see
Publication 529. For information on other
business bad debts, see chapter 11 of Publi-
cation 535.
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts.To be
deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be
totally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly
worthless nonbusiness debt.
Genuine debt required.A debt must be
genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is
genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor re-
lationship based on a valid and enforceable
obligation to repay a fixed or determinable
sum of money.
Loan or gift.  For a bad debt, you must
show that there was an intention at the time
of the transaction to make a loan and not a
gift. If you lend money to a relative or friend
with the understanding that it may not be re-
paid, it is considered a gift and not a loan.
You cannot take a bad debt deduction for a
gift. There cannot be a bad debt unless there
is a true creditor-debtor relationship between
you and the person or organization that owes
you the money.
When minor children borrow from their
parents to pay for their basic needs, there is
no genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be de-
ducted for such a loan.
Basis in bad debt required.To deduct
a bad debt, you must have a basis in it — that
is, you must have already included the
amount in your income or loaned out your
cash. For example, you cannot claim a bad
debt deduction for court-ordered child support
not paid to you by your former spouse. If you
are a cash method taxpayer (most individuals
are), you generally cannot take a bad debt
deduction for unpaid salaries, wages, rents,
fees, interest, dividends, and similar items.
When deductible. You can take a bad debt
deduction only in the year the debt becomes
worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt
is due to determine whether it is worthless.
A debt becomes worthless when there is no
longer any chance that the amount owed will
be paid.
It is not necessary to go to court if you can
show that a judgment from the court would
be uncollectible. You must only show that you
have taken reasonable steps to collect the
debt. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally
good evidence of the worthlessness of at
least a part of an unsecured and unpreferred
debt.
If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in
a financial institution, see Loss on deposits in
an insolvent or bankrupt financial institution,
earlier.
Filing a claim for refund.If you do not
deduct a bad debt on your original return for
the year it becomes worthless, you can file a
claim for a credit or refund due to the bad
debt. To do this, use Form 1040X to amend
your return for the year the debt became
worthless. You must file it within 7 years from
the date your original return for that year had
to be filed, or 2 years from the date you paid
the tax, whichever is later. (Claims not due
to bad debts or worthless securities generally
must be filed within 3 years from the date a
return is filed, or 2 years from the date the tax
is paid.) For more information about filing a
claim, see Publication 556, Examination of
Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re-
fund.
Loan guarantees.  If you guarantee a debt
that becomes worthless, you cannot take a
bad debt deduction for your payments on the
debt unless you can show either that your
reason for making the guarantee was to pro-
tect your investment or that you entered the
guarantee transaction with a profit motive. If
you make the guarantee as a favor to friends
and do not receive any consideration in re-
turn, your payments are considered a gift and
you cannot take a deduction.
Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and
principal shareholder of the Spruce Corpo-
ration, guaranteed payment of a bank loan
the corporation received. The corporation
defaulted on the loan and Henry made full
payment. Because he guaranteed the loan to
protect his investment in the corporation,
Henry can take a nonbusiness bad debt de-
duction.
Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.
Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note
at their local credit union. John does not pay
the note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays
off the note. However, since he did not enter
into the guarantee agreement to protect an
investment or to make a profit, Milt cannot
take a bad debt deduction.
Deductible in year paid.Unless you
have rights against the borrower, discussed
next, a payment you make on a loan you
guaranteed is deductible in the year you
make the payment.
Page 50 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Rights against the borrower.When you
make payment on a loan that you guaranteed,
you may have the right to take the place of
the lender (the right of subrogation). The debt
is then owed to you. If you have this right, or
some other right to demand payment from the
borrower, you cannot take a bad debt de-
duction until these rights become totally
worthless.
Debts owed by political parties.You can-
not take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction
for any worthless debt owed to you by:
1) A political party, 
2) A national, state, or local committee of
a political party, or 
3) A committee, association, or organiza-
tion that either accepts contributions or
spends money to influence elections.
Mechanics' and suppliers' liens.Workers
and material suppliers may file liens against
property because of debts owed by a builder
or contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid
foreclosure and loss of your property, you are
entitled to repayment from the builder or
contractor. If the debt is uncollectible, you
can take a bad debt deduction.
Insolvency of contractor.You can take a
bad debt deduction for the amount you de-
posit with a contractor if the contractor be-
comes insolvent and you are unable to re-
cover your deposit. If the deposit is for work
unrelated to your trade or business, it is a
nonbusiness bad debt deduction.
Secondary liability on home mortgage.  If
the buyer of your home assumes your mort-
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for
repayment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer
defaults on the loan and the house is then
sold for less than the amount outstanding on
the mortgage, you may have to make up the
difference. You can take a bad debt deduction
for the amount you pay to satisfy the mort-
gage, if you cannot collect it from the buyer.
Worthless securities.  If you own securities
that become totally worthless, you can take
a deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt.
See Worthless Securities under What Is a
Sale or Trade, earlier in this chapter.
How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-
ness bad debts as short-term capital losses
on Schedule D (Form 1040).
In Part I, line 1 of Schedule D, enter the
name of the debtor and “statement attached”
in column (a). Enter the amount of the bad
debt in parentheses in column (f). Use a
separate line for each bad debt.
For each bad debt, attach a statement to
your return that contains:
1) A description of the debt, including the
amount, and the date it became due, 
2) The name of the debtor, and any busi-
ness or family relationship between you
and the debtor, 
3) The efforts you made to collect the debt,
and 
4) Why you decided the debt was
worthless. For example, you could show
that the borrower has declared bank-
ruptcy, or that legal action to collect
would probably not result in payment of
any part of the debt.
S corporation shareholder.If you are a
shareholder in an S corporation, your share
of any nonbusiness bad debt will be shown
on a schedule attached to your Schedule K–1
(Form 1120S) that you receive from the cor-
poration.
Recovery of a bad debt.If you deducted a
bad debt and in a later tax year you recover
(collect) all or part of it, you may have to in-
clude the amount you recover in your gross
income. However, you can exclude from
gross income the amount recovered up to the
amount of the deduction that did not reduce
your tax in the year deducted. See Recov-
eries in Publication 525.
Short Sales 
A short sale occurs when you agree to sell
property you do not own (or own but do not
wish to sell). You make this type of sale in two
steps.
1) You sell short. You borrow property and
deliver it to a buyer. 
2) You close the sale. At a later date, you
either buy substantially identical property
and deliver it to the lender or make de-
livery out of property that you held at the
time of the sale. 
You do not realize gain or loss until delivery
of property to close the short sale. You will
have a capital gain or loss if the property used
to close the short sale is a capital asset.
Exception if property becomes worthless.
A different rule applies if the property sold
short becomes substantially worthless. In that
case, you must recognize gain as if the short
sale were closed when the property became
substantially worthless.
Exception for constructive sales.Entering
into a short sale may cause you to be treated
as having made a constructive sale of prop-
erty. In that case, you will have to recognize
gain on the date of the constructive sale. For
details, see Constructive Sales of Appreci-
ated Financial Positions, earlier.
Example. On May 1, 2000, you bought
100 shares of Baker Corporation stock for
$1,000. On September 3, 2000, you sold
short 100 shares of similar Baker stock for
$1,600. You made no other transactions in-
volving Baker stock for the rest of 2000 and
the first 30 days of 2001. Your short sale is
treated as a constructive sale of an appreci-
ated financial position because a sale of your
Baker stock on the date of the short sale
would have resulted in a gain. You recognize
a $600 short-term capital gain from the con-
structive sale and your new holding period in
the Baker stock begins on September 3.
Short-Term or Long-Term
Capital Gain or Loss
As a general rule, you determine whether you
have short-term or long-term capital gain or
loss on a short sale by the amount of time you
actually hold the property eventually delivered
to the lender to close the short sale.
Example. Even though you do not own
any stock of the Ace Corporation, you con-
tract to sell 100 shares of it, which you borrow
from your broker. After 13 months, when the
price of the stock has risen, you buy 100
shares of Ace Corporation stock and imme-
diately deliver them to your broker to close
out the short sale. Your loss is a short-term
capital loss because your holding period for
the delivered property is less than one day.
Special rules.Special rules may apply to
short sales of stocks, securities, and com-
modity futures (other than certain straddles).
These rules limit the circumstances for treat-
ing capital gain as long term and capital loss
as short term by taking into account certain
substantially identical property you held on
the date of the short sale or acquired after-
wards. But if the amount of property you sold
short is more than the amount of that sub-
stantially identical property, the special rules
do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.
Special rules for gains and holding pe-
riod. If you held the substantially identical
property for 1 year or less on the date of the
short sale, or if you acquired the substantially
identical property after the short sale and by
the date of closing the short sale, then:
Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close the
short sale is a short-term capital gain, and
Rule 2. The holding period of the substantially
identical property begins on the date of the
closing of the short sale or on the date of
the sale of this property, whichever comes
first. 
Special rule for treatment of losses.If,
on the date of the short sale, you held sub-
stantially identical property for more than 1
year, any loss you realize on the short sale
is a long-term capital loss, even if you held
the property used to close the sale for 1 year
or less. Certain losses on short sales of stock
or securities are also subject to wash sale
treatment. For information, see Wash Sales,
later.
Mixed straddles. Under certain elections,
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a
short sale as long term under the special rule.
These elections are for positions that are part
of a mixed straddle. See Other elections un-
der Mixed Straddles, later, for more informa-
tion about these elections.
Reporting Substitute Payments 
If any broker transferred your securities for
use in a short sale, or similar transaction, and
received certain substitute dividend payments
on your behalf while the short sale was open,
that broker must give you a Form 1099–MISC
or a similar statement, reporting the amount
of these payments. Form 1099–MISC must
be used for those substitute payments totaling
$10 or more that are known on the payment's
record date to be in lieu of an exempt-interest
dividend, a capital gain dividend, a return of
capital distribution, or a dividend subject to a
foreign tax credit, or that are in lieu of tax-
exempt interest. Do not treat these substitute
payments as dividends or interest. Instead,
report the substitute payments shown on
Form 1099–MISC as “Other income” on line
21 of Form 1040.
Substitute payment.A substitute payment
means a payment in lieu of:
1) Tax-exempt interest (including OID) that
has accrued while the short sale was
open, and 
2) A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is af-
ter the transfer of stock for use in a short
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 51

sale and before the closing of the short
sale.
Short Sale Expenses 
If you borrow stock to make a short sale, you
may have to remit to the lender payments in
lieu of the dividends distributed while you
maintain your short position. You can deduct
these payments only if you hold the short sale
open at least 46 days (more than 1 year in the
case of an extraordinary dividend as defined
below) and you itemize your deductions.
You deduct these expenses as investment
interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See In-
terest Expenses in chapter 3 for more infor-
mation.
If you close the short sale by the 45th day
after the date of the short sale (1 year or less
in the case of an extraordinary dividend), you
cannot deduct the payment in lieu of the div-
idend that you make to the lender. Instead,
you must increase the basis of the stock used
to close the short sale by that amount.
To determine how long a short sale is kept
open, do not include any period during which
you hold, have an option to buy, or are under
a contractual obligation to buy substantially
identical stock or securities.
If your payment is made for a liquidating
distribution or nontaxable stock distribution,
or if you buy more shares equal to a stock
distribution issued on the borrowed stock
during your short position, you have a capital
expense. You must add the payment to the
cost of the stock sold short.
Exception. If you close the short sale within
45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay
in lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to
the extent the payments are more than the
amount that you receive as ordinary income
from the lender of the stock for the use of
collateral with the short sale. This exception
does not apply to payments in place of ex-
traordinary dividends.
Extraordinary dividends.  If the amount of
any dividend you receive on a share of pre-
ferred stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in
the case of other stock) of the amount real-
ized on the short sale, the dividend you re-
ceive is an extraordinary dividend.
Wash Sales 
You cannot deduct losses from sales or
trades of stock or securities in a wash sale.
A wash sale occurs when you sell or trade
stock or securities at a loss and within 30
days before or after the sale you:
1) Buy substantially identical stock or se-
curities, 
2) Acquire substantially identical stock or
securities in a fully taxable trade, or 
3) Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-
stantially identical stock or securities. 
If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpo-
ration you control buys substantially identical
stock, you also have a wash sale.
If your loss was disallowed because of the
wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to
the cost of the new stock or securities. The
result is your basis in the new stock or secu-
rities. This adjustment postpones the loss
deduction until the disposition of the new
stock or securities. Your holding period for the
new stock or securities begins on the same
day as the holding period of the stock or se-
curities sold.
Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X
stock for $1,000. You sell these shares for
$750 and within 30 days from the sale you
buy 100 shares of the same stock for $800.
Because you bought substantially identical
stock, you cannot deduct your loss of $250
on the sale. However, you add the disallowed
loss ($250) to the cost of the new stock
($800) to obtain your basis of the new stock,
which is $1,050.
Example 2. You are an employee of a
corporation that has an incentive pay plan.
Under this plan, you are given 10 shares of
the corporation's stock as a bonus award.
You include the fair market value of the stock
in your gross income as additional pay. You
later sell these shares at a loss. If you receive
another bonus award of substantially identical
stock within 30 days of the sale, you cannot
deduct your loss on the sale.
Options and futures contracts.  The wash
sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades
of contracts and options to acquire or sell
stock or securities. They do not apply to
losses from sales or trades of commodity fu-
tures contracts and foreign currencies. See
Coordination of Loss Deferral Rules and
Wash Sale Rules under Straddles, later, for
information about the tax treatment of losses
on the disposition of positions in a straddle.
Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if
you sell common stock at a loss and, at the
same time, buy warrants for common stock
of the same corporation. But if you sell war-
rants at a loss and, at the same time, buy
common stock in the same corporation, the
wash sale rules apply only if the warrants and
stock are considered substantially identical,
as discussed next.
Substantially identical.In determining
whether stock or securities are substantially
identical, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances in your particular case. Ordi-
narily, stocks or securities of one corporation
are not considered substantially identical to
stocks or securities of another corporation.
However, they may be substantially identical
in some cases. For example, in a reorgan-
ization, the stocks and securities of the pred-
ecessor and successor corporations may be
substantially identical.
Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a
corporation are not ordinarily considered
substantially identical to the common stock
of the same corporation. However, where the
bonds or preferred stock are convertible into
common stock of the same corporation, the
relative values, price changes, and other cir-
cumstances may make these bonds or pre-
ferred stock and the common stock substan-
tially identical. For example, preferred stock
is substantially identical to the common stock
if the preferred stock:
1) Is convertible into common stock, 
2) Has the same voting rights as the com-
mon stock, 
3) Is subject to the same dividend re-
strictions, 
4) Trades at prices that do not vary signif-
icantly from the conversion ratio, and 
5) Is unrestricted as to convertibility. 
More or less stock bought than sold.If the
number of shares of substantially identical
stock or securities you buy within 30 days
before or after the sale is either more or less
than the number of shares you sold, you must
determine the particular shares to which the
wash sale rules apply. You do this by match-
ing the shares bought with an equal number
of the shares sold. Match the shares bought
in the same order that you bought them, be-
ginning with the first shares bought. The
shares or securities so matched are subject
to the wash sale rules.
Example 1. You bought 100 shares of
M stock on September 24, 1999, for $5,000.
On December 21, 1999, you bought 50
shares of substantially identical stock for
$2,750. On December 28, 1999, you bought
25 shares of substantially identical stock for
$1,125. On January 4, 2000, you sold for
$4,000 the 100 shares you bought in Sep-
tember. You have a $1,000 loss on the sale.
However, because you bought 75 shares of
substantially identical stock within 30 days of
the sale, you cannot deduct the loss ($750)
on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss ($250)
on the other 25 shares. The basis of the 50
shares bought on December 21, 1999, is in-
creased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750
disallowed loss. The new basis of those
shares is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis
of the 25 shares bought on December 28,
1999, is increased by the rest of the loss to
$1,375 ($1,125 + $250).
Example 2. You bought 100 shares of
M stock on September 24, 1999. On Febru-
ary 1, 2000, you sold those shares at a
$1,000 loss. On each of the 4 days from
February 15, 2000, to February 18, 2000, you
bought 50 shares of substantially identical
stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000 loss.
You must add half the disallowed loss ($500)
to the basis of the 50 shares bought on Feb-
ruary 15. Add the other half ($500) to the
basis of the shares bought on February 16.
Loss and gain on same day. Loss from a
wash sale of one block of stock or securities
cannot be used to reduce any gains on iden-
tical blocks sold the same day.
Example. During 1995, you bought 100
shares of X stock on each of three occasions.
You paid $158 a share for the first block of
100 shares, $100 a share for the second
block, and $95 a share for the third block. On
December 23, 2000, you sold 300 shares of
X stock for $125 a share. On January 6, 2001,
you bought 250 shares of identical X stock.
You cannot deduct the loss of $33 a share
on the first block because within 30 days after
the date of sale you bought 250 identical
shares of X stock. In addition, you cannot re-
duce the gain realized on the sale of the
second and third blocks of stock by this loss.
Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply
to a dealer in stock or securities if the loss is
from a transaction made in the ordinary
course of business.
Short sales.  The wash sale rules apply to a
loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or
enter into another short sale of, substantially
identical stock or securities within a period
beginning 30 days before the date the short
sale is complete and ending 30 days after that
date.
Page 52 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

For purposes of the wash sale rules, a
short sale is considered complete on the date
the short sale is entered into, if:
1) On that date, you own stock or securities
identical to those sold short (or by that
date you enter into a contract or option
to acquire that stock or those securities),
and 
2) You later deliver the stock or securities
to close the short sale. 
Otherwise, a short sale is not considered
complete until the property is delivered to
close the sale.
Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares
of stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares
of the stock for $750 on October 6. On Octo-
ber 7, you buy 100 shares of the same stock
for $750. You close the short sale on No-
vember 17 by delivering the shares bought
on June 2. You cannot deduct the $250 loss
($1,000 − $750) because the date of entering
into the short sale (October 6) is considered
the date the sale is complete for wash sale
purposes and you bought substantially iden-
tical stock within 30 days from that date.
Residual Interests in a REMIC.The wash
sale rules generally will apply to the sale of
your residual interest in a real estate mort-
gage investment conduit (REMIC) if, during
the period beginning 6 months before the sale
of the interest and ending 6 months after that
sale, you acquire any residual interest in any
REMIC or any interest in a taxable mortgage
pool that is comparable to a residual interest.
REMICs are discussed in chapter 1.
How to report.  Report a wash sale or trade
on line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),
whichever is appropriate. Show the full
amount of the loss in parentheses in column
(f). On the next line, enter “Wash Sale” in
column (a) and the amount of the loss not
allowed as a positive amount in column (f).
Options
Options are generally subject to the rules
described in this section. If the option is part
of a straddle, the loss deferral rules covered
later under Straddles may also apply. For
special rules that apply to nonequity options
and dealer equity options, see Section 1256
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an
option to buy or sell property that is a capital
asset in your hands, or would be if you ac-
quired it, is capital gain or loss. If the property
is not, or would not be, a capital asset, the
gain or loss is ordinary gain or loss.
Example 1. You purchased an option to
buy 100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The
stock increases in value and you sell the op-
tion for more than you paid for it. Your gain
is capital gain because the stock underlying
the option would have been a capital asset in
your hands.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that the stock decreases
in value and you sell the option for less than
you paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.
Section 1231 transactions.If you hold an
option more than 1 year to buy or sell property
that is (or would be) used for business or to
produce rents or royalties, the gain or loss on
its sale or trade is a section 1231 gain or loss.
For information on its treatment, see Section
1231 Gains and Losses in chapter 3 of Pub-
lication 544.
Option not exercised.If you do not exercise
an option to buy or sell, and you have a loss,
you are considered to have sold or traded the
option on the date that it expired.
Writer of option.If you write (grant) an op-
tion, how you report your gain or loss de-
pends on whether it was exercised.
If you are not in the business of writing
options and an option you write on stocks,
securities, commodities, or commodity futures
is not exercised, the amount you receive is a
short-term capital gain.
If an option requiring you to buy or sell
property is exercised, see Writers of calls and
puts, later.
Section 1256 contract options.  Gain or loss
is recognized on the exercise of an option on
a section 1256 contract. Section 1256 con-
tracts are defined under Section 1256 Con-
tracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Cash settlement option.  A cash settlement
option is treated as an option to buy or sell
property. A cash settlement option is any op-
tion that on exercise is settled in, or could be
settled in, cash or property other than the
underlying property.
How to report.Gain or loss from the closing
or expiration of an option that is not a section
1256 contract, but that is a capital asset in
your hands, is reported on Schedule D (Form
1040).
If an option you purchased expired, enter
the expiration date in column (c) and write
“Expired” in column (d).
If an option that you wrote expired, enter
the expiration date in column (b) and write
“Expired” in column (e).
Calls and Puts 
Calls and puts are options on securities and
are covered by the rules just discussed for
options. The following are specific applica-
tions of these rules to holders and writers of
options that are bought, sold, or “closed out”
in transactions on a national securities ex-
change, such as the Chicago Board Options
Exchange. (But see Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market, earlier, for special rules
that may apply to nonequity options and
dealer equity options.) These rules are also
presented in Table 4–1.
Calls and puts are issued by writers
(grantors) to holders for cash premiums. They
are ended by exercise, closing transaction,
or lapse.
A call option is the right to buy from the
writer of the option, at any time before a
specified future date, a stated number of
shares of stock at a specified price. Con-
versely, a put option is the right to sell to the
writer, at any time before a specified future
date, a stated number of shares at a specified
price.
Holders of calls and puts.If you buy a call
or a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a
capital expenditure.
If you sell the call or the put before you
exercise it, the difference between its cost
and the amount you receive for it is either a
long-term or short-term capital gain or loss,
depending on how long you held it.
If the option expires, its cost is either a
long-term or short-term capital loss, depend-
ing on your holding period, which ends on the
expiration date.
If you exercise a call, add its cost to the
basis of the stock you bought. If you exercise
a put, reduce your amount realized on the
sale of the underlying stock by the cost of the
put when figuring your gain or loss. Any gain
or loss on the sale of the underlying stock is
long term or short term depending on your
holding period for the underlying stock.
Put option as short sale.  Buying a put
option is generally treated as a short sale, and
the exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is
a closing of the short sale. See Short Sales,
earlier. If you have held the underlying stock
for 1 year or less at the time you buy the put,
any gain on the exercise, sale, or expiration
of the put is a short-term capital gain. The
same is true if you buy the underlying stock
after you buy the put but before its exercise,
sale, or expiration. Your holding period for the
underlying stock begins on the earliest of:
1) The date you dispose of the stock, 
2) The date you exercise the put, 
3) The date you sell the put, or 
4) The date the put expires.
Writers of calls and puts. If you write
(grant) a call or a put, do not include the
amount you receive for writing it in your in-
come at the time of receipt. Carry it in a de-
ferred account until:
1) Your obligation expires, 
2) You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, in
the case of a put, the underlying stock
when the option is exercised, or 
3) You engage in a closing transaction.
If your obligation expires, the amount you
received for writing the call or put is short-
term capital gain.
If a call you write is exercised and you sell
the underlying stock, increase your amount
realized on the sale of the stock by the
amount you received for the call when figuring
your gain or loss. The gain or loss is long term
or short term depending on your holding pe-
riod of the stock.
If a put you write is exercised and you buy
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in
the stock by the amount you received for the
put. Your holding period for the stock begins
on the date you buy it, not on the date you
wrote the put.
If you enter into a closing transaction by
paying an amount equal to the value of the
call or put at the time of the payment, the
difference between the amount you pay and
the amount you receive for the call or put is
a short-term capital gain or loss.
Examples of non-dealer transactions.
1) Expiration. Ten XYZ call options were
issued on April 8, 2000, for $4,000.
These equity options expired in Decem-
ber 2000, without being exercised. If you
were a holder (buyer) of the options, you
would recognize a short-term capital loss
of $4,000 on Schedule D of your 2000
return. If you were a writer of the options,
you would recognize a short-term capital
gain of $4,000 on Schedule D of your
2000 return. 
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 53

2) Closing transaction. The facts are the
same as in (1), except that on May 10,
2000, the options were sold for $6,000.
If you were the seller, you would recog-
nize a short-term capital gain of $2,000
on Schedule D of your 2000 return. If
you were the writer of the options and
you bought them back, you would rec-
ognize a short-term capital loss of
$2,000 on Schedule D of your 2000 re-
turn. 
3) Exercise. The facts are the same as in
(1), except that the options were exer-
cised on May 27, 2000. The buyer adds
the cost of the options to the basis of the
stock bought through the exercise of the
options. The writer adds the amount re-
ceived from writing the options to the
amount realized from selling the stock.
4) Section 1256 contracts. The facts  are
the same as in (1), except the options
were nonequity options, subject to the
rules for section 1256 contracts. If you
were a buyer of the options, you would
recognize a short-term capital loss of
$1,600, and a long-term capital loss of
$2,400. If you were a writer of the
options, you would recognize a short-
term capital gain of $1,600, and a long-
term capital gain of $2,400. See Section
1256 Contracts Marked to Market, ear-
lier, for more information.
Straddles 
This section discusses the loss deferral rules
that apply to the sale or other disposition of
positions in a straddle. These rules do not
apply to the straddles described under Ex-
ceptions, later.
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions
on personal property. For example, a straddle
may consist of a security and a written option
to buy and a purchased option to sell on the
same number of shares of the security, with
the same exercise price and period.
Personal property.This is any property of
a type that is actively traded. It includes stock
options and contracts to buy stock, but gen-
erally does not include stock.
Straddle rules for stock.  Although stock
is generally excluded from the definition of
personal property when applying the straddle
rules, it is included in the following two situ-
ations.
1) The stock is part of a straddle in which
at least one of the offsetting positions is
either:
a) An option to buy or sell the stock
or substantially identical stock or
securities, or
b) A position on substantially similar
or related property (other than
stock).
2) The stock is in a corporation formed or
availed of to take positions in personal
property that offset positions taken by
any shareholder.
Position. A position is an interest in personal
property. A position can be a forward or fu-
tures contract or an option.
An interest in a loan that is denominated
in a foreign  currency is treated as a position
in that currency. For the straddle rules, for-
Table 4–1. Puts and Calls
Puts
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised
Expires
Is sold by the holder
Reduce your amount realized
from sale of the underlying
stock by the cost of the put.
Report the cost of the put as
a capital loss.*
Report the difference between
the cost of the put and the
amount you receive for it as a
capital gain or loss.*
Reduce your basis in the
stock you buy by the amount
you received for the put.
Report the amount you
received for the put as a
short-term capital gain.
This does not affect you. (But
if you buy back the put,
report the difference between
the amount you pay and the
amount you received for the
put as a short-term capital
gain or loss.)
Calls
When a call:
Add the cost of the call to
your basis in the stock
purchased.
Report the cost of the call as
a capital loss on the date it
expires.*
Report the difference between
the cost of the call and the
amount you receive for it as a
capital gain or loss.*
Increase your amount realized
on sale of the stock by the
amount you received for the
call.
Report the amount you
received for the call as a
short-term capital gain.
This does not affect you. (But
if you buy back the call,
report the difference between
the amount you pay and the
amount you received for the
call as a short-term capital
gain or loss.)
If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
Is exercised
Expires
Is sold by the holder
* See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your
gain or loss is short term or long term.
eign currency for which there is an active
interbank market is considered to be
actively-traded personal property. See also
Foreign currency contract under Section 1256
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
Offsetting position. This is a position that
substantially reduces any risk of loss you may
have from holding another position. However,
if a position is part of a straddle that is not an
identified straddle (described later), do not
treat it as offsetting to a position that is part
of an identified straddle.
Presumed offsetting positions.If you
establish two or more positions, an offsetting
position will be presumed under any of the
following conditions, unless otherwise re-
butted.
1) The positions are established in the
same personal property (or in a contract
for this property), and the value of one
or more positions varies inversely with
the value of one or more of the other
positions. 
2) The positions are in the same personal
property, even if this property is in a
substantially changed form, and the po-
sitions' values vary inversely as de-
scribed in the first condition. 
3) The positions are in debt instruments
with a similar maturity, and the positions'
values vary inversely as described in the
first condition. 
4) The positions are sold or marketed as
offsetting positions, whether or not the
positions are called a straddle, spread,
butterfly, or any similar name. 
5) The aggregate margin requirement for
the positions is lower than the sum of the
margin requirements for each position if
held separately. 
Related persons.  To determine if two or
more positions are offsetting, you will be
treated as holding any position that your
spouse holds during the same period. If you
take into account part or all of the gain or loss
for a position held by a flowthrough entity,
such as a partnership or trust, you are also
considered to hold that position.
Loss Deferral Rules
Generally, you can deduct a loss on the dis-
position of one or more positions only to the
extent that the loss is more than any unrec-
ognized gain you have on offsetting positions.
Unused losses are treated as sustained in the
next tax year.
Page 54 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Unrecognized gain.This is:
1) The amount of gain you would have had
on an open position if you had sold it on
the last business day of the tax year at
its fair market value, and 
2) The amount of gain realized on a posi-
tion if, as of the end of the tax year, gain
has been realized, but not recognized. 
Example. On July 1, 2000, you entered
into a straddle. On December 16, 2000, you
closed one position of the straddle at a loss
of $15,000. On December 31, 2000, the end
of your tax year, you have an unrecognized
gain of $12,750 in the offsetting open posi-
tion. On your 2000 return, your deductible
loss on the position you closed is limited to
$2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750). You must carry
forward to 2001 the unused loss of $12,750.
Exceptions. The loss deferral rules just de-
scribed do not apply to:
1) A straddle that is an identified straddle
at the end of the tax year,
2) Certain straddles consisting of qualified
covered call options and the stock to
be purchased under the options,
3) Hedging transactions, described ear-
lier under Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market, and
4) Straddles consisting entirely of section
1256 contracts, as described earlier
under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
Market (but see Identified straddle, next).
Identified straddle.  An identified straddle
is not subject to the loss deferral rules just
described. Instead, losses from positions in
an identified straddle are deferred until you
dispose of all the positions in the straddle.
Any straddle (other than a straddle de-
scribed in (2) or (3) above) is an identified
straddle if all of the following conditions exist.
1) You clearly identified the straddle on
your records before the close of the day
on which you acquired it. 
2) All of the original positions that you
identify were acquired on the same day.
3) All of the positions included in item (2)
were disposed of on the same day dur-
ing the tax year, or none of the positions
were disposed of by the end of the tax
year.
4) The straddle is not part of a larger
straddle.
Qualified covered call options and op-
tioned stock.  A straddle is not subject to the
loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the
following are true.
1) All of the offsetting positions consist of
one or more qualified covered call
options and the stock to be purchased
from you under the options.
2) The straddle is not part of a larger
straddle. 
But see Special year-end rule, later, for an
exception.
A qualified covered call option is any op-
tion you grant to purchase stock you hold (or
stock you acquire in connection with granting
the option), but only if all of the following are
true.
1) The option is traded on a national secu-
rities exchange or other market ap-
proved by the Secretary of the Treasury.
2) The option is granted more than 30 days
before its expiration date.
3) The option is not a deep-in-the-money
option.
4) You are not an options dealer who
granted the option in connection with
your activity of dealing in options.
5) Gain or loss on the option is capital gain
or loss.
A deep-in-the-money option is  an option
with a strike price lower than the lowest
qualified benchmark (LQB). The strike price
is the price at which the option is to be exer-
cised. The LQB is the highest available strike
price that is less than the applicable stock
price. However, the LQB for an option with
a term of more than 90 days and a strike price
of more than $50 is the second highest
available strike price that is less than the ap-
plicable stock price. Strike prices are listed in
the financial section of many newspapers.
The availability of strike prices for equity
options with flexible terms does not affect the
determination of the LQB for an option that is
not an equity option with flexible terms.
The applicable stock price for any stock
for which an option has been granted is:
1) The closing price of the stock on the
most recent day on which that stock was
traded before the date on which the op-
tion was granted, or 
2) The opening price of the stock on the
day on which the option was granted,
but only if that price is greater than 110%
of the price determined in (1).
If the applicable stock price is $25 or less,
the LQB will be treated as not less than 85%
of the applicable stock price. If the applicable
stock price is $150 or less, the LQB will be
treated as not less than an amount that is $10
below the applicable stock price.
Example. On May 13, 2000, you held
XYZ stock and you wrote an XYZ/September
call option with a strike price of $120. The
closing price of one share of XYZ stock on
May 12, 2000, was $130
1/4. The strike prices
of all XYZ/September call options offered on
May 13, 2000, were as follows: $110, $115,
$120, $125, $130, and $135. Because the
option has a term of more than 90 days, the
LQB is $125, the second highest strike price
that is less than $130
1/4, the applicable stock
price. The call option is a deep-in-the-money
option because its strike price is lower than
the LQB. Therefore, the option is not a qual-
ified covered call option, and the loss deferral
rules apply if you closed out the option or the
stock at a loss during the year.
Capital loss on qualified covered call
options. If you hold stock and you write a
qualified covered call option on that stock with
a strike price less than the applicable stock
price, treat any loss from the option as long-
term capital loss if, at the time the loss was
realized, gain on the sale or exchange of the
stock would be treated as long-term capital
gain. The holding period of the stock does not
include any period during which you are the
writer of the option.
Special year-end rule.The loss deferral
rules for straddles apply if all of the following
are true.
1) The qualified covered call options are
closed or the stock is disposed of at a
loss during any tax year. 
2) Gain on disposition of the stock or gain
on the options is includible in gross in-
come in a later tax year.
3) The stock or options were held less than
30 days after the closing of the options
or the disposition of the stock.
How To Report Gains
and Losses (Form 6781) 
Report each position (whether or not it is part
of a straddle) on which you have unrecog-
nized gain at the end of the tax year and the
amount of this unrecognized gain in Part III
of Form 6781.  Use Part II of Form 6781 to
figure your gains and losses on straddles
before entering these amounts on Schedule
D (Form 1040). Include a copy of Form 6781
with your income tax return.
Coordination of Loss Deferral
Rules and Wash Sale Rules 
Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to
any disposition of a position or positions of a
straddle. First apply Rule 1, explained next,
then apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies
only if stocks or securities make up a position
that is part of the straddle. If a position in the
straddle does not include stock or securities,
use Rule 2.
Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the
disposition of shares of stock or securities
that make up the positions of a straddle if,
within a period beginning 30 days before the
date of that disposition and ending 30 days
after that date, you acquired substantially
identical stock or securities. Instead, the loss
will be carried over to the following tax year,
subject to any further application of Rule 1 in
that year. This rule will also apply if you en-
tered into a contract or option to acquire the
stock or securities within the time period de-
scribed above. See Loss carryover, later, for
more information about how to treat the loss
in the following tax year.
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or
securities, this loss treatment will not apply to
any losses you sustained in the ordinary
course of your business.
Example. You are not a dealer in stock
or securities. On December 2, 2000, you
bought stock in XX Corporation (XX stock)
and an offsetting put option. On December
13, 2000, there was $20 of unrealized gain in
the put option and you sold the XX stock at
a $20 loss. By December 16, 2000, the value
of the put option had declined, eliminating all
unrealized gain in the position. On December
16, 2000, you bought a second XX stock po-
sition that is substantially identical to the XX
stock you sold on December 13, 2000. At the
end of the year there is no unrecognized gain
in the put option or in the XX stock. Under
these circumstances, the $20 loss will be
disallowed for 2000 under Rule 1 because,
within a period beginning 30 days before De-
cember 13, 2000, and ending 30 days after
that date, you bought stock substantially
identical to the XX stock you sold.
Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the
disposition of less than all of the positions of
a straddle (your loss position) to the extent
that any unrecognized gain at the close of the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 55

tax year in one or more of the following posi-
tions is more than the amount of any loss
disallowed under Rule 1:
1) Successor positions, 
2) Offsetting positions to the loss position,
or 
3) Offsetting positions to any successor
position.
Successor position. A successor posi-
tion is a position that is or was at any time
offsetting to a second position, if both of the
following conditions are met.
1) The second position was offsetting to the
loss position that was sold.
2) The successor position is entered into
during a period beginning 30 days be-
fore, and ending 30 days after, the sale
of the loss position.
Example 1. On November 1, 2000, you
entered into offsetting long and short posi-
tions in non-section 1256 contracts. On No-
vember 12, 2000, you disposed of the long
position at a $10 loss. On November 14,
2000, you entered into a new long position
(successor position) that is offsetting to the
retained short position, but that is not sub-
stantially identical to the long position dis-
posed of on November 12, 2000. You held
both positions through year end, at which time
there was $10 of unrecognized gain in the
successor long position and no unrecognized
gain in the offsetting short position. Under
these circumstances, the entire $10 loss will
be disallowed for 2000 because there is $10
of unrecognized gain in the successor long
position.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that at year end you have
$4 of unrecognized gain in the successor long
position and $6 of unrecognized gain in the
offsetting short position. Under these circum-
stances, the entire $10 loss will be disallowed
for 2000 because there is a total of $10 of
unrecognized gain in the successor long po-
sition and offsetting short position.
Example 3. The facts are the same as in
Example 1, except that at year end you have
$8 of unrecognized gain in the successor long
position and $8 of unrecognized loss in the
offsetting short position. Under these circum-
stances, $8 of the total $10 realized loss will
be disallowed for 2000 because there is $8
of unrecognized gain in the successor long
position.
Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed
loss that resulted from applying Rule 1 and
Rule 2, you must carry it over to the next tax
year and apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that
carryover loss. For example, a loss disal-
lowed in 1999 under Rule 1 will not be al-
lowed in 2000, unless the substantially iden-
tical stock or securities (which caused the
loss to be disallowed in 1999) were disposed
of during 2000. In addition, the carryover loss
will not be allowed in 2000 if Rule 1 or Rule
2 disallows it.
Example. The facts are the same as in
the example under Rule 1 above, except that
on December 31, 2001, you sell the XX stock
at a $20 loss and there is $40 of unrecog-
nized gain in the put option. Under these cir-
cumstances, you cannot deduct in 2001 either
the $20 loss disallowed in 2000 or the $20
loss you incurred for the December 31, 2001,
sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does not apply be-
cause the substantially identical XX stock was
sold during the year and no substantially
identical stock or securities were bought
within the 61–day period. However, Rule 2
does apply because there is $40 of unrecog-
nized gain in the put option, an offsetting po-
sition to the loss positions.
Capital loss carryover.If the sale of a
loss position would have resulted in a capital
loss, you treat the carryover loss as a capital
loss on the date it is allowed, even if you
would treat the gain or loss on any successor
positions as ordinary income or loss. Like-
wise, if the sale of a loss position (in the case
of section 1256 contracts) would have re-
sulted in a 60% long-term capital loss and a
40% short-term capital loss, you treat the
carryover loss under the 60/40 rule, even if
you would treat any gain or loss on any suc-
cessor positions as 100% long-term or short-
term capital gain or loss.
Exceptions. The rules for coordinating
straddle losses and wash sales do not apply
to the following loss situations.
1) Loss on the sale of one or more posi-
tions in a hedging transaction. (Hedging
transactions are described under Sec-
tion 1256 Contracts Marked to Market,
earlier.) 
2) Loss on the sale of a loss position in a
mixed straddle account. (See the dis-
cussion later on the mixed straddle ac-
count election.)
3) Loss on the sale of a position that is part
of a straddle consisting only of section
1256 contracts.
Holding Period and
Loss Treatment Rules 
The holding period of a position in a straddle
generally begins no earlier than the date on
which the straddle ends (the date you no
longer hold an offsetting position). This rule
does not apply to any position you held more
than 1 year before you established the
straddle. But see Exceptions, later.
Example. On March 6, 1999, you ac-
quired gold. On January 4, 2000, you entered
into an offsetting short gold forward contract
(nonregulated futures contract). On April 1,
2000, you disposed of the short gold forward
contract at no gain or loss. On April 8, 2000,
you sold the gold at a gain. Because the gold
had been held for 1 year or less before the
offsetting short position was entered into, the
holding period for the gold begins on April 1,
2000, the date the straddle ended. Gain rec-
ognized on the sale of the gold will be treated
as short-term capital gain.
Loss treatment.Treat the loss on the sale
of one or more positions (the loss position)
of a straddle as a long-term capital loss if both
of the following are true.
1) You held (directly or indirectly) one or
more offsetting positions to the loss po-
sition on the date you entered into the
loss position.
2) You would have treated all gain or loss
on one or more of the straddle positions
as long-term capital gain or loss if you
had sold these positions on the day you
entered into the loss position.
Mixed straddles.  Special rules apply to
a loss position that is part of a mixed straddle
and that is a non-section 1256 position. A
mixed straddle is a straddle:
1) That is not part of a larger straddle,
2) In which all positions are held as capital
assets, 
3) In which at least one (but not all) of the
positions is a section 1256 contract, and
4) For which the mixed straddle election
(Election A, discussed later) has not
been made.
Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss
and 40% short-term capital loss, if all of the
following conditions apply.
1) Gain or loss from the sale of one or more
of the straddle positions that are section
1256 contracts would be considered gain
or loss from the sale or exchange of a
capital asset.
2) The sale of no position in the straddle,
other than a section 1256 contract,
would result in a long-term capital gain
or loss.
3) You have not made a straddle-by-
straddle identification election (Election
B) or mixed straddle account election
(Election C), both discussed later.
Example. On March 1, 2000, you entered
into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
2000, you entered into an offsetting short gold
regulated futures contract. You did not make
an election to offset gains and losses from
positions in a mixed straddle. On August 9,
2000, you disposed of the long forward con-
tract at a loss. Because the gold forward
contract was part of a mixed straddle and the
disposition of this non-section 1256 position
would not result in long-term capital loss, the
loss recognized on the termination of the gold
forward contract will be treated as a 60%
long-term and 40% short-term capital loss.
Exceptions. The special holding period and
loss treatment for straddle positions does not
apply to positions that:
1) Constitute part of a hedging transaction,
2) Are included in a straddle consisting only
of section 1256 contracts, or 
3) Are included in a mixed straddle account
(Election C), discussed later.
Mixed Straddles
If you disposed of a position in a mixed
straddle and make one of the elections de-
scribed in the following discussions, report
your gain or loss as indicated in those dis-
cussions. If you do not make any of the
elections, report your gain or loss in Part II
of Form 6781. If you disposed of the section
1256 component of the straddle, enter the
recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or your
gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form
6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11
or 13 (Part II).
Mixed straddle election (Election A). You
can elect out of the marked to market rules,
discussed under Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market, earlier, for all section 1256
contracts that are part of a mixed straddle.
Instead, the gain and loss rules for straddles
Page 56 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

will apply to these contracts. However, if you
make this election for an option on a section
1256 contract, the gain or loss treatment dis-
cussed earlier under Options will apply, sub-
ject to the gain and loss rules for straddles.
You can make this election if:
1) At least 1 (but not all) of the positions is
a section 1256 contract, and
2) Each position forming part of the
straddle is clearly identified as being part
of that straddle on the day the first sec-
tion 1256 contract forming part of the
straddle is acquired.
If you make this election, it will apply for
all later years as well. It cannot be revoked
without the consent of the IRS. If you made
this election, check box A of Form 6781. Do
not report the section 1256 component in Part
I.
Other elections.You can avoid the 60%
long-term capital loss treatment required for
a non-section 1256 loss position that is part
of a mixed straddle, described earlier, if you
choose either of the two following elections
to offset gains and losses for these positions.
1) Election B. Make a separate identifica-
tion of the positions of each mixed
straddle for which you are electing this
treatment (the straddle-by-straddle iden-
tification method).
2) Election C. Establish a mixed straddle
account for a class of activities for which
gains and losses will be recognized and
offset on a periodic basis. 
These two elections are alternatives to the
mixed straddle election. You can choose only
one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to
indicate your election choice by checking box
A, B, or C, whichever applies.
Straddle-by-straddle identification
election (Election B).Under this election,
you must clearly identify each position that is
part of the identified mixed straddle by the
earlier of:
1) The close of the day the identified mixed
straddle is established, or 
2) The time the position is disposed of. 
If you dispose of a position in the mixed
straddle before the end of the day on which
the straddle is established, this identification
must be made by the time you dispose of the
position. You are presumed to have properly
identified a mixed straddle if independent
verification is used.
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss
under this election depends on which side of
the straddle produced the total net gain or
loss. If the net gain or loss from the straddle
is due to the section 1256 contracts, gain or
loss is treated as 60% long-term capital gain
or loss and 40% short-term capital gain or
loss. Enter the net gain or loss in Part I of
Form 6781 and identify the election by
checking box B.
If the net gain or loss is due to the non-
section 1256 positions, gain or loss is short-
term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain
or loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify
the election.
For the specific application of the rules of
this election, see regulations section
1.1092(b)–3T.
Example. On April 1, you entered into a
non-section 1256 position and an offsetting
section 1256 contract. You also made a valid
election to treat this straddle as an identified
mixed straddle. On April 8, you disposed of
the non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss
and the section 1256 contract at an $800
gain. Under these circumstances, the $600
loss on the non-section 1256 position will be
offset against the $800 gain on the section
1256 contract. The net gain of $200 from the
straddle will be treated as 60% long-term
capital gain and 40% short-term capital gain
because it is due to the section 1256 contract.
Mixed straddle account (Election C).
A mixed straddle account is an account for
determining gains and losses from all posi-
tions held as capital assets in a designated
class of activities at the time you elected to
establish the account. You must establish a
separate mixed straddle account for each
separate designated class of activities.
Generally, you must determine gain or
loss for each position in a mixed straddle ac-
count as of the close of each business day
of the tax year. You offset the net section
1256 contracts against the net non-section
1256 positions to determine the “daily account
net gain or loss.”
If the daily account amount is due to non-
section 1256 positions, the amount is treated
as short-term capital gain or loss. If the daily
account amount is due to section 1256 con-
tracts, the amount is treated as 60% long-
term and 40% short-term capital gain or loss.
On the last business day of the tax year,
you determine the “annual account net gain
or loss” for each account by netting the daily
account amounts for that account for the tax
year. The “total annual account net gain or
loss” is determined by netting the annual ac-
count amounts for all mixed straddle accounts
that you had established.
The net amounts keep their long-term or
short-term classification. However, no more
than 50% of the total annual account net gain
for the tax year can be treated as long-term
capital gain. Any remaining gain is treated as
short-term capital gain. Also, no more than
40% of the total annual account net loss can
be treated as short-term capital loss. Any re-
maining loss is treated as long-term capital
loss.
The election to establish one or more
mixed straddle accounts for each tax year
must be made by the due date (without ex-
tensions) of your income tax return for the
immediately preceding tax year. If you begin
trading in a new class of activities during a tax
year, you must make the election for the new
class of activities by the later of either:
1) The due date of your return for the im-
mediately preceding tax year (without
extensions), or 
2) 60 days after you entered into the first
mixed straddle in the new class of activ-
ities.
You make the election on Form 6781 by
checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your
income tax return for the immediately pre-
ceding tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that
applies. Report the annual account net gain
or loss from a mixed straddle account in Part
II of Form 6781. In addition, you must attach
a statement to Form 6781 specifically desig-
nating the class of activities for which a mixed
straddle account is established.
For the specific application of the rules of
this election, see regulations section
1.1092(b)–4T.
Interest expense and carrying charges
relating to mixed straddle account posi-
tions.  You cannot deduct interest and car-
rying charges that are allocable to any posi-
tions held in a mixed straddle account. Treat
these charges as an adjustment to the annual
account net gain or loss and allocate them
proportionately between the net short-term
and the net long-term capital gains or losses.
To find the amount of interest and carrying
charges that is not deductible and that must
be added to the annual account net gain or
loss, apply the rules described in chapter 3
under Interest expense and carrying charges
on straddles to the positions held in the mixed
straddle account.
Rollover of Gain
From Publicly
Traded Securities
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of cer-
tain gains from the sale of publicly traded
securities. This means that if you buy certain
replacement property and make the choice
described in this section, you postpone part
or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the
basis of the replacement property as de-
scribed in Basis of replacement property,
later. This postpones your gain until the year
you dispose of the replacement property.
You qualify to make this choice if you meet
all the following tests.
1) You sell publicly traded securities at a
gain. Publicly traded securities are se-
curities traded on an established securi-
ties market.
2) Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
3) During the 60-day period beginning on
the date of the sale, you buy replace-
ment property. This replacement prop-
erty must be either common stock or a
partnership interest in a  specialized
small business investment company
(SSBIC). This is any partnership or cor-
poration licensed by the Small Business
Administration under section 301(d) of
the Small Business Investment Act of
1958, as in effect on May 13, 1993.
Amount of gain recognized. If you make
the choice described in this section, you must
recognize gain only up to the following
amount:
1) The amount realized on the sale, minus
2) The cost of any common stock or part-
nership interest in an SSBIC that you
bought during the 60-day period begin-
ning on the date of sale (and did not
previously take into account on an earlier
sale of publicly traded securities). 
If this amount is less than the amount of your
gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,
subject to the limit described next. If this
amount is equal to or more than the amount
of your gain, you must recognize the full
amount of your gain.
Limit on gain postponed.The amount
of gain you can postpone each year is limited
to the smaller of:
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 57

1) $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and
file a separate return), or 
2) $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married
and file a separate return), minus the
amount of gain you postponed for all
earlier years. 
Basis of replacement property.You must
subtract the amount of postponed gain from
the basis of your replacement property.
How to report and postpone gain. Report
the entire gain realized from the sale on line
1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),
whichever is appropriate. To make the choice
to postpone gain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in
column (a) of the line directly below the line
on which you reported the gain. Enter the
amount of gain postponed in column (f). Enter
it as a loss (in parentheses).
Your choice is revocable with the consent
of the IRS.
For more information on how to postpone
gain, see the Schedule D (Form 1040) in-
structions.
Gains on Qualified
Small Business Stock
This section discusses two provisions of the
law that may apply to gain from the sale or
trade of qualified small business stock. You
may qualify for a tax-free rollover of all or
part of the gain. You may be able to exclude
part of the gain from your income.
Qualified small business stock.This is
stock that meets all the following tests.
1) It must be stock in a C corporation.
2) It must have been originally issued after
August 10, 1993.
3) As of the date the stock was issued, the
corporation must have been a qualified
small business, defined later.
4) You must have acquired the stock at its
original issue, directly or through an
underwriter, in exchange for money or
other property (not including stock), or
as pay for services provided to the cor-
poration (other than services performed
as an underwriter of the stock). In certain
cases, your stock may also meet this test
if you acquired it from another person
who met this test, or through a conver-
sion or trade of qualified small business
stock that you held.
5) The corporation must have met the ac-
tive business test, defined later, and
must have been a C corporation during
substantially all the time you held the
stock.
6) Within the period beginning 2 years be-
fore and ending 2 years after the stock
was issued, the corporation cannot have
bought more than a de minimis amount
of its stock from you or a related party.
7) Within the period beginning 1 year be-
fore and ending 1 year after the stock
was issued, the corporation cannot have
bought more than a de minimis amount
of its stock from anyone, unless the total
value of the stock it bought is 5% or less
of the total value of all its stock.
For more information about tests 6 and 7, see
the regulations under section 1202 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Qualified small business.This is a C cor-
poration with total gross assets of $50 million
or less at all times after August 9, 1993, and
before it issued the stock. The corporation's
total gross assets immediately after it issued
the stock must also be $50 million or less.
When figuring the corporation's total gross
assets, you must also count the assets of any
predecessor of the corporation. In addition,
you must treat all corporations that are
members of the same parent-subsidiary con-
trolled group as one corporation.
Active business test.A corporation meets
this test for any period of time if, during that
period, both the following are true.
1) It was an eligible corporation, defined
below.
2) It used at least 80% (by value) of its as-
sets in the active conduct of at least one
qualified trade or business, defined
below.
Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized
small business investment company (SSBIC)
is treated as meeting the active business test.
An SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is li-
censed to operate under section 301(d) of the
Small Business Investment Act of 1958 as in
effect on May 13, 1993.
Eligible corporation.This is any U.S.
corporation other than:
1) A Domestic International Sales Corpo-
ration (DISC) or a former DISC,
2) A corporation that has made, or whose
subsidiary has made, an election under
section 936 of the Internal Revenue
Code, concerning the Puerto Rico and
possession tax credit,
3) A regulated investment company,
4) A real estate investment trust (REIT), 
5) A real estate mortgage investment
conduit (REMIC),
6) A financial asset securitization invest-
ment trust (FASIT), or
 7) A cooperative.
Qualified trade or business.This is any
trade or business other than:
1) One involving services performed in the
fields of health, law, engineering, archi-
tecture, accounting, actuarial science,
performing arts, consulting, athletics, fi-
nancial services, or brokerage services,
2) One whose principal asset is the repu-
tation or skill of one or more employees,
3) Any banking, insurance, financing, leas-
ing, investing, or similar business,
4) Any farming business (including the
business of raising or harvesting trees),
5) Any business involving the production
or extraction of products for which per-
centage depletion can be claimed, or
6) Any business of operating a hotel, motel,
restaurant, or similar business.
Section 1045 Rollover 
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of
capital gain from the sale of qualified small
business stock held more than 6 months. This
means that, if you buy certain replacement
stock and make the choice described in this
section, you postpone part or all of your gain.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the
basis of the replacement stock as described
in Basis of replacement stock, below. This
postpones your gain until the year you dis-
pose of the replacement stock.
You can make this choice if you meet all
the following tests.
1) You buy replacement stock during the
60-day period beginning on the date of
the sale.
2) The replacement stock is qualified small
business stock.
3) The replacement stock continues to
meet the active business requirement for
small business stock for at least the first
6 months after you buy it.
Amount of gain recognized. If you make
the choice described in this section, you must
recognize the capital gain only up to the fol-
lowing amount:
1) The amount realized on the sale, minus
2) The cost of any qualified small business
stock you bought during the 60-day pe-
riod beginning on the date of sale (and
did not previously take into account on
an earlier sale of qualified small business
stock). 
If this amount is less than the amount of your
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that
gain. If this amount equals or is more than the
amount of your capital gain, you must recog-
nize the full amount of your gain.
Basis of replacement stock. You must
subtract the amount of postponed gain from
the basis of your replacement stock.
Holding period of replacement stock.Your
holding period for the replacement stock in-
cludes your holding period for the stock sold,
except for the purpose of applying the
6-month holding period requirement for
choosing to roll over the gain on its sale.
How to report gain. Report the entire gain
realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of
Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is ap-
propriate. To make the choice to postpone
the gain, enter “Section 1045 Rollover” in
column (a) of the line directly below the line
on which you reported the gain. Enter the
amount of gain postponed in column (f). En-
ter it as a loss (in parentheses).
Section 1202 Exclusion
You generally can exclude from your income
one-half of your gain from the sale or trade
of qualified small business stock held by you
for more than 5 years. The taxable part of
your gain equal to your section 1202 exclu-
sion is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax
Rates, later.
SSBIC stock.If the stock is specialized small
business investment company (SSBIC) stock
that you bought as replacement property for
publicly traded securities you sold at a gain,
you must reduce the basis of the stock by the
Page 58 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

amount of any postponed gain on that earlier
sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of
Gain From Publicly Traded Securities. But do
not reduce your basis by that amount when
figuring your section 1202 exclusion.
Limit on eligible gain.The amount of your
gain from the stock of any one issuer that is
eligible for the exclusion in 2000 is limited to
the greater of:
1) Ten times your basis in all qualified stock
of the issuer that you sold or exchanged
during the year, or
2) $10 million ($5 million for married indi-
viduals filing separately) minus the
amount of gain from the stock of the
same issuer that you used to figure your
exclusion in earlier years.
How to report gain. Report the entire gain
realized from the sale in column (f) of line 8
of Schedule D (Form 1040). Report an
amount equal to the excluded gain in column
(g). Directly below the line on which you re-
port the gain, enter “Section 1202 exclusion”
in column (a) and enter the amount of the
exclusion in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in
parentheses).
More information. For information about ad-
ditional requirements that may apply, see
section 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Reporting Capital
Gains and Losses
This section discusses how to report your
capital gains and losses on Schedule D (Form
1040). Enter your sales and trades of stocks,
bonds, etc., and real estate (if not required to
be reported on another form) on line 1 of Part
I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include
all these transactions even if you did not re-
ceive a Form 1099–B or 1099–S (or substi-
tute statement). You can use Schedule D–1
as a continuation schedule to report more
transactions.
Be sure to add all sales price entries in
column (d) on lines 1 and 2 and lines 8 and
9 and enter the totals on lines 3 and 10. Then
add the following amounts reported to you for
2000 on Forms 1099–B and Forms 1099–S
(or on substitute statements):
1) Proceeds from transactions involving
stocks, bonds, and other securities, and
2) Gross proceeds from real estate trans-
actions (other than the sale of your main
home if you had no taxable gain) not
reported on another form or schedule. 
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 and
10, attach a statement to your return ex-
plaining the difference.
Installment sales. If you will receive any of
the proceeds from the sale of your investment
property after the year of sale, you may have
an installment sale. Generally, you report gain
from an installment sale using the installment
method. Under this method, you report part
of the gain each year that you receive a pay-
ment. For information, see Publication 537,
Installment Sales.
Stock or securities. You cannot use the
installment method to report a gain from the
sale of stock or securities traded on an es-
tablished securities market. You must report
the entire gain in the year of sale (the year in
which the trade date occurs).
At-risk rules.  Special at-risk rules apply to
most income-producing activities. These
rules limit the amount of loss you can deduct
to the amount you risk losing in the activity.
The at-risk rules also apply to a loss from the
sale or trade of an asset used in an activity
to which the at-risk rules apply. For more in-
formation, see Publication 925, Passive Ac-
tivity and At-Risk Rules. Use Form 6198, At-
Risk Limitations, to figure the amount of loss
you can deduct.
Passive activity gains and losses.  If you
have gains or losses from a passive activity,
you may also have to report them on  Form
8582. In some cases, the loss may be limited
under the passive activity rules. Refer to Form
8582 and its separate instructions for more
information about reporting capital gains and
losses from a passive activity.
Form 1099–B transactions.  If you sold
property, such as stocks, bonds, or certain
commodities, through a broker, you should
receive Form 1099–B or an equivalent state-
ment from the broker. Use the Form 1099–B
or equivalent statement to complete Schedule
D.
Report the gross proceeds shown in box
2 of Form 1099–B as the gross sales price
in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of
Schedule D, whichever applies. However, if
the broker advises you, in box 2 of Form
1099–B, that gross proceeds (gross sales
price) less commissions and option premiums
were reported to the IRS, enter that net sales
price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8
of Schedule D, whichever applies.
If the net amount is entered in column (d),
do not include the commissions and option
premiums in column (e).
Section 1256 contracts and straddles.
Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses
from section 1256 contracts and straddles
before entering these amounts on Schedule
D. Include a copy of Form 6781 with your
income tax return.
Market discount bonds. Report the sale
or trade of a market discount bond on
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If
the sale or trade results in a gain and you did
not choose to include market discount in in-
come currently, enter “Accrued Market Dis-
count” on the next line in column (a) and the
amount of the accrued market discount as a
loss in column (f). Also report the amount of
accrued market discount as interest income
on Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, and
identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”
Form 1099–S transactions.  If you sold or
traded reportable real estate, you generally
should receive from the real estate reporting
person a Form 1099–S, Proceeds From Real
Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-
ceeds.
“Reportable real estate” is defined as any
present or future ownership interest in any of
the following:
1) Improved or unimproved land, including
air space, 
2) Inherently permanent structures, includ-
ing any residential, commercial, or in-
dustrial building, 
3) A condominium unit and its accessory
fixtures and common elements, including
land, and 
4) Stock in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration (as defined in section 216 of the
Internal Revenue Code). 
A “real estate reporting person” could in-
clude the buyer's attorney, your attorney, the
title or escrow company, a mortgage lender,
your broker, the buyer's broker, or the person
acquiring the biggest interest in the property.
Your Form 1099–S will show the gross
proceeds from the sale or exchange in box
2. Follow the instructions for Schedule D to
report these transactions, and include them
on line 1 or 8 as appropriate.
It is unlawful for any real estate reporting
person to separately charge you for comply-
ing with the requirement to file Form 1099–S.
Sale of property bought at various times.
If you sell a block of stock or other property
that you bought at various times, report the
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one
line in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term
gain or loss on one line in Part II. Write “Var-
ious” in column (b) for the “Date acquired.”
See the Comprehensive Example later in this
chapter.
Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other
basis any expense of sale such as broker's
fees, commissions, state and local transfer
taxes, and option premiums. Enter this ad-
justed amount in column (e) of either Part I
or Part II of Schedule D, whichever applies,
unless you reported the net sales price
amount in column (d).
Short-term gains and losses.  Capital gain
or loss on the sale or trade of investment
property held 1 year or less is a short-term
capital gain or loss. You report it in Part I of
Schedule D. If the amount you report in col-
umn (f) is a loss, show it in parentheses.
You combine your share of short-term
capital gain or loss from partnerships, S cor-
porations, and fiduciaries, and any short-term
capital loss carryover, with your other short-
term capital gains and losses to figure your
net short-term capital gain or loss on line 7
of Schedule D.
Long-term gains and losses.  A capital gain
or loss on the sale or trade of investment
property held more than 1 year is a long-term
capital gain or loss. You report it in Part II of
Schedule D. If the amount you report in col-
umn (f) is a loss, show it in parentheses.
You also report the following in Part II of
Schedule D:
1) Undistributed long-term capital gains
from a regulated investment company
(mutual fund) or real estate investment
trust (REIT),
2) Your share of long-term capital gains or
losses from partnerships, S corporations,
and fiduciaries,
3) All capital gain distributions from mutual
funds and REITs not reported directly on
line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
1040, and
4) Long-term capital loss carryovers.
The result after combining these items
with your other long-term capital gains and
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 59

losses is your net long-term capital gain or
loss (line 16 of Schedule D).
28% rate gain or loss.Enter in column
(g) the amount, if any, from column (f) that is
a 28% rate gain or loss. Enter any loss in
parentheses.
A 28% rate gain or loss is:
 Any collectibles gain or loss, or
 The part of your gain on qualified small
business stock that is equal to the section
1202 exclusion.
For more information, see Capital Gain Tax
Rates, later.
Capital gain distributions only.  You do
not have to file Schedule D if all of the fol-
lowing are true.
1) The only amounts you would have to
report on Schedule D are capital gain
distributions from box 2a of Form
1099–DIV (or substitute statement).
2) You do not have an amount in box 2b,
2c, or 2d of any Form 1099–DIV (or
substitute statement).
3) You do not file Form 4952 or, if you do,
the amount on line 4e of that form is not
more than zero.
If all the above statements are true, report
your capital gain distributions directly on line
13 of Form 1040 and check the box on that
line. Also, use the Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure
your tax.
You can report your capital gain distribu-
tions on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on
Form 1040, if both of the following are true.
1) None of the Forms 1099–DIV (or substi-
tute statements) you received have an
amount in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
2) You do not have to file Form 1040 for
any other reason. (For example, you
must not have any other capital gains
or any capital losses.)
Total net gain or loss.To figure your total
net gain or loss, combine your net short-term
capital gain or loss (line 7) with your net
long-term capital gain or loss (line 16). Enter
the result on line 17, Part III of Schedule D.
If your losses are more than your gains, see
Capital Losses, next. If both lines 16 and 17
are gains and line 39 of Form 1040 is more
than zero, see Capital Gain Tax Rates, later.
Capital Losses 
If your capital losses are more than your
capital gains, you can claim a capital loss
deduction. Report the deduction on line 13
of Form 1040, enclosed in parentheses.
Limit on deduction.Your allowable capital
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the
lesser of:
1) $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and
file a separate return), or
2) Your total net loss as shown on line 17
of Schedule D.
You can use your total net loss to reduce your
income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.
Capital loss carryover.  If you have a total
net loss on line 17 of Schedule D that is more
than the yearly limit on capital loss de-
ductions, you can carry over the unused part
to the next year and treat it as if you had in-
curred it in that next year. If part of the loss
is still unused, you can carry it over to later
years until it is completely used up.
When you figure the amount of any capital
loss carryover to the next year, you must take
the current year's allowable deduction into
account, whether or not you claimed it.
When you carry over a loss, it remains
long term or short term. A long-term capital
loss you carry over to the next tax year will
reduce that year's long-term capital gains
before it reduces that year's short-term capital
gains.
Figuring your carryover.The amount
of your capital loss carryover is the amount
of your total net loss that is more than the
lesser of:
1) Your allowable capital loss deduction for
the year, or 
2) Your taxable income increased by your
allowable capital loss deduction for the
year and your deduction for personal
exemptions.
If your deductions are more than your
gross income for the tax year, use your neg-
ative taxable income in computing the amount
in item (2).
Complete the Capital Loss Carryover
Worksheet in the Schedule D (Form 1040)
instructions to determine the part of your
capital loss for 2000 that you can carry over
to 2001.
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities
in 2000. The sales resulted in a capital loss
of $7,000. They had no other capital trans-
actions. Their taxable income was $26,000.
On their joint 2000 return, they can deduct
$3,000. The unused part of the loss, $4,000
($7,000 − $3,000), can be carried over to
2001.
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their
capital loss deduction would have been
$2,000. They would have no carryover to
2001.
Use short-term losses first.When you
figure your capital loss carryover, use your
short-term capital losses first, even if you in-
curred them after a long-term capital loss. If
you have not reached the limit on the capital
loss deduction after using the short-term
capital loss, use the long-term capital losses
until you reach the limit.
Decedent's capital loss.  A capital loss
sustained by a decedent during his or her last
tax year (or carried over to that year from an
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final
return filed for the decedent. The capital loss
limits discussed earlier still apply in this situ-
ation. The decedent's estate cannot deduct
any of the loss or carry it over to following
years.
Joint and separate returns.If you and
your spouse once filed separate returns and
are now filing a joint return, combine your
separate capital loss carryovers. However, if
you and your spouse once filed a joint return
and are now filing separate returns, any cap-
ital loss carryover from the joint return can be
deducted only on the return of the spouse
who actually had the loss.
Capital Gain Tax Rates 
The 31%, 36%, and 39.6% income tax rates
for individuals do not apply to a net capital
gain. In most cases, the 15% and 28% rates
do not apply either. Instead, your net capital
gain is taxed at a lower capital gain rate.
The term “net capital gain” means the
amount by which your net long-term capital
gain for the year is more than your net short-
term capital loss.
The capital gain rate may be 10%, 20%,
25%, or 28%, or a combination of those rates,
as shown in Table 4–2.
The capital gain rate does not apply if it is
higher than your regular tax rate.
Example. You have a net capital gain
from selling collectibles, so the capital gain
rate on the gain would be 28%. Because you
are single and your taxable income is
$25,000, your regular tax rate is 15%. All your
taxable income will be taxed at the 15% rate.
The 28% rate does not apply.
Investment interest deducted.If you claim
a deduction for investment interest, you may
have to reduce the amount of your net capital
gain that is eligible for the capital gain tax
rates. Reduce it by the amount of the net
capital gain you choose to include in invest-
ment income when figuring the limit on your
investment interest deduction. This is done
on lines 20–22 of Schedule D. For more in-
formation about the limit on investment inter-
est, see Interest Expenses in chapter 3.
Using the Capital Gain Rates
The part of a net capital gain that is subject
to each rate is determined under the following
rules.
1) In each of the following groups, long-
term capital gains are netted with long-
term capital losses.
a) A 28% group, consisting of collect-
ibles gains and losses, gain on
qualified small business stock equal
to the section 1202 exclusion, and
long-term capital loss carryovers.
b) A 25% group, consisting of
unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
c) A 20% group, consisting of gains
and losses that are not in the 28%
or 25% group.
2) A net short-term capital loss reduces any
net gain from the 28% group, then any
gain from the 25% group, and finally any
net gain from the 20% group.
3) A net loss from the 28% group reduces
any gain from the 25% group, and then
any net gain from the 20% group. 
4) A net loss from the 20% group reduces
any net gain from the 28% group, and
then any gain from the 25% group.
Collectibles gain or loss.This is gain or
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art,
rug, antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and
platinum bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alco-
holic beverage held more than 1 year.
Collectibles gain includes gain from the
sale of an interest in a partnership, S corpo-
ration, or trust attributable to unrealized ap-
preciation of collectibles.
Page 60 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Table 4–2. What Is Your Capital Gain Tax Rate?
IF your net capital gain is from. . .
Collectibles gain
1
15%, if your regular tax rate is 15%.
THEN your capital gain rate is . . .
28%
1
Gain on qualified small business stock equal to the section 1202
exclusion 28%
1
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain
Other gain, and your regular tax rate is 28% or higher
25%
1
20%
10%
2
Other gain, and your regular tax rate is 15%
2
The 10% rate applies only to the part of your net capital gain that would be taxed at 15% if there were no capital gain rates.
Gain on qualified small business stock. If
you realized a gain from qualified small busi-
ness stock that you held more than 5 years,
you generally can exclude one-half of your
gain from your income. The taxable part of
your gain equal to your section 1202 exclu-
sion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains on Qual-
ified Small Business Stock, earlier in this
chapter.
Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.Gener-
ally, this is any part of your capital gain from
selling section 1250 property (real property)
that is due to depreciation (but not more than
your net section 1231 gain), reduced by any
net loss in the 28% group. Use the worksheet
in the Schedule D instructions to figure your
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. For more
information about section 1250 property and
section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of Publica-
tion 544.
Using Schedule D. You apply these rules
by using Part IV of Schedule D (Form 1040)
to figure your tax. 
You will need to use Part IV if both of the
following are true.
1) You have a net capital gain. You have
a net capital gain if both lines 16 and 17
of Schedule D are gains. (Line 16 is your
net long-term capital gain or loss. Line
17 is your net long-term capital gain or
loss combined with any net short-term
capital gain or loss.)
2) Your taxable income on Form 1040, line
39, is more than zero.
See the Comprehensive Example, later,
for an example of how to figure your tax on
Schedule D using the capital gain rates.
Using Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. If
you have capital gain distributions but do not
have to file Schedule D (Form 1040), figure
your tax using the Capital Gain Tax Work-
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040A or
Form 1040, whichever you file. For more in-
formation, see Capital gain distributions only,
earlier.
Alternative minimum tax. These capital
gain rates are also used in figuring alternative
minimum tax.
Changes for Years After 2000
After 2000, there will be changes in the capital
gain rates.
2001. Beginning in the year 2001, the 10%
capital gain rate will be lowered to 8% for
“qualified 5-year gain.”
2006. Beginning in the year 2006, the 20%
capital gain rate will be lowered to 18% for
qualified 5-year gain from property with a
holding period that begins after 2000.
Taxpayers who own certain stock on Jan-
uary 1, 2001, can choose to treat the stock
as sold and repurchased on January 2, 2001,
if they pay tax for 2001 on any resulting gain.
Qualified 5-year gain.This is long-term
capital gain from the sale of property that you
held for more than 5 years and that would
otherwise be subject to the 10% or 20%
capital gain rate.
Comprehensive Example
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to
wages from her job, she has income from
stocks and other securities. For the 2000 tax
year, she had the following capital gains and
losses, which she reports on Schedule D. Her
filled-in Schedule D is shown at the end of this
example.
Capital gains and losses—Schedule D.
Emily sold stock in two different companies
that she held for less than a year. In June,
she sold 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock
that she had bought in February. She had an
adjusted basis of $1,150 in the stock and sold
it for $400, for a loss of $750. In July, she sold
25 shares of Computer Co. stock that she
bought in June. She had an adjusted basis in
the stock of $2,000 and sold it for $2,500, for
a gain of $500. She reports these short-term
transactions on line 1 in Part I of Schedule
D.
Emily had three other stock sales that she
reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold
60 shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had in-
herited the Car stock from her father. Its fair
market value at the time of his death was
$2,500, which became her basis. Her loss
on the sale is $400. Because she had inher-
ited the stock, her loss is a long-term loss,
regardless of how long she and her father
actually held the stock. She enters the loss in
column (f) of line 8.
In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture
Co. stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of
those shares in 1989, for $1,000. She had
bought 100 more shares in 1991 for $2,200,
and an additional 300 shares in 1993 for
$1,500. Her total basis in the stock is $4,700.
She has a $300 ($5,000 − $4,700) gain on
this sale, which she enters in column (f) of line
8.
In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy
Co. stock for $4,100. This was qualified small
business stock that she had bought in Sep-
tember 1995. Her basis is $1,100, so she has
a $3,000 gain, which she enters in column (f)
of line 8. Because she held the stock more
than 5 years, she has a $1,500 section 1202
exclusion. She enters that amount in column
(g) as a 28% rate gain and claims the exclu-
sion on the line below by entering $1,500 as
a loss in column (f).
She received a Form 1099–B (not shown)
from her broker for each of these trans-
actions. The entries shown in box 2 of these
forms total $14,100.
Reconciliation of Forms 1099–B. Emily
makes sure that the total of the amounts re-
ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of
Schedule D is not less than the total of the
amounts shown on the Forms 1099–B she
received from her broker. For 2000, the total
of lines 3 and 10 of Schedule D is $14,100,
which is the same amount reported by the
broker on Forms 1099–B.
Form 6781. During 2000, Emily had a
realized loss from a regulated futures contract
of $11,000. She also had an unrealized
marked to market gain on open contracts of
$27,000 at the end of 2000. She had reported
an unrealized marked to market gain of
$1,000 on her 1999 tax return. (This $1,000
must be subtracted from her 2000 profit.)
These amounts are shown in boxes 6, 7, and
8 of the Form 1099–B she received from her
broker. Box 9 shows her combined profit of
$15,000 ($27,000 − $1,000 − $11,000). She
reports this gain in Part I of Form 6781 (not
shown). She shows 40% as short-term gain
on line 4 of Schedule D and 60% as long-term
gain on line 11 of Schedule D.
The Form 1099–B that Emily received
from her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown
later.
Capital loss carryover from 1999.Emily
has a capital loss carryover to 2000 of $800,
of which $300 is short-term capital loss, and
$500 is long-term capital loss. She enters
these amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule
D.
She kept the completed Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet in her 1999 Schedule
D instructions (not shown), so she could
properly report her loss carryover for the 2000
tax year without refiguring it.
Tax computation.Because Emily has gains
on both lines 16 and 17 of Schedule D and
has taxable income, she uses Part IV of
Schedule D to figure her tax. After entering
the gain from line 17 on line 13 of her Form
1040, she completes the rest of Form 1040
through line 39. She enters the amount from
that line, $30,000, on line 19 of Schedule D.
After filling out the rest of Part IV, she figures
her tax is $4,434. This is less than the tax she
would have figured without using Part IV of
Schedule D, $4,995.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 61

Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-00
6-29-00
6-12-00
7-30-00
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-20-95
2-3-00
6-29-00
12-15-00
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
1,500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
500
9,900
1,000
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
*28% rate gain or loss includes all “collectibles gains and losses ” (as defined on page D-6) and up to 50% of the eligible gain
on qualified small business stock (see page D-4).
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 for more space to list transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on Form 1040
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or
other basis
(see page D-6)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts.
Add column (d) of lines 1 and 2
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684,
6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 8 of your
1999 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine column (f) of lines 1 through 6 /H17075
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from
Schedule D-1, line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.
Add column (d) of lines 8 and 9 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and
long-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts
from Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-1
15 15
14
16
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter in both columns (f) and (g) the amount, if
any, from line 13 of your 1999 Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet ()
Combine column (g) of lines 8 through 14
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine column (f) of lines 8 through 14 /H1707516
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2000Cat. No. 11338H
()
4
4
Part I
Part II
7
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or
other basis
(see page D-6)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-6)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(g) 28% rate gain or
(loss)
(see instr. below)*
Next: Go to Part III on the back.
()
2000
Page 62 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

15,350
30,000
8,900
21,100
26,250
21,100
20,100
21,100
3,169
26,250
21,100
5,150
515
8,900
5,150
3,750
750
30,000
30,000
-0-
-0-
4,434
4,995
4,434
9,900
—
9,900
6,450
1,000
-0-
1,000
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2000
Summary of Parts I and II
Combine lines 7 and 16. If a loss, go to line 18. If a gain, enter the gain on Form 1040, line 1317 17
()18
Next: Skip Part IV below. Instead, complete Form 1040 through line 37. Then, complete the
Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet on page D-6 if: 
Part III
● The loss on line 17 or
● ($3,000) or, if married filing separately, ($1,500)
Page 2
18
Next: Complete Form 1040 through line 39. Then, go to Part IV to figure your tax if: 
If line 17 is a loss, enter here and as a (loss) on Form 1040, line 13, the smaller of these losses:
Tax Computation Using Maximum Capital Gains RatesPart IV
20
Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 39
22
Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 23, but not less than zero
23
If you are filing Form 4952, enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e
24
Add lines 24 and 25
25
Subtract line 26 from line 22. If zero or less, enter -0-
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
Subtract line 39 from line 38
/H17075
Add lines 33, 37, 41, 47, and 51
Figure the tax on the amount on line 19. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains). Enter the smaller of line 52 or line 53 here
and on Form 1040, line 40
24
25
19
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
43
44
49
50
51
52
53
54
21
Enter the smaller of line 16 or line 17 of Schedule D
Enter your unrecaptured section 1250 gain, if any, from line 17 of the
worksheet on page D-8 
Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0-
Combine lines 7 and 15. If zero or less, enter -0-
20
21
22
23
● Both lines 16 and 17 are gains and
● Form 1040, line 39, is more than zero.
● The loss on line 17 exceeds the loss on line 18 or
● Form 1040, line 37, is a loss.
Subtract line 27 from line 19. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the smaller of:
Enter the smaller of line 28 or line 29
Subtract line 22 from line 19. If zero or less, enter -0-
Enter the larger of line 30 or line 31 /H17075
Figure the tax on the amount on line 32. Use the Tax Table or Tax Rate Schedules, whichever applies
Enter the smaller of line 22 or line 25
Add lines 22 and 32
Enter the amount from line 19
Subtract line 44 from line 43. If zero or less, enter -0-
Subtract line 45 from line 42. If zero or less, enter -0- /H17075
Multiply line 46 by 25% (.25)
Enter the amount from line 19
Add lines 32, 36, 40, and 46
Subtract line 49 from line 48
Multiply line 50 by 28% (.28)
Enter the amount from line 29
Enter the amount from line 30
Subtract line 35 from line 34 /H17075
Multiply line 36 by 10% (.10)
Enter the smaller of line 19 or line 27
Enter the amount from line 36
45
46
47
48
19
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
● The amount on line 19 or
● $26,250 if single; $43,850 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er);
$21,925 if married filing separately; or $35,150 if head of household /H20854
Note. If the amounts on lines 29 and 30 are the same, skip lines 34 through 37 and go to line 38.
41 Multiply line 40 by 20% (.20)
Note. If line 24 is zero or blank, skip lines 48 through 51 and go to line 52.
Note. If line 26 is zero or blank, skip lines 42 through 51 and go to line 52.
Note. If the amounts on lines 19 and 29 are the same, skip lines 38 through 51 and go to line 52.
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2000
Otherwise, stop here.
-0-
-0-
-0-
1,000
31,000
30,000
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment PropertyPage 63

XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, P A 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
Transactions
CUSIP No.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$ Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S Federal identification number RECIPIENT ’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name Description5
Regulated Futures Contracts
Street address (including apt. no.) Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts— 12/31/99
7Profit or (loss) realized in
2000
6
City, state, and ZIP code $$
Aggregate profit or (loss)9Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts— 12/31/2000
8
Account number (optional)
$$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B (Keep for your records.)
/H20854
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
CORRECTED (if checked)
OMB No. 1545-0715
Form 1099-B
2000
Special Rules for
Traders in Securities
Special rules apply if you are a trader in se-
curities in the business of buying and selling
securities for your own account. To be en-
gaged in business as a trader in securities,
you must meet all the following conditions.
 You must seek to profit from daily market
movements in the prices of securities and
not from dividends, interest, or capital
appreciation.
 Your activity must be substantial.
 You must carry on the activity with conti-
nuity and regularity.
The following facts and circumstances
should be considered in determining if your
activity is a securities trading business.
1) Typical holding periods for securities
bought and sold.
2) The frequency and dollar amount of your
trades during the year.
3) The extent to which you pursue the ac-
tivity to produce income for a livelihood.
4) The amount of time you devote to the
activity.
If your trading activities are not a busi-
ness, you are considered an investor, and not
a trader. It does not matter whether you call
yourself a trader or a “day trader.”
Note. You may be a trader in some se-
curities and have other securities you hold for
investment. The special rules discussed here
do not apply to the securities held for invest-
ment. You must keep detailed records to dis-
tinguish the securities. The securities held for
investment must be identified as such in your
records on the day you got them (for example,
by holding them in a separate brokerage ac-
count).
How To Report
Transactions from trading activities result in
capital gains and losses and must be reported
on Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from
these transactions are subject to the limit on
capital losses explained earlier in this chapter.
Mark-to-market election made. If you made
the mark-to-market election, you should re-
port all gains and losses from trading as or-
dinary gains and losses in Part II of Form
4797, instead of as capital gains and losses
on Schedule D. In that case, securities held
at the end of the year in your business as a
trader are marked to market by treating them
as if they were sold (and reacquired) for fair
market value on the last business day of the
year. But do not mark to market any securi-
ties you held for investment. Report sales
from those securities on Schedule D, not
Form 4797.
Expenses. Interest expense and other in-
vestment expenses that an investor would
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) are de-
ducted by a trader on Schedule C (Form
1040), Profit or Loss From Business, if the
expenses are from the trading business.
Commissions and other costs of acquiring or
disposing of securities are not deductible but
must be used to figure gain or loss. The limit
on investment interest expense, which ap-
plies to investors, does not apply to interest
paid or incurred in a trading business.
Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from
selling securities as part of a trading business
are not subject to self-employment tax. This
is true whether the election is made or not.
How To Make the
Mark-to-Market Election
To make the mark-to-market election for
2001, you must file a statement by April 16,
2001. This statement should be attached to
either your 2000 individual income tax return
or a request for an extension of time to file
that return. The statement must include the
following information.
1) That you are making an election under
section 475(f) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
2) The first tax year for which the election
is effective.
3) The trade or business for which you are
making the election.
If you are not required to file a 2000 in-
come tax return, you make the election by
placing the above statement in your books
and records no later than March 15, 2001.
Attach a copy of the statement to your 2001
return.
After making the election to change to the
mark-to-market method of accounting, you
must change your method of accounting for
securities under Revenue Procedure 99–49.
Revenue Procedure 99–49 requires you to file
Form 3115, Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method. Follow its instructions. La-
bel the Form 3115 as filed under “Section 10A
of the APPENDIX of Rev. Proc. 99–49.”
Once you make the election, it will apply
to 2001 and all later tax years, unless you get
permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect
of making the election is described under
Mark-to-market election made, earlier.
For more information on this election, see
Revenue Procedure 99–17, 1999–1 CB 503.
Page 64 Chapter 4  Sales and Trades of Investment Property

5.
How To
Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax is-
sues, order free publications and forms, ask
tax questions, and get more information from
the IRS in several ways. By selecting the
method that is best for you, you will have
quick and easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 65

Glossary
The definitions in this glos-
sary are the meanings of the
terms as used in this publication.
The same term used in another
publication may have a slightly
different meaning.
Accrual method: An account-
ing method under which you re-
port your income when you earn
it, whether or not you have re-
ceived it. You generally deduct
your expenses when you incur a
liablity for them, rather than
when you pay them.
At-risk rules:Rules that limit
the amount of loss you may de-
duct to the amount you risk los-
ing in the activity.
Basis: Basis is the amount of
your investment in property for
tax purposes. The basis of prop-
erty you buy is usually the cost.
Basis is used to figure gain or
loss on the sale or disposition of
investment property.
Below-market loan:A demand
loan (defined later) on which in-
terest is payable at a rate below
the applicable federal rate, or a
term loan where the amount
loaned is more than the present
value of all payments due under
the loan.
Call: An option that entitles the
purchaser to buy, at any time
before a specified future date,
property such as a stated num-
ber of shares of stock at a spec-
ified price.
Cash method: An accounting
method under which you report
your income in the year in which
you actually or constructively re-
ceive it. You generally deduct
your expenses in the year you
pay them.
Commodities trader:A person
who is actively engaged in trad-
ing section 1256 contracts and
is registered with a domestic
board of trade designated as a
contract market by the Com-
modities Futures Trading Com-
mission.
Commodity future: A contract
made on a commodity exchange,
calling for the sale or purchase
of a fixed amount of a commodity
at a future date for a fixed price.
Conversion transaction:Any
transaction that you entered into
after April 30, 1993 that meets
both of these tests.
1) Substantially all of your ex-
pected return from the
transaction is due to the
time value of your net in-
vestment.
2) The transaction is one of
the following.
a) A straddle, including
any set of offsetting
positions on stock.
b) Any transaction in
which you acquire
property (whether or
not actively traded) at
substantially the same
time that you contract
to sell the same prop-
erty or substantially
identical property at a
price set in the con-
tract.
c) Any other transaction
that is marketed or
sold as producing cap-
ital gains from a trans-
action described in (1).
Demand loan: A loan payable
in full at any time upon demand
by the lender.
Dividend: A distribution of
money or other property made
by a corporation to its share-
holders out of its earnings and
profits.
Equity option:Any option:
1) To buy or sell stock, or 
2) That is valued directly or
indirectly by reference to
any stock, group of stocks,
or stock index.
Fair market value: The price
at which property would change
hands between a willing buyer
and a willing seller, both having
reasonable knowledge of the
relevant facts.
Forgone interest:The amount
of interest that would be payable
for any period if interest accrued
at the applicable federal rate and
was payable annually on De-
cember 31, minus any interest
payable on the loan for that pe-
riod.
Forward contract: A contract
to deliver a substantially fixed
amount of property (including
cash) for a substantially fixed
price.
Futures contract: An
exchange-traded contract to buy
or sell a specified commodity or
financial instrument at a speci-
fied price at a specified future
date. See also Commodity fu-
ture.
Gift loan: Any below-market
loan where the forgone interest
is in the nature of a gift.
Interest:Compensation for the
use or forbearance of money.
Investment interest:The inter-
est you paid or accrued on
money you borrowed that is
allocable to property held for in-
vestment.
Limited partner: A partner
whose participation in partner-
ship activities is restricted, and
whose personal liability for part-
nership debts is limited to the
amount of money or other prop-
erty that he or she contributed
or may have to contribute.
Listed option:Any option that
is traded on, or subject to the
rules of, a qualified board or ex-
change.
Marked to market rule: The
treatment of each section 1256
contract (defined later) held by a
taxpayer at the close of the year
as if it were sold for its fair mar-
ket value on the last business
day of the year.
Market discount: The stated
redemption price of a bond at
maturity minus your basis in the
bond immediately after you ac-
quire it. Market discount arises
when the value of a debt obli-
gation decreases after its issue
date.
Market discount bond: Any
bond having market discount
except:
1) Short-term obligations with
fixed maturity dates of up to
1 year from the date of is-
sue, 
2) Tax-exempt obligations that
you bought before May 1,
1993, 
3) U.S. savings bonds, and 
4) Certain installment obli-
gations.
Nominee: A person who re-
ceives, in his or her name, in-
come that actually belongs to
someone else.
Nonequity option: Any listed
option that is not an equity op-
tion, such as debt options, com-
modity futures options, currency
options, and broad-based stock
index options.
Options dealer: Any person
registered with an appropriate
national securities exchange as
a market maker or specialist in
listed options.
Original issue discount (OID):
The amount by which the stated
redemption price at maturity of a
debt instrument is more than its
issue price.
Passive activity:An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade or
business in which you do not
materially participate and any
rental activity. However, the
rental of real estate is not a
passive activity if both of the fol-
lowing are true.
1) More than one-half of the
personal services you per-
form during the year in all
trades or businesses are
performed in real property
trades or businesses in
which you materially partic-
ipate.
2) You perform more than 750
hours of services during the
year in real property trades
or businesses in which you
materially participate.
Portfolio income: Gross in-
come from interest, dividends,
annuities, or royalties that is not
derived in the ordinary course of
a trade or business. It includes
gains from the sale or trade of
property (other than an interest
in a passive activity) producing
portfolio income or held for in-
vestment.
Premium: The amount by which
your cost or other basis in a bond
right after you get it is more than
the total of all amounts payable
on the bond after you get it (other
than payments of qualified stated
interest).
Private activity bond:A bond
that is part of a state or local
government bond issue of which:
1) More than 10% of the pro-
ceeds are to be used for a
private business use, and
2) More than 10% of the pay-
ment of the principal or in-
terest is:
a) Secured by an interest
in property to be used
for a private business
use (or payments for
the property), or
b) Derived from pay-
ments for property (or
borrowed money) used
for a private business
use.
Put: An option that entitles the
purchaser to sell, at any time
before a specified future date,
property such as a stated num-
ber of shares of stock at a spec-
ified price.
Real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduit (REMIC):An en-
tity that is formed for the purpose
of holding a fixed pool of mort-
gages secured by interests in
real property, with multiple
classes of interests held by in-
vestors. These interests may be
either regular or residual.
Page 66

Regulated futures contract:A
section 1256 contract that:
1) Provides that amounts that
must be deposited to, or
may be withdrawn from,
your margin account de-
pend on daily market con-
ditions (a system of marking
to market), and 
2) Is traded on, or subject to
the rules of, a qualified
board of exchange, such as
a domestic board of trade
designated as a contract
market by the Commodity
Futures Trading Commis-
sion or any board of trade
or exchange approved by
the Secretary of the Treas-
ury.
Restricted stock:Stock you get
for services you perform that is
nontransferable and is subject to
a substantial risk of forfeiture.
Section 1256 contract:Any:
1) Regulated futures contract,
2) Foreign currency contract
as defined in chapter 4 un-
der Section 1256 Contracts
Marked to Market,
3) Nonequity option, or 
4) Dealer equity option.
Short sale:The sale of property
that you generally do not own.
You borrow the property to de-
liver to a buyer and, at a later
date, you buy substantially iden-
tical property and deliver it to the
lender.
Straddle: Generally, a set of
offsetting positions on personal
property. A straddle may consist
of a security and a written option
to buy and a purchased option
to sell on the same number of
shares of the security, with the
same exercise price and period.
Stripped preferred stock:
Stock that meets the following
tests.
1) There has been a sepa-
ration in ownership between
the stock and any dividend
on the stock that has not
become payable. 
2) The stock: 
a) Is limited and preferred
as to dividends, 
b) Does not participate in
corporate growth to
any significant extent,
and 
c) Has a fixed redemption
price.
Term loan: Any loan that is not
a demand loan.
Wash sale: A sale of stock or
securities at a loss within 30
days before or after you buy or
acquire in a fully taxable trade,
or acquire a contract or option to
buy, substantially identical stock
or securities.
Page 67

Index
A
 Accounting fees ......................... 32
Accrual method ............... 7, 15, 34
 Accuracy-related penalty ....... 4, 27
Acquisition discount ....... 15, 42, 46
 Acquisition premium .................. 13
 Adjusted basis ........................... 40
Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends (See also In-
terest expenses: Limit
on investment interest) 21, 30, 31
Amortization of bond premium .. 31
 Annuities:
 Borrowing on ........................ 33
Bought with life insurance pro-
ceeds ............................... 11
 Interest on ........................ 5, 47
 Nontaxable trades ................ 44
 Sale of .................................. 47
 Single-premium .................... 33
 Trade for ............................... 36
Appreciated financial position ... 37
Assistance (See Tax help)               
 At-risk rules ......................... 29, 59
 Attorney fees ............................. 32
Automatic investment ser-
vice ........................... 32, 41, 49
B
 Backup withholding ..................... 3
 Bad debts .................................. 50
 Bargain purchases .................... 39
 Basis:
 Adjusted ............................... 40
 Cost ...................................... 39
Discounted debt instruments 42
 Investment property ............. 39
Other than cost .................... 39
Real estate investment trust
(REIT) .............................. 19
REMIC, residual interest ...... 23
Stocks and bonds .... 19, 20, 40
 Bearer obligations ............... 13, 47
 Bonds:
Accrued interest on .............. 18
Amortization of premium ...... 31
 Arbitrage ............................... 11
 Basis ..................................... 40
 Capital asset ........................ 46
 Convertible ........................... 43
 Coupon ................................. 15
 Coupons, stripped ................ 13
 Federally guaranteed ........... 11
 Market dis-
count ....... 12, 14, 42, 46, 59
 Mortgage revenue ................ 11
 Premiums on ........................ 42
 Private activity ...................... 11
Redemption or retirement of 36
 Registered ...................... 11, 47
Sold between interest dates 11
State and local ..................... 46
State or local government .... 11
 Stripped .......................... 11, 13
 Traded flat .............................. 6
 U.S. savings ..................... 7, 16
U.S. Treasury ........... 10, 44, 49
 Brokerage fees .......................... 33
C
Calls and puts ........................... 53
 Capital assets ............................ 45
Capital gain distributions
(See also Interest ex-
penses: Limit on in-
vestment interest) ...... 19, 21, 30
Capital gain tax computation ..... 60
Capital gains and losses:
Constructive ownership trans-
actions ............................. 48
 Investment property ............. 46
 Long term ....................... 49, 59
Losses, limit on .................... 60
 Reporting .............................. 59
 Short term ...................... 49, 59
Capital loss carryover ................ 60
Cash method ................... 7, 15, 34
Certificate of deposit ................. 13
 Children:
 Gifts to .................................... 4
Investment income of ............. 3
Owner of U.S. savings bond .. 8
 Related parties ..................... 44
 Clerical help ............................... 32
Collateralized debt obligations
(CDOs) ........................... 22, 23
 Comments ................................... 2
 Commissions, trustee's ............. 33
 Commodity futures .............. 48, 50
 Community property .................... 8
Constructive ownership trans-
actions .................................. 48
 Constructive receipt ................... 15
 Constructive sales ..................... 37
 Conversion transactions ............ 47
Convertible stocks and bonds ... 43
Corporate distributions: (See
also Dividends)
 Capital gain .......................... 19
 Liquidating ...................... 19, 42
 Nontaxable ........................... 19
Return of capital ................... 19
 Stock rights .................... 19, 41
Undistributed capital gains ... 19
 Cost basis .................................. 39
D
 Day traders ................................ 64
Decedents ....................... 8, 36, 60
Deposits, loss on ....................... 47
Discount on debt instruments:
 Market dis-
count ....... 12, 14, 42, 46, 59
Original issue discount
(OID) ......................... 11, 12
Sales or redemptions ........... 46
 Short-term obligations .......... 15
Stripped bonds and coupons 13
 Dividend reinvestment
plan ........................... 19, 32, 41
Dividends: (See also Corporate
distributions) 
 Exempt-interest .................... 20
 Extraordinary ........................ 52
 Form 1099–DIV .................... 18
How to report ....................... 21
Incorrect Form 1099 ............. 18
 Insurance policies ................ 20
 Nominees ............................. 21
On restricted stock ............... 21
On stock sold ....................... 18
 Ordinary ................................ 19
 Patronage ............................. 21
Received in January ............ 18
Reinvestment plans .. 19, 32, 41
 Scrip ..................................... 20
 Stock .............................. 41, 50
Vs. sale or trade ................... 36
 Divorce ...................................... 44
E
Education Savings Bond Program 9
 Endowment contract ............ 13, 33
Estate income received by benefi-
ciary ........................................ 3
Expenses of producing income . 32
F
 Face-amount certificates ........... 13
Fair market value ................ 39, 42
Federal guarantee on bonds ..... 11
Fees to buy or sell .................... 33
Financial asset securitization in-
vestment trust (FASIT) ......... 23
 Foreign currency
transactions .................... 37, 54
 Foreign income ............................ 2
 Form:
 1041 ..................................... 25
 1065 ..................................... 24
1066 (Schedule Q) ......... 23, 33
 1096 ............................... 18, 21
 1099–B ........................... 36, 59
 1099–DIV ....................... 18, 21
1099–INT .......... 4, 9, 16, 22, 23
 1099–MISC .................... 18, 51
1099–OID ........... 12, 16, 22, 23
 1099–S ................................. 59
 1116 ..................................... 16
 1120 ..................................... 24
 1120-A .................................. 24
 2439 ..................................... 19
 3115 ....................................... 7
 4684 ..................................... 47
 4797 ..................................... 43
 4952 ............................... 31, 34
 6198 ..................................... 59
 6781 ............................... 38, 55
 8271 ..................................... 27
 8275 ..................................... 27
 8275–R ................................. 27
 8582 ............................... 24, 59
 8615 ....................................... 3
 8814 ................................. 3, 31
 8815 ................................. 9, 17
 8818 ..................................... 10
 8824 ..................................... 43
 8832 ..................................... 24
 SS–4 ..................................... 24
 W–8BEN ................................. 4
 W–9 ........................................ 3
 Fractional shares ................. 20, 41
Free tax services ....................... 65
 Frozen deposits ..................... 5, 18
Futures contract, regulated ....... 37
G
Gains and losses:
 Deposits ............................... 47
Gains on sales or trades ..... 42, 44
Gifts ............................... 40, 49, 50
 Glossary .................................... 66
H
 Hedging transactions ........... 39, 48
Help (See Tax help)                         
 Holding period:
 Investment property ............. 49
 Straddles .............................. 56
How to report:
Bond premium amortization . 32
Capital gains and losses ...... 59
 Dividend income ................... 21
 Interest income ..................... 16
 Investment expenses ........... 34
Nonbusiness bad debts ....... 51
 Positions ............................... 55
Rollover of gain .................... 58
S corporation income, etc. ... 24
Sales of SBIC stock ............. 49
Section 1256 contracts and
straddles .......................... 38
 Wash sales ........................... 53
I
Income from sources outside the
U.S. ........................................ 2
Indian tribal government ............ 11
 Inherited property:
 Basis of ................................ 40
 Holding period ...................... 49
 Installment sales .................... 5, 59
 Insurance:
 Borrowing on ........................ 33
 Dividends on ........................ 20
Dividends, interest on ............ 5
Interest option on ................. 11
Life, interest on loan to buy . 33
Life, paid to beneficiary ........ 11
 Prepaid premiums .................. 5
 Single-premium life .............. 33
 Trades .................................. 44
 Interest expenses:
 Allocation .............................. 29
 Carry forward ....................... 30
 Investment ............................ 29
Limit on investment interest . 30
 Margin accounts ................... 30
Mixed straddle account posi-
tions ................................. 57
Paid in advance ................... 30
Passive activity losses ......... 31
 Straddles .............................. 34
 Unstated ............................... 39
 Interest income:
 Frozen deposits ................ 5, 18
How to report ....................... 16
 In general ............................... 4
On condemnation award ........ 5
On insurance dividends ......... 5
On seller-financed mortgage 18
On tax refund ......................... 5
 Tax-exempt .......................... 11
 Taxable ................................... 4
 Usurious ................................. 5
When to report ..................... 15
 Investment clubs ....................... 24
 Investment expenses:
 Deductible ............................ 32
From pass-through entities .. 33
How to report ....................... 34
 Interest ................................. 29
Limits on deductions ............ 29
 Nondeductible ...................... 33
 Investment income ...................... 3
Investment income, children ....... 3
 Investment property:
 Basis ..................................... 39
 Defined ................................. 29
Gain or loss treatment ......... 46
Sales and trades .................. 36
 IRAs ............................................. 4
J
 Joint accounts ............................. 4
L
 Like-kind exchanges ............ 43, 44
Liquidating distributions . 19, 21, 42
 Loans:
 Below-market ......................... 6
Gift and demand .................... 6
 Guarantees ........................... 50
Nonbusiness bad debt ......... 50
 Term ....................................... 6
Long-term capital gains and
losses ............................. 59, 60
Loss on deposits ....................... 47
Losses on sales or trades:
How to figure ........................ 42
Passive activities ...... 26, 29, 31
 Related parties ..................... 44
Small business investment
company stock ................ 49
Small business stock ........... 48
 Wash sales ........................... 52
M
 Mark-to-market election ............. 64
Marked to market ................ 37, 38
 Market discount
bonds ............ 12, 14, 42, 46, 59
Maximum tax rate, net capital
gain ....................................... 60
Meetings, expenses of attending 33
Money market certificates ........... 5
Money market funds .................. 19
More information (See Tax help)     
 Mortgage:
 Revenue bonds .................... 11
Secondary liability on home . 51
 Seller-financed ..................... 18
 Municipal bonds ........................ 11
Mutual funds ...... 18, 19, 33, 41, 50
Page 68

N
 Nominee distributions:
 Dividends ........................ 18, 21
 Interest ............................. 4, 18
Original issue discount ......... 12
Nonbusiness bad debts ............. 50
 Noncapital assets ...................... 45
Nondeductible investment ex-
penses .................................. 33
Nonqualified preferred stock ..... 43
Nontaxable corporate distribu-
tions ................................ 19, 21
 Nontaxable trades ............... 43, 49
 Notes:
Of individuals, bought at dis-
count ............................... 47
Redemption or retirement of 36
U.S. Treasury ........... 10, 44, 49
O
 Office expenses ......................... 32
 Options:
Calls and puts ...................... 53
 Cash settlement ................... 53
 Dealer equity ........................ 38
 Deep-in-the-money ............... 55
 Equity ................................... 38
Gain or loss .......................... 53
 Holding period ...................... 50
 Nonequity ............................. 38
Qualified covered call ........... 55
Section 1256 contracts ........ 53
 Wash sales ........................... 52
Ordinary gains and losses ........ 45
 Original issue discount
(OID) ................... 11, 12, 18, 42
P
Passive activity .. 24, 26, 29, 31, 59
 Penalty:
 Accuracy-related .............. 4, 27
 Backup withholding ................ 4
Failure to pay tax ................. 28
Failure to supply SSN ............ 3
On early withdrawals ........ 5, 18
 Substantial understatement . 28
 Valuation misstatement ........ 28
 Portfolio income ......................... 29
 Position:
 Appreciated financial ............ 37
 Defined ................................. 54
 Holding period ...................... 56
 Offsetting .............................. 54
 Successor ............................. 56
 Preferred stock:
 Nonqualified ......................... 43
 Redemption premium ........... 20
 Stripped ................................ 22
Premiums on bonds ............ 31, 42
Public utility stock reinvestment 41
Publications (See Tax help)             
Puts and calls ............................ 53
R
Real estate invest-
ment trust (REIT) 18, 19, 41, 50
Real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduits (REMICs):
 Regular interest .................... 22
 Residual interest ............ 23, 53
Recordkeeping .......... 3, 10, 40, 49
Registration of bonds .......... 11, 47
Regulated futures contract ........ 37
Related parties .............. 34, 44, 54
Repossession of real property .. 50
Rollover of gain from sale of se-
curities .................................. 57
S
 S corporations ........................... 23
Safe deposit box ....................... 33
Sales and trades of investment
property ................................ 36
 Savings bonds ....................... 7, 16
 Scrip dividends .......................... 20
Section 1202 gain ..................... 61
Section 1244 stock .................... 48
Section 1256 con-
tracts ................... 37, 50, 54, 59
 Securities:
 Holding period ...................... 49
 Installment sale .................... 59
Lost, stolen, etc., cost of re-
placing ............................. 32
Rollover of gain from sale .... 57
Worthless ................. 36, 48, 51
 Self-employment .................. 24, 39
 Seller-financed mortgage .......... 18
 Short sales:
 Adjusted basis ...................... 42
 Defined ................................. 51
 Expenses of ................... 33, 52
 Extraordinary dividends ........ 52
 Puts ...................................... 53
 SBIC stock ........................... 49
 Substitute payments ............. 51
 Wash sales ........................... 52
Short-term capital gains and
losses ............................. 59, 60
 Short-term obligations ............... 15
 Sixty/forty rule ............................ 38
Small business investment
company stock ............... 49, 57
Small business stock ..... 48, 50, 58
 Social security:
Investment club earnings ..... 24
 Number ................................... 3
Specialized small business in-
vestment company ............... 57
 Spouses:
 Related parties ..................... 44
 Transfers between ......... 40, 44
State or local government obli-
gations .................................. 11
 Stock:
 Basis ............................... 19, 40
 Capital asset ........................ 46
 Constructive ownership ........ 45
 Convertible ........................... 43
 Dividends ........................ 19, 41
 Fractional shares ............ 20, 41
 Identification ......................... 41
 Installment sale .................... 59
 Nonqualified preferred .......... 43
Public utility, reinvestment ... 41
Qualified small business ...... 58
 Redemption of ...................... 36
Rights ................. 19, 41, 46, 50
Rollover of gain from sale .... 57
 S corporation ........................ 42
 Section 1202 ........................ 58
Small business (section
1244) ............................... 48
Small Business Investment
Company ................... 49, 57
Sold or traded ...................... 40
 Splits ..................................... 41
 Straddle rules ....................... 54
 Stripped preferred ................ 22
 Surrender of ......................... 36
 Trades .................................. 43
 Straddles:
Deferral of loss from ............ 54
 Identified ............................... 55
Interest expense and carrying
charges ........................... 34
 Mixed .............................. 51, 56
 Reporting .............................. 59
Stripped bonds and coupons 11, 13
Stripped preferred stock ............ 22
 Suggestions ................................. 2
T
 Tax help ..................................... 65
Tax refund, interest on ................ 5
 Tax shelters ............................... 26
Tax-exempt income, expenses
of .......................................... 33
 Tax-exempt interest:
Reporting .................... 4, 16, 20
State or local government obli-
gations ............................. 11
Stripped bonds and cou-
pons .......................... 11, 14
 Taxes:
State and local transfer ........ 33
 State income ........................ 33
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 65
Traders in securities .................. 64
 Trades:
 Insurance .............................. 44
Investment property for
annuity ............................. 36
 Like-kind ......................... 43, 44
Nontaxable ............... 39, 43, 49
 Stock .................................... 43
 Taxable ................................. 39
U.S. Treasury notes or bonds 44
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds 10
Trust income received by benefi-
ciary ........................................ 3
Trustee's commission, revocable
trust ...................................... 33
 TTY/TDD information ................ 65
U
U.S. savings bonds ............... 7, 16
U.S. Treasury bills, notes,
and bonds ................ 10, 44, 49
 Usurious interest ......................... 5
W
 Wash sales:
 Holding period ...................... 50
Loss deferral rules, straddles 55
 Loss disallowed .................... 52
When to report interest income . 15
Worthless securities ...... 36, 48, 51
/H18549
Page 69

Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2001
Highlights of 2000 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With
Income From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) (Including Roth IRAs and
Education IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax,
phone, and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other
Qualified Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts, and MSAs
Alternative Minimum Tax –Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Page 70