Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -10% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.SGM ( 8-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: C:\Documents and Settings\MFYCB\Desktop\535-05\p535_0.sgm
Page 1 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction..................... 1Department
of the What’s New for 2005............... 2BusinessTreasury
What’s New for 2006............... 2Internal
Revenue Expenses Reminders ...................... 2Service
1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2
For use in preparing
2. Employees’ Pay............... 6
2005 Returns 3. Retirement Plans.............. 8
4. Rent Expense................. 14
5. Interest..................... 16
6. Taxes ...................... 21
7. Insurance ................... 23
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize................... 26
9. Amortization................. 30
10. Depletion.................... 38
11. Business Bad Debts............ 43
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel
Vehicles .................... 45
13. Other Expenses............... 48
14. How To Get Tax Help........... 54
Index.......................... 56
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR–6406
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
Get forms and other information
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thefaster and easier by: asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
Internet • www.irs.gov ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your

Page 2 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products. What’s New for 2006
Tax questions. If you have a tax question, 1.The following items highlight some changes invisit www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We
the tax law for 2006.cannot answer tax questions at either of the
addresses listed above. Elective deferrals.For 2006, the maximum
amount of elective deferrals under a salary re-Ordering forms and publications. Visit Deductingduction agreement that can be contributed to awww.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
qualified plan increases to $15,000 ($20,000 ifpublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to
you are age 50 or older). However, for SIMPLEone of the three addresses shown under How To Business
plans, the amount is $10,000 ($12,500 if you areGet Tax Help in the back of this publication.
age 50 or older). Expenses
Compensation limit.The maximum compen-
sation used for figuring contributions and bene-What’s New for 2005 fits for a retirement plan will increase from
Introduction$210,000 to $220,000 for 2006.The following items highlight some changes in
This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-the tax law for 2005. Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- ing business expenses. Business expenses areage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,2005 Presidentially declared disaster areas. the costs of carrying on a trade or business andpickup, or panel truck in 2006 is 44.5 cents aThe information in this publication covers routine they are usually deductible if the business ismile for all business miles.business situations. If your business has been operated to make a profit.
affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Wilma, or Rita,
see Publication 4492, Information for Taxpayers Topics
Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Wilma, and Rita. This chapter discusses:RemindersPublication 4492 contains special business pro-
visions found in the Katrina Emergency Tax Re- • What you can deductQualified environmental cleanup (remedia-lief Act of 2005 and the Gulf Opportunity Zone
tion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi-Act of 2005. • How much you can deduct
ronmental cleanup (remediation) costs include• When you can deductMeal expense deduction subject to “hours ofcosts you pay or incur before 2006. See chapter
service” limits.For 2005, this deduction is8. • Not-for-profit activities70% of the reimbursed meals your employees
Marginal production of oil and gas.Theconsumed while they were subject to the De-
Useful Itemssuspension of the taxable income limit on per-partment of Transportation’s “hours of service”
centage depletion from the marginal productionlimits. See chapter 13. You may want to see:
of oil and natural gas has been extended to tax
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit.years beginning before 2006. For more informa-PublicationThe maximum section 179 deduction you cantion on marginal production, see section 613A(c)
elect for property you purchased and placed inof the Internal Revenue Code. ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business
service beginning in 2005 has increased from
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and CarMaximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.$102,000 to $105,000. For more information,
Expenses100% of the clean-fuel vehicle deduction andsee Publication 946.
qualified electric vehicle credit are allowed for❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable IncomeDomestic production activities deduction.qualified property placed in service in 2005. See
❏ 529 Miscellaneous DeductionsYou may be able to deduct up to 3% of yourchapter 12.
qualified production activities income from cer- ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) forPhotographs of missing children.The Inter-tain business activities. For more information, Individuals, Estates, and Trustsnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thesee Form 8903, Domestic Production Activities
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and MethodsDeduction.
dren. Photographs of missing children selected❏ 542 CorporationsElective deferrals.For 2005, the maximum by the Center may appear in this publication on
amount of elective deferrals under a salary re-pages that would otherwise be blank. You can❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
duction agreement that could be contributed to ahelp bring these children home by looking at the❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homequalified plan increased to $14,000 ($18,000 ifphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (Including Use by Daycareyou were age 50 or older). For SIMPLE plans,(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. Providers)the amount increased to $10,000 ($12,000 if you
were age 50 or older). The maximum elective ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
deferral amount is $17,000 for section 403(b)
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interestplans if you qualify for the 15-year rule. See
Deductionchapter 3.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate PropertyCompensation limit.The maximum compen-
sation used for figuring contributions and bene- Form (and Instructions)fits for a retirement plan has increased from
$205,000 to $210,000 for 2005. ❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions
❏ 5213 Election To PostponeStandard mileage rate.The standard mile-
Determination as To Whether theage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
Presumption Applies That anpickup, or panel truck in 2005 is 40.5 cents a
mile for all business miles driven before Sep- Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
tember 1, 2005. The rate is 48.5 cents a mile for
See chapter 14 for information about gettingbusiness miles driven after August 31, 2005,
and before January 1, 2006. See chapter 1. publications and forms.
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Business assets. Generally, repairs you make to your busi-
ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,What Can I Deduct? • Improvements. amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul a
business vehicle are capital expenses and areTo be deductible, a business expense must be
You can elect to deduct or amortizerecovered through depreciation.both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
certain business start-up costs. Seepense is one that is common and accepted in Roads and driveways.  The costs of buildingchapters 8 and 9.
TIP
your industry. A necessary expense is one that a private road on your business property and theis helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-Cost recovery. Although you generally can-ness. An expense does not have to be indispen- crete one are capital expenses you may be ablenot take a current deduction for a capital ex-sable to be considered necessary. to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privatepense, you may be able to recover the amountIt is important to distinguish business ex- road on your business property is a deductibleyou spend through depreciation, amortization,penses from: expense.or depletion. These recovery methods allow you
• The expenses used to figure cost of goodsto deduct part of your cost each year. In this
sold, Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulesway, you are able to recover your capital ex-
apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourpense. See Amortization (chapter 9) and Deple-• Capital expenses, and business are deductible expenses if the toolstion (chapter 10) in this publication. You may• Personal expenses. have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theiralso be allowed a section 179 deduction. For
cost is minor.information on the section 179 deduction and
depreciation, see Publication 946.Cost of Goods Sold Machinery parts.Unless the uniform capitali-
zation rules apply, the cost of replacingIf your business manufactures products or short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodBusiness Assetspurchases them for resale, you generally must working condition, but not add to its life, is avalue inventory at the beginning and end of each deductible expense.There are many different kinds of business as-tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.sets; for example, land, buildings, machinery,Some of your business expenses may be in- Heating equipment. The cost of changingfurniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights.cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of from one heating system to another is a capitalYou must fully capitalize the cost of these as-goods sold is deducted from your gross receipts expense.sets, including freight and installation charges.to figure your gross profit for the year. If youCertain property you produce for use in yourinclude an expense in the cost of goods sold, Personal versus Businesstrade or business must be capitalized under theyou cannot deduct it again as a business ex-uniform capitalization rules. See sectionExpensespense. 1.263A-2 of the regulations for information onThe following are types of expenses that gothese rules. Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, orinto figuring cost of goods sold. family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
• The cost of products or raw materials, in- pense for something that is used partly for busi-
Improvementscluding freight. ness and partly for personal purposes, divide
the total cost between the business and per-• Storage. The costs of making improvements to a busi-sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.ness asset are capital expenses if the improve-• Direct labor (including contributions to For example, if you borrow money and usements add to the value of the asset, appreciablypension or annuity plans) for workers who 70% of it for business and the other 30% for alengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to aproduce the products. family vacation, you can deduct 70% of the inter-different use. Improvements are generally majorest as a business expense. The remaining 30%• Factory overhead. expenditures. Some examples are: new electricis personal interest and is not deductible. Seewiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,chapter 5 for information on deducting interestUnder the uniform capitalization rules, youbricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andand the allocation rules.must capitalize the direct costs and part of thelighting improvements.
indirect costs for certain production or resaleHowever, you can currently deduct repairsBusiness use of your home.If you use partactivities. Indirect costs include rent, interest,that keep your property in a normal efficientof your home for business, you may be able totaxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack-operating condition as a business expense.deduct expenses for the business use of youraging, handling, and administrative costs.Treat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts ofhome. These expenses may include mortgageThis rule does not apply to personal propertya machine that only keep it in a normal operatinginterest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-you acquire for resale if your average annualcondition. ciation.gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for To qualify to claim expenses for the businessthe preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10Restoration plan.Capitalize the cost of re-use of your home, you must meet both of themillion. conditioning, improving, or altering your prop-following tests.For more information, see the followingerty as part of a general restoration plan to make
sources. it suitable for your business. This applies even if1. The business part of your home must be
some of the work would by itself be classified asused exclusively and regularly for your• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica-
repairs. trade or business.tion 334.
2. The business part of your home must be:• Inventories—Publication 538. Capital versus Deductible
• Uniform capitalization rules—Publication a. Your principal place of business, orExpenses
538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev- b. A place where you meet or deal withenue Code and the related regulations.To help you distinguish between capital and patients, clients, or customers in thedeductible expenses, different examples are normal course of your trade or busi-given below. ness, orCapital Expenses
Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize the c. A separate structure (not attached toYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, somecost of a motor vehicle you use in your business.your home) used in connection withcosts. These costs are a part of your investmentYou can recover its cost through annual deduc- your trade or business.in your business and are called “capital ex-tions for depreciation.penses.” Capital expenses are considered as-There are dollar limits on the depreciation You generally do not have to meet the exclu-sets in your business. There are, in general,you can claim each year on passenger automo- sive use test for the part of your home that youthree types of costs you capitalize. biles used in your business. See Publication regularly use either for the storage of inventory
• Business start-up costs (See Tip below). 463. or product samples, or as a daycare facility.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your home office qualifies as your principal Similarly, if you pay a business expense inAccrual method. Under an accrual method of
place of business if you meet the following re- goods or other property, you can deduct only accounting, you generally deduct business ex-
quirements. what the property costs you. If these costs are penses when both of the following apply.
included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct• You use the office exclusively and regu- 1. The all-events test has been met. The testthem as a business expense.larly for administrative or management ac- is met when:
tivities of your trade or business. Limits on losses.If your deductions for an a. All events have occurred that fix the factinvestment or business activity are more than• You have no other fixed location where of liability, andthe income it brings in, you have a loss. Thereyou conduct substantial administrative or
may be limits on how much of the loss you canb. The liability can be determined with rea-management activities of your trade or
deduct. sonable accuracy.business.
Not-for-profit limits.If you carry on your 2. Economic performance has occurred.If you have more than one business location,business activity without the intention of makingdetermine your principal place of businessa profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetEconomic performance. You generallybased on the following factors. other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later. cannot deduct or capitalize a business expense• The relative importance of the activitiesAt-risk limits.Generally, a deductible lossuntil economic performance occurs. If your ex-performed at each location. from a trade or business or other income-pro-pense is for property or services provided to you,
ducing activity is limited to the investment youor for your use of property, economic perform-• If the relative importance factor does not
have “at risk” in the activity. You are at risk in anyance occurs as the property or services aredetermine your principal place of busi-
activity for the following. provided, or the property is used. If your ex-ness, consider the time spent at each lo-
pense is for property or services you provide tocation.
1. The money and adjusted basis of propertyothers, economic performance occurs as you
you contribute to the activity.For more information, see Publication 587. provide the property or services.
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activityBusiness use of your car.If you use your car Example. Your tax year is the calendarif:exclusively in your business, you can deduct car year. In December 2005, the Field Plumbing
expenses. If you use your car for both business Company did some repair work at your place ofa. You are personally liable for repayment,and personal purposes, you must divide your business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid itorexpenses based on actual mileage. by check in January 2006. If you use the accrualb. You pledge property (other than prop-You can deduct actual car expenses, which method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourerty used in the activity) as security forinclude depreciation (or lease payments), gas tax return for 2005 because all events havethe loan.and oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this case
registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- the work was completed), the liability can beFor more information, see Publication 925.ness part of these actual expenses, you may be determined, and economic performance oc-
able to use the standard mileage rate to figure curred in that year.Passive activities.Generally, you are in ayour deduction. For 2005, the standard mileage If you use the cash method of accounting,passive activity if you have a trade or businessrate is 40.5 cents a mile for all business miles deduct the expense on your 2006 return.activity in which you do not materially partici-driven before September 1, 2005. The rate ispate, or a rental activity. In general, deductionsPrepayment. You generally cannot deduct48.5 cents a mile for business miles driven afterfor losses from passive activities only offset in-expenses in advance, even if you pay them inAugust 31, 2005, and before January 1, 2006.come from passive activities. You cannot useadvance. This rule applies to both the cash andIf you are self-employed, you can also de-any excess deductions to offset other income. Inaccrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,duct the business part of interest on your caraddition, passive activity credits can only offsetprepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-loan, state and local personal property tax on thethe tax on net passive income. Any excess losspense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not youor credits are carried over to later years. Sus-create an asset with a useful life extending sub-claim the standard mileage rate. pended passive losses are fully deductible in thestantially beyond the end of the current tax year.For more information on car expenses andyear you completely dispose of the activity. Forthe rules for using the standard mileage rate,more information, see Publication 925. Example. In 2005, you sign a 10-year leasesee Publication 463.
Net operating loss.If your deductions areand immediately pay your rent for the first 3
more than your income for the year, you mayyears. Even though you paid the rent for 2005,
have a “net operating loss.” You can use a net2006, and 2007, you can only deduct the rent for
operating loss to lower your taxes in other years.2005 on your 2005 tax return. You can deductHow Much Can I
See Publication 536 for more information.the rent for 2006 and 2007 on your tax returns
for those years.Deduct? See Publication 542 for information about
net operating losses of corporations. Contested liability.Under the cash method,You can deduct the cost of a business expense you can deduct a contested liability only in theif it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary year you pay the liability. Under the accrualand it is not a capital expense. method, you can deduct contested liabilities
When Can I such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit
sion income, war profits, and excess profitsrule).If you recover part of an expense in theDeduct an Expense? taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liabilitysame tax year in which you would have claimed
(or transfer money or other property to satisfya deduction, reduce your current year expenseWhen you can deduct an expense depends onthe obligation) or in the tax year you settle theby the amount of the recovery. If you have ayour accounting method. An accounting methodcontest. However, to take the deduction in therecovery in a later year, include the recoveredis a set of rules used to determine when and howyear of payment or transfer, you must meetamount in income in that year. However, if partincome and expenses are reported. The twocertain conditions. See Contested Liability inof the deduction for the expense did not reducebasic methods are the cash method and thePublication 538 for more information.your tax, you do not have to include that part ofaccrual method. Whichever method you choosethe recovered amount in income. must clearly reflect income. Related person. Under an accrual method ofFor more information on recoveries and the accounting, you generally deduct expensesFor more information on accounting meth-tax benefit rule, see Publication 525. when you incur them, even if you have not yetods, see Publication 538.
Payments in kind. If you provide services to paid them. However, if you and the person you
pay a business expense, the amount you canCash method. Under the cash method of ac- owe are related and that person uses the cash
deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. counting, you generally deduct business ex- method of accounting, you must pay the ex-
You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor. penses in the tax year you pay them. pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is allowed when the amount is includible in in- You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213.Individuals must claim the amounts in
come by the related cash method payee. See categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-Filing this form postpones any determination
Related Persons in Publication 538. ous deductions on Schedule A (Formthat your activity is not carried on for profit until 5
TIP
1040). They are subject to the(or 7) years have passed since you started the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-activity.
cation 529 for information on this limit.The benefit gained by making this election is
Not-for-Profit Activitiesthat the IRS will not immediately question Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitwhether your activity is engaged in for profit.activity. The income and expenses of the activityIf you do not carry on your business or invest-Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.are as follows.ment activity to make a profit, you cannot use aRather, you will gain time to earn a profit in the
loss from the activity to offset other income.required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2)Gross income................. $3,200Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sportyears of profit at the end of this period, youror recreation, are often not entered into for profit. Subtract:deductions are not limited under these rules. IfThe limit on not-for-profit losses applies to Real estate taxes........ $700you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limitindividuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S Home mortgage interest.... 9 0 0can be applied retroactively to any year with aInsurance............. 4 0 0corporations. It does not apply to corporationsloss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period. Utilities............... 7 0 0other than S corporations. Filing Form 5213 automatically extends theMaintenance ........... 2 0 0In determining whether you are carrying on
period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (orDepreciation on an automobile 600an activity for profit, several factors are taken
7-year) period to 2 years after the due date ofDepreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700into account. No one factor alone is decisive.
the return for the last year of the period. TheAmong the factors to consider are whether: Loss ....................... $(500)period is extended only for deductions of the
• You carry on the activity in a businesslikeactivity and any related deductions that might bemanner, affected. Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the• The time and effort you put into the activityYou must file Form 5213 within 3 gross income she earned from the activity. Theindicate you intend to make it profitable, years after the due date of your returnlimit is reached in category (3), as follows.
for the year in which you first carried• You depend on the income for your liveli-
TIP
Limit on deduction............. $3,200on the activity, or, if earlier, within 60 days afterhood,
receiving written notice from the Internal Reve-Category 1: Taxes and• Your losses are due to circumstances be-nue Service proposing to disallow deductionsinterest............... $1,600yond your control (or are normal in theattributable to the activity. Category 2: Insurance,start-up phase of your type of business), utilities, and maintenance . . . 1,300 2,900
• You change your methods of operation inLimit on Deductions Available for Category 3........ $ 300an attempt to improve profitability,
If your activity is not carried on for profit, take• You (or your advisors) have the knowl-deductions in the following order and only to theThe $800 of depreciation is allocated be-edge needed to carry on the activity as aextent stated in the three categories. If you aretween the automobile and machine as follows.successful business, an individual, these deductions may be taken
• You were successful in making a profit in $600 depreciation for theonly if you itemize. These deductions may be x $300 = $225$800 automobilesimilar activities in the past, taken on Schedule A (Form 1040).
• The activity makes a profit in some years,
Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-$200 depreciation for theand x $300 = $75$800 machinesonal as well as for business activities are al-• You can expect to make a future profitlowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusinessThe basis of each asset is reduced accord-from the appreciation of the assets used indeductions, such as those for home mortgageingly.the activity. interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong inThe $1,600 for category (1) is deductible inthis category. Deduct them on the appropriatefull on the appropriate lines for taxes and interestPresumption of profit.An activity is pre-lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts thesumed carried on for profit if it produced a profitduct a casualty loss on property you own forremaining $1,600 ($1,300 for category (2) andin at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including thepersonal use only to the extent it is more than$300 for category (3)) as other miscellaneouscurrent year. Activities that consist primarily of$100 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted grossdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) subjectbreeding, training, showing, or racing horses areincome. See Publication 547 for more informa-to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.presumed carried on for profit if they produced ation on casualty losses. For the limits that apply
profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ-to mortgage interest, see Publication 936.Partnerships and S corporations.If a part-ing the current year. The activity must be sub- nership or S corporation carries on astantially the same for each year within thisCategory 2. Deductions that do not result innot-for-profit activity, these limits apply at theperiod. You have a profit when the gross incomean adjustment to the basis of property are al-partnership or S corporation level. They are re-from an activity exceeds the deductions. flected in the individual shareholder’s orlowed next, but only to the extent your grossIf a taxpayer dies before the end of the partner’s distributive shares.income from the activity is more than your de-5-year (or 7-year) period, the “test” period endsductions under the first category. Most businesson the date of the taxpayer’s death. More than one activity.If you have severaldeductions, such as those for advertising, insur-If your business or investment activity undertakings, each may be a separate activity orance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRS several undertakings may be combined. Thebelong in this category.will presume it is carried on for profit. This following are the most significant facts and cir-means the limits discussed here will not apply. cumstances in making this determination.Category 3. Business deductions that de-You can take all your business deductions from
crease the basis of property are allowed last, but• The degree of organizational and eco-the activity, even for the years that you have a
only to the extent the gross income from thenomic interrelationship of various under-loss. You can rely on this presumption unless
activity exceeds the deductions you take undertakings.the IRS later shows it to be invalid.
the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-• The business purpose that is (or might be)tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty lossUsing the presumption later.If you are start- served by carrying on the various under-an individual could not deduct in category (1)ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years takings separately or together in a busi-belong in this category. Where more than oneshowing a profit, you can elect to have the pre- ness or investment setting.asset is involved, allocate depreciation andsumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) years
these other deductions proportionally.of experience allowed by the test. • The similarity of the undertakings.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The IRS will generally accept your characteri- Employee-shareholder salaries.If a corpo-
ration pays an employee who is also a share-zation if it is supported by facts and circum-Tests for holder a salary that is unreasonably highstances.
considering the services actually performed, theDeducting PayIf you are carrying on two or more excessive part of the salary may be treated as adifferent activities, keep the deduc- constructive distribution to the employee-share-To be deductible, your employees’ pay must betions and income from each one sep-
TIP
holder. For more information on corporate distri-an ordinary and necessary expense and youarate. Figure separately whether each is a butions to shareholders, see Publication 542,must pay or incur it. These and other require-not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on Corporations.ments that apply to all business expenses aredeductions and losses separately for each activ-
explained in chapter 1.ity that is not for profit.
In addition, the pay must meet both of the
following tests. Kinds of Pay
• Test 1. It must be reasonable.
Some of the ways you may provide pay to your
• Test 2. It must be for services performed.employees in addition to regular wages or sala-
ries are discussed next. For specialized andThe form or method of figuring the pay does not2. detailed information on employees’ pay and theaffect its deductibility. For example, bonuses
employment tax treatment of employees’ pay,and commissions based on sales or earnings,
see Pub. 15, Pub. 15-A, and Pub. 15-B.and paid under an agreement made before the
services were performed, are both deductible.Employees’ Pay Awards
Test 1—Reasonableness You can generally deduct amounts you pay to
your employees as awards, whether paid in
Introduction Determine the reasonableness of pay by the
cash or property. If you give property to anfacts and circumstances. Generally, reasonableYou can generally deduct the pay you give your employee as an employee achievement award,pay is the amount that like enterprises would payemployees for the services they perform. The your deduction may be limited.for the same, or similar, services.pay may be in cash, property, or services. It may
You must be able to prove that the pay isinclude wages, or salaries, or other compensa- Achievement awards. An achievementreasonable. Base this test on the circumstancestion such as: vacation allowances, bonuses, award is an item of tangible personal propertythat exist when you contract for the services, notcommissions, and fringe benefits. For informa- that meets all the following requirements.those that exist when the reasonableness istion about deducting employment taxes, seequestioned. If the pay is excessive, you cannot• It is given to an employee for length ofchapter 6. deduct the excess. service or safety achievement.You can claim the following employ-
• It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-ment credits if you hire individualsFactors to consider.To determine if pay is entation.who meet certain requirements. reasonable, consider the following items and
TIP
any other pertinent facts. • It is awarded under conditions and circum-• Empowerment zone and renewal com-
stances that do not create a significantmunity employment credit. • The duties performed by the employee. likelihood of disguised pay.• Indian employment credit.
• The volume of business handled.• Welfare-to-work credit. Length-of-service award.An award will• The character and amount of responsibil-• Work opportunity credit. qualify as a length-of-service award if either ofity.• Credits for employers affected by Hurri- the following applies.
cane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. • The complexities of your business. • The employee receives the award after hisReduce your deduction for employee wages by• The amount of time required. or her first 5 years of employment.the amount of any employment credits you
• The cost of living in the locality. • The employee did not receive anotherclaim. For more information about these credits,
length-of-service award (other than one ofsee Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Dis- • The ability and achievements of the indi-very small value) during the same year ortressed Communities, or Publication 4492, In- vidual employee performing the service. in any of the prior 4 years.formation for Taxpayers Affected by Hurricanes
• The pay compared with the gross and netKatrina, Rita, and Wilma. income of the business, as well as withSafety achievement award. An award for
distributions to shareholders if the busi-safety achievement will qualify as an achieve-Topics ness is a corporation. ment award unless one of the following applies.This chapter discusses:
• Your policy regarding pay for all your em-1. It is given to a manager, administrator,ployees.• Tests for deducting pay clerical employee, or other professional
• The history of pay for each employee. employee.• Kinds of pay
2. During the tax year, more than 10% of
Individual officer’s pay.You must base the your employees, excluding those listed inUseful Items
test of whether an individual officer’s pay is rea-(1), have already received a safetyYou may want to see: sonable on each individual officer’s pay and theachievement award (other than one of very
service performed, not on the total amount paidsmall value).Publication to all officers or all employees. For example,
even if the total amount you pay to your officersDeduction limit.Your deduction for the❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide
is reasonable, you cannot deduct the part of ancost of employee achievement awards given to❏ 15-A Employer’s Supplemental Tax individual officer’s pay that is not reasonable.any one employee during the tax year is limitedGuide to the following.
❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Test 2—For Services • $400 for awards that are not qualified planBenefits Performed awards.
See chapter 14 for information about gettingYou must be able to prove the payment was • $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual-
publications and forms. made for services actually performed. ified plan awards.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage used in connection with such an activity (for year. These claims can be for supplemen-
business expense on your return or business example, a company aircraft) for certain officers,tal unemployment benefits, severance
schedule. directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is pay, or disability, medical, or life insurance
limited to the amount actually reported as com-benefits.A qualified plan award is an achievementpensation subject to employment taxes. Seeaward given as part of an established writtenPub. 15-B for more information on fringe bene-For more information, see sections 419(c) andplan or program that does not favor highly com-fits included as compensation. 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thepensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. related regulations.The following are examples of fringe bene-A highly compensated employee for 2005 is
fits.an employee who meets either of the following Meals and lodging. You can usually deducttests. • Benefits under employee benefit programsthe cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your
(defined below). employees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-1. The employee was a 5% owner at any
gory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-time during the year or the preceding year.• Meals and lodging.
ate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the meals2. The employee received more than $95,000• Use of a car. you furnish to employees as part of the cost ofin pay for the preceding year. goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,• Flights on airplanes.
motel, or rental property, deduct the cost ofYou can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-• Discounts on property or services.ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees furnishing lodging to an employee as expenses
ranked by pay for the preceding year. for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,• Memberships in country clubs or other so-
An award is not a qualified plan award if the etc.cial clubs.
average cost of all the employee achievement Deduction limit on meals.You can gener-• Tickets to entertainment or sportingawards given during the tax year (that would be ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingevents.qualified plan awards except for this limit) is meals to your employees. However, you canmore than $400. To figure this average cost, deduct the full cost of the following meals.ignore awards of nominal value. Employee benefit programs. Employee
• Meals whose value you include in anbenefit programs include the following.You may not owe employment taxes
employee’s wages.on the value of some achievement • Accident and health plans.awards you provide to an employee.
TIP
• Meals that qualify as a de minimus fringe
See Publication 15-B. • Adoption assistance. benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-
cation 15-B. This generally includes meals• Cafeteria plans. you furnish to employees at your place ofBonuses
• Dependent care assistance. business if more than half of these em-
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an ployees are provided the meals for your• Educational assistance.employee if you intended the bonus as addi- convenience.
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the• Life insurance coverage. • Meals you furnish to your employees atservices were performed. However, the total bo-• Welfare benefit funds. the work site when you operate a restau-nuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona-
rant or catering service.ble for the services performed. If the bonus isYou can generally deduct amounts you spendpaid in property, see Property, later. • Meals you furnish to your employees ason employee benefit programs on the “em- part of the expense of providing recrea-ployee benefit programs” or other applicable lineGifts of nominal value.If, to promote em- tional or social activities, such as a com-of your tax return. For example, if you provideployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams, or pany picnic.dependent care by operating a dependent careother merchandise of nominal value to your em-facility for your employees, deduct your costs in• Meals you are required by federal law toployees at holidays, you can deduct the cost ofwhatever categories they fall (utilities, salaries,furnish to crew members of certain com-these items as a nonwage business expense.etc.). mercial vessels (or would be required toYour deduction for de minimus gifts of food or
furnish if the vessels were operated atdrink are not subject to the 50% deduction limitLife insurance coverage.You cannot de-
sea). This does not include meals you fur-that generally applies to meals. For more infor-duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,
nish on vessels primarily providing luxurymation on this deduction limit, see Meals and an employee, or any person with a financial
water transportation.lodging, later. interest in your business, if you are directly or
indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform
ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.Education Expenses or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-Welfare benefit funds.A welfare benefitIf you pay or reimburse education expenses for port camp that is near and integral to anfund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementan employee, you can deduct the payments. oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareDeduct them on the “employee benefit pro-benefits to your employees, independent con-grams” or other appropriate line of your tax re-tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsturn if they are part of a qualified educational Loans or Advancesare any benefits other than deferred compensa-assistance program. For information on educa-tion or transfers of restricted property.You generally can deduct as wages an advancetional assistance programs, see Educational As-
Your deduction for contributions to a welfareyou make to an employee for services per-sistance in section 2 of Publication 15-B.
benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified costformed if you do not expect the employee to
for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundrepay the advance. However, if the employeeFringe Benefits are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessperforms no services, treat the amount you ad-
over to the next tax year. vanced as a loan. If the employee does notA fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-
Generally, the fund’s “qualified cost” is therepay the loan, it may be deductible as a badance of services. You can generally deduct the
total of the following amounts, reduced by thedebt. See chapter 11 for information on the de-cost of fringe benefits.
after-tax income of the fund. duction for bad debts.You may be able to exclude all or part of the
value of some fringe benefits from your employ-• The cost you would have been able to Below-market interest rate loans.On cer-ees’ pay. You also may not owe employment deduct using the cash method of account-tain loans you make to an employee or share-taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. Seeing if you had paid for the benefits directly.holder, you are treated as having receivedTable 2-1 in Publication 15-B for details.
interest income and as having paid compensa-Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits• The contributions added to a reserve ac-
tion or dividends equal to that interest. Seefor activities generally considered entertain- count that are needed to fund claims in-
Below-Market Loans in chapter 5.ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility curred but not paid as of the end of the
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The excess of the participant’s compensa-Property
tion over the salary reduction contributions
that are not catch-up contributions.If you transfer property (including your
3.company’s stock) to an employee as payment
for services, you can generally deduct it as
wages. The amount you can deduct is the
property’s fair market value on the date of the
IntroductionRetirementtransfer less any amount the employee paid for
the property. This chapter discusses retirement plans you can
You can claim the deduction only for the tax set up and maintain for yourself and your em-
Plansyear in which your employee includes the ployees. Retirement plans are savings plans
property’s value in income. Your employee is that offer you tax advantages to set aside money
deemed to have included the value in income if for your own and your employees’ retirement.
you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.What’s New In general, a sole proprietor or a partner is
 You treat the deductible amount as received treated as an employee for retirement plan pur-
in exchange for the property, and you must rec-Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005 poses.
ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer.and Gulf Opportunity Zone Act of 2005. SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer youYour gain or loss is the difference between theBoth Acts provide for tax-favored withdrawals,and your employees a tax favored way to savefair market value of the property and its adjustedrepayments, and loans from certain retirementfor retirement. You can deduct contributions youbasis on the date of transfer. plans for taxpayers who suffered economicmake to the plan for your employees. If you are a
losses as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Rita, orA corporation recognizes no gain or sole proprietor, you can deduct contributions
Wilma. See Publication 4492, Information forloss when it pays for services with its you make to the plan for yourself. You can also
Taxpayers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,own stock. deduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the planCAUTION
!
and Wilma, for more information. do not cover them. Earnings on the contributionsThese rules also apply to property trans-
are generally tax free until you or your employ-ferred to an independent contractor, generally
ees receive distributions from the plan.reported on Form 1099-MISC.
Under certain plans, employees can have
Restricted property. If the property you you contribute limited amounts of theirWhat’s New for 2005
transfer for services is subject to restrictions that before-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (and
affect its value, you generally cannot deduct it the earnings on them) are generally tax free untilCompensation limit.For 2005, the maximum
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- your employees receive distributions from thecompensation used for figuring contributionstially vested in the recipient. However, if the plan.and benefits increases to $210,000.recipient pays for the property, you must report In general, individuals who are employed or
any gain at the time of the transfer up to theElective deferrals.The limit on elective defer-self-employed can also set up and contribute to
amount paid. rals increases to $14,000 for tax years begin-individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
“Substantially vested” means the property isning in 2005 and then increases to $15,000 in
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This2006. These new limits will apply for participantsTopics
means that the recipient is not likely to have toin SARSEPs, 401(k) plans (excluding SIMPLEThis chapter discusses:give up his or her rights in the property in theplans), and deferred compensation plans of
future. state or local governments and tax-exempt or-• Simplified employee pension (SEP) plans
ganizations. The $15,000 figure is subject to• SIMPLE (Savings incentive match plan forReimbursements cost-of-living increases after 2006. employees) retirement plansfor Business Expenses Catch-up contributions. A plan can permit
• Qualified plans (also called H.R. 10 plansparticipants who are age 50 or over at the end of
You can generally deduct the amount you pay or or Keogh plans when covering self-em-the calendar year to also make catch-up contri-
reimburse employees for business expenses in- ployed individuals)butions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2005curred for your business. However, your deduc-is $4,000. This limit increases to $5,000 in 2006.• Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)tion may be limited. The limit is subject to cost-of-living increasesIf you make the payment under an accounta-after 2006. The catch-up contribution a partici-ble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense Useful Itemspant can make for a year cannot exceed thepaid. For example, if you pay an employee for You may want to see:lesser of the following amounts.travel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct
this payment as a travel expense. If you make• The catch-up contribution limit. Publication
the payment under a nonaccountable plan, de-• The excess of the participant’s compensa-❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Smallduct it as wages. tion over the elective deferrals that are not Business (SEP, SIMPLE, andSee Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and catch-up contributions. Qualified Plans)Entertainment in chapter 13 for more informa-
tion about deducting reimbursements and an ❏ 590 Individual Retirement ArrangementsSIMPLE plan salary reduction contributions.explanation of accountable and nonaccountable (IRAs)The limit on salary reduction contributions to aplans.
SIMPLE plan increases to $10,000 beginning inForm (and Instructions)2005. The $10,000 figure is subject to adjust-Sick and Vacation Pay
ment after 2005 for cost-of-living increases.❏ W-2 Wage and Tax Statement
You can deduct amounts you pay to your em- Catch-up contributions. A SIMPLE plan ❏ 5304-SIMPLE Savings Incentive Matchployees for sickness and injury, includingcan permit participants who are age 50 or over Plan for Employees of Smalllump-sum amounts, as wages. However, yourat the end of the calendar year to make catch-up Employers (SIMPLE)—Not for Usededuction is limited to amounts not compen-contributions. The catch-up contribution limit forWith a Designated Financialsated by insurance or other means. 2005 is $2,000. This limit increases to $2,500 in InstitutionVacation pay is an employee benefit. It in-2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in-
❏ 5305-SIMPLE Savings Incentive Matchcludes amounts paid for unused vacation leave.creases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a
Plan for Employees of SmallYou can deduct vacation pay only in the tax yearparticipant can make for a year cannot exceed
Employers (SIMPLE)—for Usein which the employee actually receives it. Thisthe lesser of the following amounts.
With a Designated Financialrule applies regardless of whether you use the
• The catch-up contribution limit. Institutioncash or accrual method of accounting.
Page 8 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 9 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 14 for information about getting tion is your net earnings from self-employment ble if you had maintained a SEP) at any
publications and forms. minus the following amounts. time during the preceding year.
• Each eligible highly compensated1. The deduction for one-half of your self-em-
employee’s deferral percentage each yearployment tax.
is no more than 125% of the averageSimplified Employee 2. The deduction for contributions to your deferral percentage (ADP) of all nonhighly
own SEP-IRA. compensated employees eligible to partici-Pension (SEP) pate (the ADP test). See Publication 560The deduction for contributions to your own
for the definition of a highly compensatedSEP-IRA and your net earnings depend on eachA simplified employee pension (SEP) is a written employee and information on how to figureother. For this reason, you determine the deduc-plan that allows you to make deductible contri- the deferral percentage.tion for contributions to your own SEP-IRA indi-butions toward your own and your employees’
rectly by reducing the contribution rate called forretirement without getting involved in more com-
in your plan. Use Worksheet 3-A shown under Limit on elective deferrals.In general, theplex retirement plans. A corporation also can
Qualified Plan, later, to figure the rate. total income an employee can defer under ahave a SEP and make deductible contributions
SARSEP and certain other elective deferral ar-toward its employees’ retirement. However, cer-SEP and defined contribution plan.If you rangements for 2005 is limited to the lesser oftain advantages available to qualified plans,also contributed to a qualified defined contribu-$14,000 or 25% of the employee’s compensa-such as the special tax treatment that may applytion plan, you must reduce the 25% deductiontion (as defined in Publication 560). This limitto lump-sum distributions, do not apply to SEPs.limit for that plan by the allowable deduction forapplies only to amounts that reduce theUnder a SEP, you make the contributions tocontributions to the SEP-IRAs of those partici-employee’s pay, not to any contributions froma traditional individual retirement arrangementpating in both the SEP plan and the definedemployer funds.(called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eligible em-contribution plan.ployee. Catch-up contributions.A SEP can permitSEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum, eachSEP and another qualified plan.If you alsoparticipants who are age 50 or older at the endeligible employee. A SEP-IRA may have to becontributed to any other type of qualified plan,of the calendar year to make catch-up contribu-set up for a leased employee, but need not betreat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing (de-tions. The catch-up contribution limit for 2005 isset up for an excludable employee. For morefined contribution) plan when applying the over-$4,000 ($5,000 for 2006). Elective deferrals areinformation, see Publication 560. all 25% deduction limit described in sectionnot treated as catch-up contributions for 2005404(h)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. until they exceed the limit discussed earlierForm 5305-SEP. You may be able to use
under Limit on elective deferrals, the SARSEPIf your SEP contribution is more thanForm 5305-SEP, Simplified Employee Pen-
ADP test (see Publication 560), or the plan limitthe deduction limit (nondeductiblesion—Individual Retirement Accounts Contri-
(if any). However, the catch-up contribution acontribution), you can carry over andbution Agreement, in setting up your SEP.
TIP
participant can make for a year cannot exceeddeduct the difference in later years. However,
the lesser of the following amounts.the contribution carryover, when combined withContribution Limits the contribution for the later year, is subject to• The catch-up contribution limit.the deduction limit for that year.Contributions you make for 2005 to a • The excess of the participant’s compensa-common-law employee’s SEP-IRA are limited toEmployee contributions. Employees can tion over the elective deferrals that are notthe lesser of $42,000 or 25% of the employee’salso make contributions of up to $4,000 (or catch-up contributions.compensation. Compensation generally does$4,500 if they are 50 or older) for 2005 to theirnot include your contributions to the SEP, butSEP-IRAs independent of the employer’s SEP Catch-up contributions are not subject to thedoes include certain elective deferrals unlesscontributions. However, the employee’s deduc-limit discussed under Limit on elective deferrals,you choose not to include them. tion for IRA contributions may be reduced orearlier.
eliminated because the employee is covered byAnnual compensation limit. You generally Deduction limit and elective deferrals.an employer retirement plan (the SEP plan).cannot consider the part of an employee’s com- Compensation, as discussed earlier, under De-See Publication 590 for details.pensation over $210,000 when you figure your duction Limit, includes elective deferrals. Elec-contribution limit for that employee. tive deferrals are no longer subject to thisSalary Reduction deduction limit. However, the combined deduc-More than one plan.If you also contribute to aSimplified Employee tion for a participant’s elective deferrals, anddefined contribution retirement plan (defined other SEP contributions, cannot exceedPension (SARSEP)later), annual additions to all of a participant’s $42,000.accounts are limited to the lesser of $42,000 or
100% of the participant’s compensation. When An employer is no longer allowed toEmployment taxes. Elective deferrals that
you figure this limit, you must add your contribu-set up a SARSEP. However, partici-meet the ADP test are not subject to income tax
tions to all defined contribution plans. A SEP ispants in a SARSEP set up beforeCAUTION
!
in the year of deferral, but they are included in
considered a defined contribution plan for this1997 (including employees hired after 1996) canwages for social security, Medicare, and federal
limit. continue to have their employer contribute partunemployment (FUTA) tax.
of their pay to the plan.
Contributions for yourself.The annual limits A SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997 thatReporting SEP Contributionson your contributions to a common-law included a salary reduction arrangement. Under
employee’s SEP-IRA also apply to contributions on Form W-2the arrangement, employees can choose to
you make to your own SEP-IRA. have you contribute part of their pay to theirYour contributions to an employee’s SEP-IRASEP-IRAs rather than receive it in cash. Thisare excluded from the employee’s income. DoDeduction Limit contribution is called an elective deferral be-not include these contributions in yourcause employees choose (elect) to set aside theemployee’s wages on Form W-2 for income,The most you can deduct for employer contribu-money and the income tax on the money is social security, or Medicare tax purposes. How-tions (other than elective deferrals) for adeferred until it is distributed. ever, your SEP contributions under a salary re-common-law employee is 25% of the compen- This choice is available only if all the follow-duction arrangement are included in yoursation (limited to $210,000 per participant) paiding requirements are met. employee’s wages for social security and Medi-to him or her during the year from the business
• The SARSEP was set up before 1997. care tax purposes only.that has the plan, not to exceed $42,000 per
participant. • At least 50% of the eligible employees Example. Jim’s salary reduction arrange-choose the salary reduction arrangement.Deduction of contributions for yourself. ment calls for 10% of his salary to be contributed
When figuring the deduction for employer contri-• You had 25 or fewer eligible employees by his employer as an elective deferral to Jim’s
butions made to your own SEP-IRA, compensa- (or employees who would have been eligi- SEP-IRA. Jim’s salary for the year is $30,000
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Page 10 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(before reduction for the deferral). The employer You can use less restrictive eligibility require-Who Can Set Up
ments (but not more restrictive ones) by elimi-did not choose to treat deferrals as compensa-a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
nating or reducing the prior year compensationtion under the arrangement. To figure the defer-
You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you meetrequirements, the current year compensationral, the employer multiplies Jim’s salary of
both the following requirements. requirements, or both. For example, you can$30,000 by 9.0909%, the reduced rate
allow participation for employees who receivedequivalent of 10%, to get the deferral of • You meet the employee limit. at least $3,000 in compensation during any pre-$2,727.27. (This method is the same one you,• You do not maintain another qualified planceding calendar year. However, you cannot im-as a self-employed person, use to figure theunless the other plan is for collective bar-pose any other conditions on participating in acontributions you make on your own behalf. Seegaining employees. SIMPLE IRA plan.Worksheet 3-A, under Qualified Plan, later.)
On Jim’s Form W-2, his employer shows Excludable employees. The following em-Employee limit. You can set up a SIMPLEtotal wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 − ployees do not need to be covered under aIRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer employees$2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000, SIMPLE IRA plan.who received $5,000 or more in compensationand Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reports • Employees who are covered by a unionfrom you for the preceding year. Under this rule,$27,272.73 as wages on his individual income agreement and whose retirement benefitsyou must take into account all employees em-tax return. were bargained for in good faith by theployed at any time during the calendar yearIf his employer chooses to treat the deferrals employees’ union and you.regardless of whether they are eligible to partici-as compensation, Jim’s deferral would be pate. Employees include self-employed individ-• Nonresident alien employees who have$3,000 ($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the em-uals who received earned income and leased received no U.S. source wages, salaries,ployer uses the rate called for under the ar-employees. or other personal services compensationrangement (not the reduced rate) to figure theOnce you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you from you.deferral and the ADP test. On Jim’s Form W-2,must continue to meet the 100-employee limit
the employer shows total wages of $27,000each year you maintain the plan.
Compensation. Compensation for employ-($30,000 − $3,000), social security wages ofGrace period for employers who cease toees is the total wages, tips, and other compen-$30,000, and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jimmeet the 100-employee limit.If you maintainsation from the employer subject to federalreports $27,000 as wages on his return. the SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1 year and youincome tax withholding and the amounts paid for
cease to meet the 100-employee limit in a laterdomestic service in a private home, local collegeMore information. For more information onyear, you will be treated as meeting it for the 2club, or local chapter of a college fraternity oremployer withholding requirements, see Publi-calendar years immediately following the calen-sorority. Compensation also includes thecation 15, (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide.dar year for which you last met it. employee’s salary reduction contributions madeFor more information on SEPs, see Publica-A different rule applies if you do not meet theunder this plan and, if applicable, elective defer-tion 560. 100-employee limit because of an acquisition,rals under a section 401(k) plan, a SARSEP, or
disposition, or similar transaction. Under thisa section 403(b) annuity contract and compen-
rule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be treated assation deferred under a section 457 plan re-
meeting the 100-employee limit for the year ofquired to be reported by the employer on Form
the transaction and the 2 following years if bothSIMPLE W-2. If you are self-employed, compensation is
the following conditions are satisfied. your net earnings from self-employment (line 4,
Retirement Plans Section A, or line 6, Section B, of Schedule SE• Coverage under the plan has not signifi-
(Form 1040)) before subtracting any contribu-cantly changed during the grace period.A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees tions made to the SIMPLE IRA plan for yourself.
• The SIMPLE IRA plan would have contin-(SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement that
ued to qualify after the transaction if youprovides you and your employees with a simpli-
had remained a separate employer. How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Planfied way to make contributions to provide retire-
ment income. Under a SIMPLE plan, employees
You can use Form 5304-SIMPLE or Formcan choose to make salary reduction contribu- The grace period for acquisitions, dis-5305-SIMPLE to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.tions to the plan rather than receiving these positions, and similar transactionsEach form is a model savings incentive matchamounts as part of their regular pay. In addition,also applies if, because of these typesCAUTION
!
plan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.you will contribute matching or nonelective con-of transactions, you do not meet the rules ex-Which form you use depends on whether youtributions. plained under Other qualified plan, next, or Who select a financial institution or your employeesCan Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, later.SIMPLE plans can only be maintained on a select the institution that will receive the contri-
calendar-year basis. butions.Other qualified plan.The SIMPLE IRA planA SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of the Use Form 5304-SIMPLE if you allow eachgenerally must be the only retirement plan tofollowing ways. plan participant to select the financial institutionwhich you make contributions, or benefits ac-for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan contri-crue, for service in any year beginning with the• Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan). butions. Use Form 5305-SIMPLE if you requireyear the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes effective.that all contributions under the SIMPLE IRA plan• As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k)
Exception. If you maintain a qualified planbe deposited initially at a designated financialplan).
for collective bargaining employees, you areinstitution.See Publication 560 for information on SIMPLEpermitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan forThe SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when you401(k) plans. other employees. (and the designated financial institution, if any)
have completed all appropriate boxes andMany financial institutions will help blanks on the form and you have signed it. Keepyou set up a SIMPLE plan. Who Can Participate the original form. Do not file it with the IRS.TIP
in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
Other uses of the forms. If you set up a
SIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304-SIMPLE orSIMPLE IRA Plan Eligible employee.Any employee who re- Form 5305-SIMPLE, you can use the form toceived at least $5,000 in compensation duringsatisfy other requirements, including the follow-A SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan thatany 2 years preceding the current calendar yearing.uses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible employee.and is reasonably expected to receive at least
Under a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE IRA must$5,000 during the current calendar year is eligi-• Meeting employer notification require-
be set up for each eligible employee. For theble to participate. The term employee includes a ments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3 of
definition of an eligible employee, see Who Can self-employed individual who received earned Form 5304-SIMPLE and Page 3 of Form
Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, next. income. 5305-SIMPLE contain a Model Notification
Page 10 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 11 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Salary reduction contributionsto Eligible Employees that provides the A SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer peri-
($25,000 × .05)................ $1,250necessary information to the employee. ods for permitting employees to enter into salary
Employer matching contributionreduction agreements or to modify prior agree-• Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan records ($25,000 × .03)................ 7 5 0ments. For example, a SIMPLE IRA plan canand proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA Total contributions............. $2,000provide a 90-day election period instead of theplan for employees. 60-day period. Similarly, in addition to theLower percentage. If you choose a match-60-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan can provideing contribution less than 3%, the percentageDeadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.quarterly election periods during the 30 daysmust be at least 1%. You must notify the em-You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective onbefore each calendar quarter, other than the firstployees of the lower match within a reasonableany date from January 1 thru October 1 of aquarter of each year. period of time before the 60-day election periodyear, provided you did not previously maintain a
(discussed earlier) for the calendar year. YouSIMPLE IRA plan. This requirement does not cannot choose a percentage less than 3% forapply if you are a new employer that comes intoContribution Limits more than 2 years during the 5-year period thatexistence after October 1 of the year the ends with (and includes) the year for which theContributions are made up of salary reductionSIMPLE IRA plan is set up and you set up a choice is effective.contributions and employer contributions. You,SIMPLE IRA plan as soon as administratively
as the employer, must make either matchingfeasible after your business comes into exis-
Nonelective contributions. Instead ofcontributions or nonelective contributions, dis-tence. If you previously maintained a SIMPLE matching contributions, you can choose to makecussed later. No other contributions can beIRA plan, you can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan nonelective contributions of 2% of compensa-made to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These contribu-effective only on January 1 of a year. A SIMPLE tion on behalf of each eligible employee who hastions, which you can deduct, must be madeIRA plan cannot have an effective date that is at least $5,000 of compensation (or some lowertimely. See Time limits for contributing funds,before the date you actually adopt the plan. amount of compensation that you select) fromlater.
you for the year. If you make this choice, youSetting up a SIMPLE IRA.SIMPLE IRAs are must make nonelective contributions whether orSalary reduction contributions.The amountthe individual retirement accounts or annuities not the employee chooses to make salary re-the employee chooses to have you contribute tointo which the contributions are deposited. A duction contributions. Only $210,000 of thea SIMPLE IRA on his or her behalf cannot beSIMPLE IRA must be set up for each eligible employee’s compensation can be taken into ac-more than $10,000 for 2005. The $10,000 figureemployee. Forms 5305-S, SIMPLE Individual count to figure the contribution limit.is subject to cost-of-living increases after De-Retirement Trust Account, and 5305-SA, If you choose this 2% contribution formula,cember 31, 2005. These contributions must beSIMPLE Individual Retirement Custodial Ac- you must notify the employees within a reasona-expressed as a percentage of the employee’scount, are model trust and custodial account ble period of time before the 60-day electioncompensation unless you permit the employeedocuments the participant and the trustee (or period (discussed earlier) for the calendar year.to express them as a specific dollar amount. Youcustodian) can use for this purpose.
cannot place restrictions on the contributionA SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as a Example 1. In 2005, your employee, Janeamount (such as limiting the contribution per-Roth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA will Wood, earned $36,000 and chose to have youcentage), except to comply with the $10,000not affect the amount an individual can contrib- contribute 10% of her salary. You make a 2%limit.ute to a Roth IRA. nonelective contribution. Both of you are under
If an employee is a participant in any otherage 50. The total contributions you can make forDeadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA.A employer plan during the year and has electiveher are $4,320, figured as follows.SIMPLE IRA must be set up for an employeesalary reductions or deferred compensation
before the first date by which a contribution isunder those plans, the salary reduction contribu-Salary reduction contributionsrequired to be deposited into the employee’stions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also are elective($36,000 × .10).............. $3,600
IRA. See Time limits for contributing funds, later, 2% nonelective contributionsdeferrals that count toward the overall $14,000
under Contribution Limits. ($36,000 × .02).............. 7 2 0annual limit on exclusion of salary reductions
Total contributions........... $4,320and other elective deferrals.
Catch-up contributions.A SIMPLE planNotification Requirement Example 2. Using the same facts as in Ex-can permit participants who are age 50 or older
ample 1, above, the maximum contribution youIf you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must notifyat the end of the calendar year to make catch-up
can make for Jane if she earned $75,000 iseach employee of the following informationcontributions. The catch-up contribution limit for
$11,500, figured as follows.before the beginning of the election period.2005 is $2,000. This limit increases to $2,500 in
2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-living in-• The employee’s opportunity to make or Salary reduction contributionscreases after 2006. The catch-up contributions a(maximum amount) .......... $10,000change a salary reduction choice under aparticipant can make for a year cannot exceed2% nonelective contributionsSIMPLE IRA plan. the lesser of the following amounts. ($75,000 × .02)............. 1,500• Your choice to make either reduced Total contributions.......... $11,500• The catch-up contribution limit.matching contributions or nonelective con-
tributions (discussed later). • The excess of the participant’s compensa-
Time limits for contributing funds.Yoution over the elective deferrals that are not• A summary description and the location of must make the salary reduction contributions tocatch-up contributions.the plan. The financial institution should the SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the end ofprovide you with this information. the month in which the amounts would other-Employer matching contributions. You wise have been payable to the employee in• Written notice that his or her balance cangenerally are required to match each cash. You must make matching contributions orbe transferred without cost or penalty ifemployee’s salary reduction contributions (othernonelective contributions by the due date (in-you use a designated financial institution.than catch-up contributions) on a dollar-for-dol-cluding extensions) for filing your federal incomelar basis up to 3% of the employee’s compensa-tax return for the year.Election period.The election period is gener-tion. This requirement does not apply if you
ally the 60-day period immediately precedingmake nonelective contributions as discussed
January 1 of a calendar year (November 2 tolater. When To Deduct ContributionsDecember 31 of the preceding calendar year).
However, the dates of this period are modified ifExample. In 2005, your employee, John You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in the
you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in mid-year (forRose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5% oftax year with or within which the calendar year
example, on July 1) or if the 60-day period fallshis salary. You make a 3% matching contribu-for which contributions were made ends. You
before the first day an employee becomes eligi-tion. The total contribution you can make forcan deduct contributions for a particular tax year
ble to participate in the SIMPLE IRA plan.John is $2,000, figured as follows. if they are made for that tax year and are made
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Page 12 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
by the due date (including extensions) of your There are two types of defined contributionMore Information on
plans: profit-sharing and money purchase pen-federal income tax return for that year. SIMPLE IRA Plans
sion.
If you need more help to set up and maintain aExample 1. Your tax year is the fiscal year
Profit-sharing plan.Generally, this plan letsSIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS noticeending June 30. Contributions under a SIMPLE your employees or their beneficiaries share inand revenue procedure.IRA plan for the calendar year 2005 (including the profits of your business. The plan must havecontributions made in 2005 before July 1, 2005) a definite formula for allocating the contributionNotice 98-4. This notice contains questionsare deductible in the tax year ending June 30, among the participating employees and for dis-and answers about the implementation and op-2006. tributing the accumulated funds in the plan.eration of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the elec-
tion and notice requirements for these plans.Example 2. You are a sole proprietor whose Money purchase pension plan. Under thisNotice 98-4 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1998-1.tax year is the calendar year. Contributions plan, contributions are fixed and are not based
under a SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar year on your business profits. For example, if the planRevenue Procedure 97-29. This revenue2005 (including contributions made in 2006 by requires contributions of 10% of each participat-procedure provides guidance to drafters of pro-April 17, 2006) are deductible in the 2005 tax ing employee’s compensation, regardless oftotype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion let-
year. whether you have a profit, generally the plan is aters. Revenue Procedure 97-29 is in Cumulative
money purchase pension plan.Bulletin 1997-1.
Where To Deduct Contributions
Defined Benefit Plan
Deduct contributions you make for your
Qualified Plancommon-law employees on your tax return. For This is any plan that is not a defined contribution
plan. In general, contributions to a qualified de-example, sole proprietors deduct them on A qualified retirement plan is a written plan youfined benefit plan are based on what is neededSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formcan set up for the exclusive benefit of your em-to provide definitely determinable benefits to1040), partnerships deduct them on Form 1065,ployees and their beneficiaries. It is sometimesplan participants. Your contributions to the planand corporations deduct them on Form 1120,called a Keogh or H.R. 10 plan. are based on actuarial assumptions. Generally,Form 1120-A, or Form 1120S. You, or you and your employees, can makeyou will need continuing professional help toSole proprietors and partners deduct contri-contributions to the plan. If your plan meets theadminister a defined benefit plan.butions for themselves on line 28 of Form 1040.qualification requirements, you generally can
(If you are a partner, contributions for yourselfdeduct your contributions to the plan. For moreSetting Up a Planare shown on the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) youinformation, see Publication 560.
receive from the partnership). Your employees generally are not taxed onYou must adopt a written plan. The plan can beyour contributions or increases in the plan’s as-an IRS-approved master or prototype plan of-sets until they are distributed. However, certainfered by a sponsoring organization. Or it can beTax Treatment of Contributions loans made from qualified plans are treated asan individually designed plan.taxable distributions. For more information, seeYou can deduct your contributions and your em-Publication 575. Master or prototype plans. The followingployees can exclude these contributions from sponsoring organizations generally can providetheir gross income. SIMPLE IRA contributionsQualification requirements.To be a quali- IRS-approved master or prototype plans.are not subject to federal income tax withhold-fied plan, the plan must meet many require-
• Trade or professional organizations.ing. However, salary reduction contributions arements. They include requirements that
subject to social security, Medicare, and federaldetermine the following. • Banks (including savings and loan as-
unemployment (FUTA) taxes. Matching and sociations and federally insured credit un-• Who must be covered by the plan.nonelective contributions are not subject to ions).
• How contributions to the plan are to bethese taxes. • Insurance companies.invested.Reporting on Form W-2. Do not include • Mutual funds.• How contributions to the plan and benefitsSIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips,
under the plan are to be determined.other compensation” box of Form W-2. How- Adoption of a master or prototype plan does not
ever, salary reduction contributions must be in- mean your plan is automatically qualified. It still• How much of an employee’s interest in the
cluded in the boxes for social security wages must meet all the qualification requirementsplan must be guaranteed (vested).
stated in the law.and Medicare wages. Also include the proper
For more information, see Publication 560.code in Box 12. For more information, see the
Individually designed plan.If you prefer, youinstructions for Forms W-2 and W-3. More than one job.If you are self-employedcan set up an individually designed plan to meet
and also work for someone else, you can partici-specific needs. Although advance IRS approval
pate in retirement plans for both jobs. Generally,is not required, you can apply for approval byDistributions (Withdrawals)
your participation in a retirement plan for one jobpaying a fee and requesting a determination
does not affect your participation in a plan for theDistributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject to letter. You may need professional help with this.
other job. However, if you have an IRA, you mayIRA rules and generally are includible in income Revenue Procedure 2005-6 in Internal Revenue
not be allowed to deduct part or all of your IRAfor the year received. Tax-free rollovers can be Bulletin 2005-1 may help you decide whether to
contributions. See Publication 590.made from one SIMPLE IRA into another apply for approval.
SIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a SIMPLE IRA to a
non-SIMPLE IRA can be made tax free only Kinds of Qualified Plans Deduction Limits
after a 2-year participation in the SIMPLE IRA
There are two basic kinds of qualified retirementplan. The deduction limit for contributions to a quali-
plans: defined contribution plans and definedfied plan depends on the kind of plan you have.Early withdrawals generally are subject to abenefit plans.10% additional tax. However, the additional tax In figuring the deduction for contribu-
is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn within tions to these plans, you cannot take
2 years of beginning participation. into account any contributions or ben-CAUTION
!
Defined Contribution Plan
efits that are more than the limits discussed
More information.See Publication 590 for in-This plan provides for a separate account forunder Limits on Contributions and Benefits in
formation about IRA rules, including those oneach person covered by the plan. Benefits arePublication 560. However, your deduction can
the tax treatment of distributions, rollovers, re-based only on amounts contributed to or allo-be as much as the plan’s unfunded current liabil-
quired distributions, and income tax withholding.cated to each account. ity.
Page 12 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 13 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your net earnings are your business grossWorksheet 3-B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed
income minus the allowable business deduc-
Step 1 tions from that business. Allowable business
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule deductions include contributions to SEP and
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or box 14, code A*, qualified plans for common-law employees and
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)................................... the deduction for one-half of your self-employ-
*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses ment tax.subtracted from box 14, code A to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Net earnings include a partner’s distributiveSchedule SE
share of partnership income or loss (other thanStep 2
separately stated items such as capital gainsEnter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 27, Form 1040.......
and losses) and any guaranteed payments. IfStep 3
you are a limited partner, net earnings includeNet earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1...........
only guaranteed payments for services ren-Step 4
dered to or for the partnership. For more infor-Enter your rate from the Worksheet 3-A...........................
mation, see Partnership Income or Loss underStep 5
Figuring Earnings Subject to Self-EmploymentMultiply step 3 by step 4.....................................
Tax in Publication 533.Step 6
Net earnings do not include income passedMultiply $210,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate).......
through to shareholders of S corporations.Step 7
Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. Adjustments. You must reduce your netStep 8 earnings by the deduction for one-half of yourContribution dollar limit...................................... $42,000 self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must be• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9. reduced by the deduction for contributions you• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller make for yourself. This reduction is made indi-of step 7 or step 8 on step 19.
rectly, as explained next.Step 9
Enter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2005. Do not enter more Net earnings reduced by adjusting contri-
than $14,000............................................ bution rate.You must reduce net earnings by
Step 10 your deduction for contributions for yourself. The
Subtract step 9 from step 8................................... deduction and the net earnings depend on each
Step 11 other. You make the adjustment indirectly by
Subtract step 9 from step 3......................... reducing the contribution rate called for in theStep 12 plan and using the reduced rate to figure yourEnter one-half of step 11.................................... maximum deduction for contributions for your-Step 13 self.Enter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
Annual compensation limit.You generallyStep 14
cannot take into account more than $210,000 ofSubtract step 13 from step 3..................................
your compensation in figuring your contributionStep 15
Enter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................ to a defined contribution plan.
• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19. Figuring Your Deduction
Step 16
Subtract step 15 from step 14................................. Use the following worksheet to find the reduced
Step 17 contribution rate for yourself. Make no reduction
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $4,000...... to the contribution rate for any common-law em-
Step 18 ployees.
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17........................... Worksheet 3-A. Rate Worksheet for
Step 19 Self-EmployedAdd steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution....
Next: Enter this amount on line 28, Form 1040. 1) Plan contribution rate as a
decimal (for example, 101/2% =
.105) ...................
Defined contribution plans.The deduction Defined benefit plans.An actuary must fig- 2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,
for contributions to a defined contribution planure the deduction for contributions to a defined.105 + 1 = 1.105)...........
(profit sharing plan or money purchase pensionbenefit plan because it is based on actuarial3) Self-employed rate as a decimal
plan) cannot be more than 25% of the compen- rounded to at least 3 decimalassumptions and computations.
places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........sation paid (or accrued) during the year to the
eligible employees participating in the plan. YouDeduction of contributions for yourself.To
must reduce this limit in figuring the deductiontake a deduction for contributions you make to a After you have figured your self-employed
for contributions you make for your own ac- rate, you can figure your maximum deduction forplan for yourself, you must have net earnings
count. See Deduction of contributions for your- contributions for yourself by completing Work-from the trade or business for which the plan
self, later. sheet 3-B.was set up.
When figuring the deduction limit, the follow- An Example of how to complete the work-Limit on deduction.If the qualified plan is aing rules apply. sheets follows.defined contribution plan, your deduction for
• Elective deferrals (discussed in Publica-yourself is limited to the lesser of $42,000 or
tion 560) are not subject to deduction lim- Example20% of your net earnings.
its.
Net earnings. Your net earnings must beYou are a sole proprietor with no employees.• Compensation includes elective deferrals.from self-employment in a trade or business inThe terms of your plan provide that you contrib-
which your personal services are a materialute 81/2% (.085) of your compensation (defined• The maximum compensation that can be
income-producing factor. Your net earnings doearlier) to your plan. Your net profit from line 31,taken into account for each employee is
not include items excluded from income (or de-Schedule C (Form 1040) is $200,000. You have$210,000.
ductions related to that income), other than for-no elective deferrals or catch-up contributions.
eign earned income and foreign housing costYour self-employment tax deduction on line 27
amounts. of Form 1040 is $8,258. You figure your self-em-
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 13

Page 14 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
be taxed at all if they are distributed according toWorksheet 3-B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed — Illustrated
the rules. For more information on IRAs, see
Step 1 Publication 590.
Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or box 14, code A*,
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)................................... $200,000
*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
subtracted from box 14, code A to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of
Schedule SE
Step 2 4.Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 27, Form 1040....... 8,258
Step 3
Net earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... 191,742
Step 4 Rent Expense
Enter your rate from Worksheet 3-A ............................. 0.078
Step 5
Multiply step 3 by step 4..................................... 14,956
IntroductionStep 6
Multiply $210,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... 17,850 This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent
Step 7 or lease payments you make for property you
Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. 14,956 use in your business but do not own. It also
Step 8 discusses how to treat other kinds of payments
Contribution dollar limit...................................... $42,000 you make that are related to your use of this• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9. property. These include payments you make for• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller taxes on the property, improvements to theof step 7 or step 8 on step 19. property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-Step 9 sion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofEnter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2005. Do not enter more property) certain rent expenses at the end of thethan $14,000............................................ N / A chapter.Step 10
Subtract step 9 from step 8...................................
TopicsStep 11
This chapter discusses:Subtract step 9 from step 3.........................
Step 12
• The definition of rentEnter one-half of step 11....................................
Step 13 • Taxes on leased propertyEnter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
• The cost of getting a leaseStep 14
Subtract step 13 from step 3.................................. • Improvements by the lesseeStep 15
• Capitalizing rent expensesEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19. See chapter 14 for information about gettingStep 16 publications and forms.Subtract step 15 from step 14.................................
Step 17
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $4,000......
Step 18
RentEnter the smaller of step 16 or step 17...........................
Step 19
Rent is any amount you pay for the use ofAdd steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution.... $14,956
property you do not own. In general, you canNext: Enter this amount on line 28, Form 1040.
deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for
property you use in your trade or business. If you
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-ployed rate and maximum deduction for em- year taxpayers), plus extensions, of your taxerty, the rent is not deductible.return for that year.ployer contributions you made for yourself as
shown in illustrated Worksheet 3-A and Work- Unreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental
More information. See Publication 560 forsheet 3-B. deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the
more information on retirement plans for smallissue of reasonableness arises only if you and
Worksheet 3-A. Rate Worksheet for business owners, including the self-employed.the lessor are related. Rent paid to a relatedSelf-Employed — Publication 560 also discusses the reportingperson is reasonable if it is the same amountIllustrated forms that must be filed for these plans.you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because1) Plan contribution rate as a it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. Fordecimal (for example, 101/2% = examples of related persons, see Related Per-.105) ................... 0.085 sons in chapter 12.Individual Retirement2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,
.105 + 1 = 1.105)........... 1.085 Rent on your home. If you rent your homeArrangement (IRA)3) Self-employed rate as a decimal and use part of it as your place of business, you
rounded to at least 3 decimal may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatAn individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aplaces (line 1 ÷ line 2)........ 0.078 part. You must meet the requirements for busi-personal savings plan that allows you to setness use of your home. For more information,aside money for your retirement. You may besee Business use of your home in chapter 1.able to deduct your contributions, depending on
When to make contributions.To take a de- the type of IRA and your circumstances. Gener-Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in
duction for contributions for a particular year,ally, amounts in an IRA, including earnings andyour trade or business is deductible in the year
you must make the contributions not later thangains, are not taxed until they are distributed. Inpaid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you
certain cases, your earnings and gains may notthe due date (generally April 15 for calendar can deduct only the amount that applies to your
Page 14 Chapter 4 Rent Expense

Page 15 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use of the rented property during the tax year. page 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 lease term and all rent payments are due in the
You can deduct the rest of your payment only contains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter-calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the
over the period to which it applies. mine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federalpreceding or following calendar year).
income tax purposes. Revenue Procedure Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustExample 1. You leased a building for 52001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internaluse an accrual method of accounting (and timeyears beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 perRevenue Bulletin provides the information re-value of money principles) for your rental ex-year. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) onquired to be furnished in a request for an ad-penses, regardless of your overall method ofJune 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 × vance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction.accounting. In addition, in certain cases in which$12,000) for the rent that applies to the first year.Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available atthe IRS has determined that a lease was de-www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf. signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeExample 2. Last January you leased prop- In general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 rent and stated or imputed interest into accounterty for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You paid theprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only,under a constant rental accrual method in whichfull $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year ofthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveragedthe rent is treated as accruing ratably over thethe lease. Each year you can deduct only lease transaction to be the owner of the propertyentire lease term. For details, see section 467 of$6,000, the part of the lease that applies to thatand the transaction to be a valid lease if all thethe Internal Revenue Code.year. factors in the revenue procedure are met, in-
cluding the following.Canceling a lease.You generally can deduct
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business• The lessor must maintain a minimum un-lease. conditional “at risk” equity investment inTaxes on
the property (at least 20% of the cost ofLease or purchase. There may be instances
Leased Propertythe property) during the entire lease term.in which you must determine whether your pay-
ments are for rent or for the purchase of the• The lessee may not have a contractualIf you lease business property, you can deductproperty. You must first determine whether yourright to buy the property from the lessor atas additional rent any taxes you have to pay toagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-less than fair market value when the rightor for the lessor. When you can deduct thesetract. Payments made under a conditional salesis exercised. taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-contract are not deductible as rent expense.
counting method.• The lessee may not invest in the property,Conditional sales contract.Whether an except as provided by Revenue Procedureagreement is a conditional sales contract de-2001-28. Cash method. If you use the cash method ofpends on the intent of the parties. Determine accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-• The lessee may not lend any money to theintent based on the provisions of the agreement tional rent only for the tax year in which you paylessor to buy the property or guarantee theand the facts and circumstances that exist when them.loan used by the lessor to buy the prop-you make the agreement. No single test, or
erty.special combination of tests, always applies. Accrual method. If you use an accrualHowever, in general, an agreement may be con-• The lessor must show that it expects tomethod of accounting, you can deduct taxes assidered a conditional sales contract rather thanreceive a profit apart from the tax deduc-additional rent for the tax year in which you cana lease if any of the following is true. tions, allowances, credits, and other taxdetermine all the following.
attributes.• The agreement applies part of each pay-
• That you have a liability for taxes on thement toward an equity interest you will re-
leased property.The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuingceive.
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue• How much the liability is.• You get title to the property after you makeProcedure 2006-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve-a stated amount of required payments. • That economic performance occurred.nue Bulletin No. 2006-1 at www.irs.gov/pub/
irs-irbs/irb06-01.pdf.• The amount you must pay to use the prop-
The liability and amount of taxes are deter-erty for a short time is a large part of theLeveraged leases of limited-use property.mined by state or local law and the lease agree-amount you would pay to get title to theThe IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-ment. Economic performance occurs as you useproperty. aged leases of so-called limited-use property.the property.Limited-use property is property not expected to• You pay much more than the current fair
be either useful to or usable by a lessor at therental value of the property. Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendarend of the lease term except for continued leas-year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of• You have an option to buy the property ating or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-a nominal price compared to the value ofdure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use ness. Under state law, owners of real propertythe property when you may exercise theproperty and property that is not limited-usebecome liable (incur a lien on the property) foroption. Determine this value when youproperty. real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofmake the agreement.
that year. However, they do not have to payLeases over $250,000.Special rules are pro-• You have an option to buy the property at these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18vided for certain leases of tangible property. Thea nominal price compared to the total months later) when tax bills are issued. Underrules apply if the lease calls for total payments ofamount you have to pay under the agree- the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable formore than $250,000 and any of the followingment. the real estate taxes in the later year when theapply. tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the• The agreement designates part of the pay-
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable forments as interest, or that part is easy to• Rents increase during the lease.
the taxes for that year.recognize as interest. • Rents decrease during the lease. Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans- rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s• Rents are deferred (rent is payable after
actions may not be considered leases. Lever- liability under the lease becomes fixed.the end of the calendar year following the
aged leases generally involve three parties: acalendar year in which the use occurs and
Example 2. The facts are the same as inlessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.the rent is allocated).
Example 1 except that, according to the terms ofUsually the lease term covers a large part of the• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforethe lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estateuseful life of the leased property, and the the end of the calendar year preceding thetaxes when the owner of the property becomeslessee’s payments to the lessor are enough tocalendar year in which the use occurs andliable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct thecover the lessor’s payments to the lender. the rent is allocated). real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for theIf you plan to take part in what appears to be
earlier year. This is the year in which Oak’sa leveraged lease, you may want to get an These rules do not apply if your lease specifies
liability under the lease becomes fixed.advance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on equal amounts of rent for each month in the
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 15

Page 16 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- Indirect costs include amounts incurred for
ments of $50 each. renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.Cost of
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortizeUniform capitalization rules.You may beit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-Getting a Lease subject to the uniform capitalization rules if youtization deduction each year will be $150do any of the following, unless the property is($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 ×You may either enter into a new lease with the produced for your use other than in a business$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5lessor of the property or get an existing lease or an activity carried on for profit.years as rent.from another lessee. Very often when you get an
existing lease from another lessee, you must 1. Produce real property or tangible personalCommissions, bonuses, and fees.Commis-pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, property. For this purpose, tangible per-sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts youbesides having to pay the rent on the lease. sonal property includes a film, sound re-pay to get a lease on property you use in yourIf you get an existing lease on property or cording, video tape, book, or similarbusiness are capital costs. You must amortizeequipment for your business, you generally property.these costs over the term of the lease.must amortize any amount you pay to get that 2. Acquire property for resale.lease over the remaining term of the lease. ForLoss on merchandise and fixtures.If youexample, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and However, these rules do not apply to the follow-sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that youthere are 10 years remaining on the lease with ing property.bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost ofno option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 eachgetting the lease. You must capitalize the loss1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifyear. and amortize it over the remaining term of theyour average annual gross receipts areThe cost of getting an existing lease of tangi-lease. $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.ble property is not subject to the amortization
rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofchapter 9. the following conditions.
ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease for a. Your indirect costs of producing the
amortization includes all renewal options plus property are $200,000 or less.by Lesseeany other period for which you and the lessor b. You use the cash method of accountingreasonably expect the lease to be renewed. and do not account for inventories.If you add buildings or make other permanentHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of
improvements to leased property, depreciatethe cost of getting the lease is for the term
the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not including Example 1. You rent construction equip-accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew, ment to build a storage facility. You must capital-Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the ize as part of the cost of the building the rent youcovery period. You cannot amortize the costlease cost to the original term and any option paid for the equipment. You recover your cost byover the remaining term of the lease.term based on the facts and circumstances. In claiming a deduction for depreciation on theIf you do not keep the improvements whensome cases, it may be appropriate to make the building.you end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedallocation using a present value computation.
on your adjusted basis in the improvements atFor more information, see Regulations section Example 2. You rent space in a facility tothat time.1.178-1(b)(5). conduct your business of manufacturing tools.For more information, see the discussion of
You must include the rent you paid to occupy theMACRS in Publication 946, How To DepreciateExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease facility in the cost of the tools you produce.Property.with 20 years remaining on it and two options to
renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid More information. For more information onAssignment of a lease.If a long-term lessee$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inwho makes permanent improvements to landrenewal options. Because $7,000 is less than Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-later assigns all lease rights to you for money75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or nal Revenue Code section 263A.and you pay the rent required by the lease, the$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30
amount you pay for the assignment is a capitalyears. That is the remaining life of your present
investment. If the rental value of the leased landlease plus the periods for renewal.
increased since the lease began, part of your
capital investment is for that increase in theExample 2. The facts are the same as in
rental value. The rest is for your investment inExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the
the permanent improvements.original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op- 5.
The part that is for the increased rental valuetions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over
of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and youthe 20-year remaining life of the original lease.
amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was
InterestYou can depreciate the part that is for yournot less than 75% of the total cost of the lease
investment in the improvements over the recov-(or $7,500).
ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement.You may Introductionhave to pay an additional “rent” amount over part
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-of the lease period to change certain provisions
ness interest expense. Business interest ex-in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
pense is an amount charged for the use ofments and amortize them over the remainingCapitalizing
money you borrowed for business activities.period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
Rent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de-
scribed as rent in the agreement. Topics
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you mustThis chapter discusses:
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect
and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building costs for certain production or resale activities.• Allocation of interest
starting on January 1. However, before you oc- Include these costs in the basis of property you• Interest you can deductcupy it, you decide that you really need less produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-
space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent ing them as a current deduction. You recover the• Interest you cannot deduct
from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost• Capitalization of interestthe excess space from the original lease. In of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent dispose of the property. • When to deduct interest
Page 16 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 17 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Below-market loans Example. You secure a loan with property funds. The following table shows the transac-
used in your business. You use the loan pro- tions in her account during the tax year.
ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.
Useful Items Date TransactionYou must allocate interest expense on the loan
You may want to see: to personal use (purchase of the automobile)January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A
even though the loan is secured by business andPublication property. $1,000 unborrowed funds
deposited❏ 537 Installment Sales If the property that secures the loan is
your home, you generally do not allo-January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan B❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods cate the loan proceeds or the related deposited
TIP
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses interest. The interest is usually deductible asFebruary 18 $800 used for personalqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of purposes❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest how the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-Deduction February 27 $700 used for passivemation, see Publication 936.
activity
Form (and Instructions) Allocation period.The period for which a June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C
loan is allocated to a particular use begins on the deposited❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized
date the proceeds are used and ends on theDeductions November 20 $800 used for anearlier of the following dates. investment❏ Sch E (Form 1040)Supplemental
• The date the loan is repaid.Income and Loss December 18 $600 used for personal
purposes• The date the loan is reallocated to another❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065)Partner’s Share of
use.Income, Deductions, Credits, etc. Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S)Shareholder’s A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheProceeds not disbursed to borrower.EvenShare of Income, Deductions, treats the $700 used for a passive activity asif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to aCredits, etc. made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofthird party, the allocation of the loan is still based
❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. Sheon your use of the funds. This applies whether
treats the $800 used for an investment as madeyou pay for property, services, or anything else❏ 3115 Application for Change in entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsby incurring a loan, or you take property subjectAccounting Method the $600 used for personal purposes as madeto a debt.
❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C
Deduction Proceeds deposited in borrower’s account.and $400 of unborrowed funds.
Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account asFor the periods during which loan proceeds❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsproperty held for investment. It does not matterare held in the account, Edith treats them as
whether the account pays interest. Any interestproperty held for investment.See chapter 14 for information about gettingyou pay on the loan is investment interest ex-publications and forms. Payments from checking accounts.Gen-pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan,erally, you treat a payment from a checking oryou must reallocate the loan based on the use ofsimilar account as made at the time the check isthe funds. written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within
a reasonable period after you write it. You canAllocation of Interest Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax- treat checks written on the same day as writtenpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-in any order.The rules for deducting interest vary, dependingmediately uses the proceeds to open a checking
on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-account. No other amounts are deposited in theAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re-ness, personal, or investment activities. If youaccount during the year and no part of the loanceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-use the proceeds of a loan for more than oneprincipal is repaid during the year. On April 1,ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treattype of expense, you must make an allocation toConnie uses $20,000 from the checking accountany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)determine the interest for each use of the loan’sfor a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-made from any account you own, or from cash,proceeds. ber 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 fromas made from those proceeds. This applies to
Allocate your interest expense to the follow-the account for personal purposes. any payment made within 30 days before or
ing categories. Under the interest allocation rules, the entireafter the proceeds are received in cash or de-
$100,000 loan is treated as property held forposited in your account.• Nonpassive trade or business activity in-investment for the period from January 4 If the loan proceeds are deposited in anterest through March 31. From April 1 through Augustaccount, you can apply this rule even if the rules
• Passive trade or business activity interest31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan asstated earlier under Order of funds spent would
used in the passive activity and $80,000 of theotherwise require you to treat the proceeds as• Investment interest loan as property held for investment. From Sep-used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to
• Portfolio interest tember 1 through December 31, she must treatany payments, disregard those payments (and
$40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-the proceeds from which they are made) when• Personal interest poses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,applying the rules stated under Order of funds
In general, you allocate interest on a loan theand $40,000 as property held for investment.spent.
same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You If you received the loan proceeds in cash,Order of funds spent.Generally, you treatallocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- you can treat the payment as made on the dateloan proceeds deposited in an account as usedments to specific uses. you received the cash instead of the date you(spent) before either of the following amounts.actually made the payment.
The easiest way to trace disburse-• Any unborrowed amounts held in the
ments to specific uses is to keep the Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 onsame account.
proceeds of a particular loan separate August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.
TIP
• Any amounts deposited after these loanfrom any other funds. Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on Augustproceeds. 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- account for a passive activity expense. Also,
ceeds and the related interest is not generallyExample. On January 9, Edith opened a Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits other
affected by the use of property that secures thechecking account, depositing $500 of the pro- loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the
loan. ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed same period. Regardless of these other transac-
Chapter 5 Interest Page 17

Page 18 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit he Treat these loans as repaid in the orderStatement. If you paid $600 or more of
made on August 18 as being paid on August 4 shown on the loan agreement. mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-
from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can ing the year on any one mortgage, you generally
treat the passive activity expense he paid on will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.Loan refinancing.Allocate the replacementAugust 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro- You will receive the statement if you pay interestloan to the same uses to which the repaid loanceeds treated as deposited in the account. to a person (including a financial institution or awas allocated. Make the allocation only to thecooperative housing corporation) in the courseextent you use the proceeds of the new loan toOptional method for determining date of of that person’s trade or business. A govern-repay any part of the original loan.reallocation.You can use the following mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingmethod to determine the date loan proceeds are the statement.Debt-financed distribution.A debt-financedreallocated to another use. You can treat all If you receive a refund of interest you over-distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-payments from loan proceeds in the account paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-poration borrows funds and allocates thoseduring any month as taking place on the later of ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotfunds to distributions made to partners or share-the following dates. deduct this amount. For information on how toholders. The manner in which you report the
report this refund, see Refunds of interest later
• The first day of that month. interest expense associated with the distributed
in this chapter.debt proceeds depends on your use of those• The date the loan proceeds are deposited
proceeds. Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.in the account.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgageHow to report.If the proceeds were used inHowever, you can use this optional method only cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-a nonpassive trade or business activity, reportif you treat all payments from the account during penses, which include mortgage commissions,the interest on line 28 of Schedule E (Formthe same calendar month in the same way. abstract fees, and recording fees, are capital1040); enter “interest expense” and the name ofexpenses. If the property mortgaged is businessInterest on a separate account.If you the partnership or S corporation in column (a)or income-producing property, you can amortizehave an account that contains only loan pro-and the amount in column (h). If the proceedsthe costs over the life of the mortgage.ceeds and interest earned on the account, youwere used in a passive activity, follow the in-
can treat any payment from that account asstructions for Form 8582, Passive Activity LossPrepayment penalty. If you pay off yourbeing made first from the interest. When theLimitations, to determine the amount of interestmortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forinterest earned is used up, any remaining pay-expense that can be reported on line 28 ofdoing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-ments are from loan proceeds. Schedule E; enter “interest expense” and theest.
name of the partnership in column (a) and theInterest on employment tax deficiency.In-Example. You borrowed $20,000 and usedamount in column (f). If the proceeds were usedterest charged on employment taxes assessedthe proceeds of this loan to open a new savingsin an investment activity, enter the interest onon your business is deductible.account. When the account had earned interestForm 4952. If the proceeds are used for per-of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-sonal purposes, the interest is generally not de-Original issue discount (OID).OID is a formposes. You can treat the withdrawal as comingductible. of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-first from the interest earned on the account, erally has OID when its proceeds are less than$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 its principal amount. The OID is the difference($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the between the stated redemption price at maturityloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- and the issue price of the loan.Interest Youcount until the time of the withdrawal is invest-  A loan’s stated redemption price at maturityment interest expense. The interest charged onCan Deduct is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)the part of the proceeds used for personal pur- payable on it other than qualified stated interest.poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew itYou can generally deduct as a business ex-Qualified stated interest is stated interest that isuntil you either repay it or reallocate it to anotherpense all interest you pay or accrue during theunconditionally payable in cash or propertyuse is personal interest expense. The interesttax year on debts related to your trade or busi-(other than another loan of the issuer) at leastcharged on the loan proceeds you left in theness. Interest relates to your trade or business ifannually over the term of the loan at a singleaccount ($867) continues to be investment inter-you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade orfixed rate.est expense until you either repay it or reallocatebusiness expense. It does not matter what typeYou generally deduct OID over the term ofit to another use. of property secures the loan. You can deductthe loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year
interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-using the constant-yield method, unless the OIDLoan repayment. When you repay any part ofing requirements. on the loan is de minimis.a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as
being repaid in the following order. De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it• You are legally liable for that debt.
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the• Both you and the lender intend that the1. Personal use. stated redemption price of the loan at maturitydebt be repaid. multiplied by the number of full years from the2. Investments and passive activities (other
date of original issue to maturity (the term of the• You and the lender have a truethan those included in (3)).
loan).debtor-creditor relationship.3. Passive activities in connection with a If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one
rental real estate activity in which you ac- of the following ways to figure the amount youPartial liability.If you are liable for part of atively participate. can deduct each year.business debt, you can deduct only your share4. Former passive activities. • On a constant-yield basis over the term ofof the total interest paid or accrued.
the loan.5. Trade or business use and expenses for
Example. You and your brother borrowcertain low-income housing projects. • On a straight-line basis over the term ofmoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. Youthe loan.use your half of the loan in your business, andLine of credit (continuous borrowings). • In proportion to stated interest payments.you make one-half of the loan payments. YouThe following rules apply if you have a line ofcan deduct your half of the total interest pay-• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.credit or similar arrangement. ments as a business deduction.
You make this choice by deducting the OID in a1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interestMortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paidmanner consistent with the method chosen onaccrues at the same fixed or variable rateor accrued on real estate you own legally oryour timely filed tax return for the tax year inas a single loan. equitably is deductible. However, rather thanwhich the loan is issued.
2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed deducting the interest currently, you may have
funds on which interest accrues at different to add it to the cost basis of the property asExample. On January 1, 2005, you took out
fixed or variable rates as different loans. explained later under Capitalization of Interest.a $100,000 discounted loan and received
Page 18 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 19 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on Because points are prepaid interest, you If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-
generally cannot deduct the full amount in the erty used in your business, the fees are indirectJanuary 1, 2015 (a 10-year term), and the
year paid. However, you can choose to fully costs and you generally must capitalize them$100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-
deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of each
tests. For exceptions to the general rule, seetalization of Interest, later.year, beginning January 1, 2006. The $1,500
Publication 936.OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less
Interest on income tax.Interest charged onThe points reduce the issue price of the loanthan $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). You income tax assessed on your individual incomeand result in original issue discount, deductiblechoose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis tax return is not a business deduction evenas explained in the preceding discussion.over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2005, you though the tax due is related to income fromcan deduct $150 each year for 10 years. Partial payments on a nontax debt.If you your trade or business. Treat this interest as a
make partial payments on a debt (other than aConstant-yield method.If the OID is not de business deduction only in figuring a net operat-
debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,minimis, you must use the constant-yield ing loss deduction.
in general, first to interest and any remainder tomethod to figure how much you can deduct each Penalties.Penalties on underpaid deficien-principal. You can deduct only the interest. Thisyear. You figure your deduction for the first year cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-rule does not apply when it can be inferred thatusing the following steps. est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youthe borrower and lender understood that a differ-
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.ent allocation of the payments would be made.1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen-
erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan. Interest on loans with respect to life insur-Installment purchase.If you make an install-If you paid points on the loan (as dis- ance policies.You generally cannot deductment purchase of business property, the con-cussed later), the issue price generally is interest on a debt incurred with respect to anytract between you and the seller generallythe difference between the proceeds and life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractprovides for the payment of interest. If no inter-the points. that covers any individual unless that individualest or a low rate of interest is charged under the
is a key person.contract, a portion of the stated principal amount2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to
If the policy or contract covers a key person,payable under the contract may be recharacter-maturity.
you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofized as interest (unstated interest). The amount3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- debt for that person. However, the deduction forrecharacterized as interest reduces your basisments from the result in (2). This is the any month cannot be more than the interestin the property and increases your interest ex-OID you can deduct in the first year. figured using Moody’s Composite Yield on Sea-pense. For more information on installment
soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known assales and unstated interest, see PublicationTo figure your deduction in any subsequent
Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield537.year, follow the above steps, except determine
Average-Monthly Average Corporates)the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the
(Moody’s rate) for that month.adjusted issue price, add to the issue price any
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2) Who is a key person? A key person is an
and (3) above. Interest You officer or 20% owner. However, the number of
The yield to maturity is generally shown in individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-
Cannot Deductthe literature you receive from your lender. If you ited to the greater of the following.
do not have this information, consult your lender • Five individuals.Certain interest payments cannot be deducted.or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity isIn addition, certain other expenses that may• The lesser of 5% of the total officers andthe discount rate that, when used in computingseem to be interest are not, and you cannot employees of the company or 20 individu-the present value of all principal and interestdeduct them as interest. als.payments, produces an amount equal to the You cannot currently deduct interest thatprincipal amount of the loan. must be capitalized, and you generally cannotExceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.
deduct personal interest. You can generally deduct the interest if the con-Example. The facts are the same as in the
tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and theprevious example, except that you deduct theInterest paid with funds borrowed from origi-
covered individual is someone other than anOID on a constant yield basis over the term ofnal lender. If you use the cash method of
employee, officer, or someone financially inter-the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan isaccounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay
ested in your business. If the contract was pur-10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2005, with funds borrowed from the original lender
chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallyyou can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) − through a second loan, an advance, or any other
deduct the interest no matter who is covered by$10,000]. For 2006, you can deduct $103 arrangement similar to a loan. You can deduct
the contract.[($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000]. the interest expense once you start making pay-
ments on the new loan. Interest allocated to unborrowed policyLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan or When you make a payment on the new loan,cash value. Corporations and partnershipsmortgage ends, you may be able to deduct anyyou first apply the payment to interest and thengenerally cannot deduct any interest expenseremaining OID in the tax year in which the loanto the principal. All amounts you apply to theallocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may endinterest on the first loan are deductible, alongsurance, annuity, or endowment contracts. Thisdue to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,with any interest you pay on the second loan,rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,or similar event. subject to any limits that apply. 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,
If you refinance with the original director, employee, or 20% owner. For moreCapitalized interest.You cannot currentlylender, you generally cannot deduct information, see section 264(f) of the Internaldeduct interest you are required to capitalizethe remaining OID in the year in whichCAUTION
!
Revenue Code.under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-the refinancing occurs, but you may be able to
talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buydeduct it over the term of the new mortgage or
property and pay interest owed by the seller (forloan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from
example, by assuming the debt and any interestoriginal lender under Interest You Cannot De- Capitalizationaccrued on the property), you cannot deduct theduct, later. interest. Add this interest to the basis of theof Interestproperty.Points. The term “points” is used to describe
certain charges paid, or treated as paid, by aCommitment fees or standby charges. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-
borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. TheseFees you incur to have business funds available erally must capitalize interest on debt equal to
charges are also called loan origination fees,on a standby basis, but not for the actual use of your expenditures to produce real property or
maximum loan charges, discount points, or pre-the funds, are not deductible as interest pay- certain tangible personal property. The property
mium charges. If any of these charges (points)ments. You may be able to deduct them as must be produced by you for use in your trade or
are solely for the use of money, they are interest.business expenses. business or for sale to customers. You cannot
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

Page 20 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
capitalize interest related to property that you A below-market loan is a loan on which no
interest is charged or on which interest isacquire in any other manner. When To
charged at a rate below the applicable federalInterest you paid or incurred during the pro- rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-mar-Deduct Interestduction period must be capitalized if the property ket loan generally is considered an arm’s-lengthproduced is designated property. Designated transaction in which you, the borrower, are con-If the uniform capitalization rules, discussedproperty is any of the following. sidered as having received both the following.under Capitalization of Interest, earlier, do not
apply to you, deduct interest as follows. • A loan in exchange for a note that requires• Real property.
the payment of interest at the applicableCash method. Under the cash method, you• Tangible personal property with a class life federal rate.can generally deduct only the interest you actu-of 20 years or more. ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct• An additional payment in an amount equal• Tangible personal property with an esti-a promissory note you gave as payment be- to the forgone interest.
mated production period of more than 2cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual
The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-payment.years.
dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-
Prepaid interest.You generally cannot de-• Tangible personal property with an esti- pensation, or other payment, depending on the
duct any interest paid before the year it is due.mated production period of more than 1 substance of the transaction.
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only inyear if the estimated cost of production is For any period, forgone interest  is:the tax year in which it is due.more than $1 million.
Discounted loan.If interest or a discount is 1. The interest that would be payable for that
subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a period if interest accrued on the loan at theProperty you produce.You produce property
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it applicable federal rate and was payableif you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-when you get the loan. For more information, annually on December 31,velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatsee Original issue discount (OID) under Interest minusproperty produced for you under a contract asYou Can Deduct, earlier. 2. Any interest actually payable on the loanproduced by you up to the amount you pay or
Refunds of interest.If you pay interest and for the period.incur for the property.
then receive a refund in the same tax year of any
Applicable federal rates are publishedpart of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-
Carrying charges. Carrying charges include by the IRS each month in the Internaltion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenuelater tax year, include the refund in your income
TIP
to carry, transport, or install personal property. Bulletins are available on the IRS web site atto the extent the deduction for the interest re-
www.irs.gov. You can also contact an IRS officeduced your tax.You can choose to capitalize carrying charges
to get these rates.not subject to the uniform capitalization rules ifAccrual method. Under an accrual method,they are otherwise deductible. For more infor- Loans subject to the rules.The rules foryou can deduct only interest that has accrued
mation, see chapter 8. below-market loans apply to the following.during the tax year.
Prepaid interest.See Prepaid interest, 1. Gift loans (below-market loans where theCapitalized interest.Treat capitalized inter-above. forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).est as a cost of the property produced. YouDiscounted loan. See Discounted loan, 2. Compensation-related loans (below-mar-recover your interest when you sell or use theabove. ket loans between an employer and anproperty. If the property is inventory, recover employee or between an independent con-Tax deficiency.If you contest a federal in-capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If tractor and a person for whom the contrac-come tax deficiency, interest does not accruethe property is used in your trade or business, tor provides services).until the tax year the final determination of liabil-recover capitalized interest through an adjust-
ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,3. Corporation-shareholder loans.ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, orthen the interest accrues in the year the tax wasother method. 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansasserted and agreed to by you. where the avoidance of federal tax is oneHowever, if you contest but pay the pro- of the main purposes of the interest ar-Partnerships and S corporations.The inter- posed tax deficiency and interest, and you dorangement).not designate the payment as a cash bond, thenest capitalization rules are applied first at the
the interest is deductible in the year paid.partnership or S corporation level. The rules are 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities
under a continuing care contract (made af-then applied at the partners’ or shareholders’Related person. If you use an accrual ter October 11, 1985).level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a
tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-related person who uses the cash method untilExcept as noted in (5) above, these rules
tion or construction costs. payment is made and the interest is includible inapply to demand loans (loans payable in full at
the gross income of that person. The relation-any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you
ship is determined as of the end of the tax yearafter June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatmay have to capitalize interest you incur duringfor which the interest would otherwise be de-are not demand loans) made after that date.the tax year for the production costs of the part-ductible. If a deduction is denied under this rule,nership or S corporation. You may also have to Treatment of gift and demand loans.If youthe rule will continue to apply even if your rela-capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or receive a below-market gift loan or demandtionship with the person ceases to exist beforeloan, you are treated as receiving an additionalS corporation for your own production costs. Tothe interest is includible in the gross income ofpayment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theproperly capitalize interest under these rules,that person. See Related Persons in Publicationforgone interest on the loan. You are thenyou must be given the required information in an538. treated as transferring this amount back to theattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive lender as interest. These transfers are consid-from the partnership or S corporation. ered to occur annually, generally on December
31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade orBelow-Market LoansAdditional information.The procedures for business, you can deduct the forgone interest
each year as a business interest expense. Theapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be-If you receive a below-market gift or demandlender must report it as interest income.yond the scope of this publication. For moreloan and use the proceeds in your trade or
information, see sections 1.263A-8 throughbusiness, you may be able to deduct the forgoneLimit on forgone interest for gift loans of
1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99.interest. See Treatment of gift and demand $100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2.loans later in this discussion. viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred
Page 20 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 21 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
back to the lender is limited to the borrower’s net b. The amount of the items.
investment income for the year. This limit ap-c. The cost of complying with theplies if the outstanding loans between the lenderbelow-market loan provisions if they6.and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the were to apply.borrower’s net investment income is $1,000 or
less, it is treated as zero. This limit does notd. Any reasons, other than taxes, for
apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal taxstructuring the transaction as a Taxesis one of the main purposes of the interest ar-below-market loan.
rangement.
Treatment of term loans.If you receive a Introduction
below-market term loan other than a gift or de-Exception for certain loans to a qualified
You can deduct various federal, state, local, andmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-continuing care facility.The below-market foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade ortional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on theinterest rules do not apply to a loan made by abusiness as business expenses.date the loan is made. This payment is equal tolender to a qualified continuing care facility
the loan amount minus the present value, at theunder a continuing care contract if the lender (orYou cannot deduct federal income
applicable federal rate, of all payments due taxes, estate and gift taxes, or statelender’s spouse) is age 65 or older by the end ofunder the loan. The same amount is treated as inheritance, legacy, and successionthe calendar year. For 2005, this exception ap-CAUTION
!
original issue discount on the loan. See Original taxes.plies only to the part of the total outstandingissue discount (OID) under Interest You Can loans from the lender (or lender’s spouse) thatDeduct, earlier. Topicsdoes not exceed $158,100.
This chapter discusses:Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less.The A qualified continuing care facility is one or
rules for below-market loans do not apply to anymore facilities that are designed to provide serv-• When to deduct taxesday on which the total outstanding loans be-ices under continuing care contracts and wheretween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or • Real estate taxessubstantially all the residents have entered intoless. This exception applies only to the follow-continuing care contracts. In addition, substan-• Income taxesing. tially all the facilities used to provide services
• Employment taxesrequired under the continuing care contract1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is
must be owned or operated by the loan bor-not directly used to buy or carry • Other taxes
rower.income-producing assets.
A continuing care contract is a written con-2. Compensation-related loans or Useful Items
tract between an individual and a qualified con-corporation-shareholder loans if the avoid- You may want to see:
tinuing care facility that meets all the followingance of any federal tax is not a principal
conditions.purpose of the interest arrangement. Publication
This exception does not apply to a term loan ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide1. The individual and/or the individual’sdescribed in (2) above that was previously sub-spouse must be entitled to use the facility❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessject to the below-market loan rules. Those rulesfor the rest of their life or lives.will continue to apply even if the outstanding ❏ 510 Excise Taxes for 2006balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. 2. The residential use must begin in a sepa-
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsrate, independent living unit provided byExceptions for loans without significant tax
the continuing care facility and continue❏ 551 Basis of Assetseffect.The following loans are specifically ex-
until the individual (or individual’s spouse)empted from the rules for below-market loans
is incapable of living independently. TheForm (and Instructions)because their interest arrangements do not
facility must provide various “personalhave a significant effect on the federal tax liabil- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductionscare” services to the resident such asity of the borrower or the lender.
maintenance of the residential unit, meals,❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment
1. Loans made available by lenders to the and daily aid and supervision relating to Tax
general public on the same terms and con-routine medical needs. ❏ 3115 Application for Change inditions that are consistent with the lender’s
Accounting Method3. The facility must be obligated to providecustomary business practices.
long-term nursing care if the resident is no2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or See chapter 14 for information about gettinglonger capable of living independently.municipal government that are made avail- publications and forms.4. The contract must require the facility toable under a program of general applica-
provide the “personal services” andtion to the public.
“long-term nursing care” without substan-3. Certain employee-relocation loans. tial additional cost to the individual.When To4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person,
unless the interest income would be effec- Deduct Taxestively connected with the conduct of a U.S.Sale or exchange of property.Different rules
trade or business and not exempt fromgenerally apply to a loan connected with the saleGenerally, you can only deduct taxes in the year
U.S. tax under an income tax treaty. or exchange of property. If the loan does notyou pay them. This applies whether you use the
provide adequate stated interest, part of thecash method or an accrual method of account-5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show
ing.principal payment may be considered interest.that the interest arrangement has no signif-
Under an accrual method, you can deduct aHowever, there are exceptions that may requireicant effect on the federal tax liability of the
tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptionyou to apply the below-market interest rate ruleslender or the borrower. Whether an inter-
for recurring items discussed under Economicto these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-est arrangement has a significant effect on
Performance in Publication 538. You can alsothe federal tax liability of the lender or thenal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis-borrower will be determined by all the facts
cussed later under Real Estate Taxes.and circumstances. Consider all the follow-More information. For more information oning factors. below-market loans, see section 7872 of theLimit on accrual of taxes.A taxing jurisdic-
Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5Ta. Whether items of income and deduction tion can require the use of a date for accruing
of the regulations.generated by the loan offset each other. taxes that is earlier than the date it originally
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 21

Page 22 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
required. However, if you use an accrual You can deduct taxes for these local benefits 2005, to June 30, 2006, are $1,200. July 1 is the
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or assessment and lien date.
it, use the original accrual date for the year of interest charges related to those benefits. If partIf John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,
change and all future years to determine when of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,$600 will accrue in 2005 ($1,200 ×
6/12, July
you can deduct the tax. you must be able to show how much of the tax is 1–December 31) and the balance will accrue in
for these expenses to claim a deduction for that2006.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-part of the tax. Separate elections.You can elect to rata-sonal property used in a trade or business con- bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade orducted in the state. This tax is assessed andExample. Waterfront City, to improve down-business and for nonbusiness activities if youbecomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In town commercial business, converted a down-account for them separately. Once you elect to2005, the state changed the assessment and town business area street into an enclosedratably accrue real estate taxes, you must uselien dates from July 1, 2006, to December 31, pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full costthat method unless you get permission from the2005, for property tax year 2006. Use the origi- of construction, financed with 10-year bonds,IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.nal accrual date (July 1, 2006) to determine against the affected properties. The city is pay-
when you can deduct the tax. You must also use ing the principal and interest with the annualMaking the election.If you elect to ratably
the July 1 accrual date for all future years to payments made by the property owners.accrue the taxes for the first year in which you
determine when you can deduct the tax. The assessments for construction costs areincur real estate taxes, attach a statement to
not deductible as taxes or as business ex-your income tax return for that year. The state-Uniform capitalization rules.Uniform capi- penses, but are depreciable capital expenses.ment should show all the following items.talization rules apply to certain taxpayers whoThe part of the payments used to pay the inter-
produce real property or tangible personal prop- • The trades or businesses to which theest charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.
erty for use in a trade or business or for sale to election applies and the accounting
Charges for services.Water bills, sewerage,customers. They also apply to certain taxpayers method or methods used.
and other service charges assessed againstwho acquire property for resale. Under these • The period to which the taxes relate.your business property are not real estate taxes,rules, you either include certain costs in inven-
but are deductible as business expenses. • The computation of the real estate tax de-tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the
duction for that first year.property, such as taxes. For more information,Purchase or sale of real estate.If real estatesee chapter 1. is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocatedGenerally, you must file your return by the duebetween the buyer and the seller.Carrying charges. Carrying charges include date (including extensions). However, if youThe buyer and seller must allocate the realtaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or timely filed your return for the year without elect-estate taxes according to the number of days into carry, transport, or install personal property. ing to ratably accrue, you can still make thethe real property tax year (the period to whichYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges not election by filing an amended return within 6the tax imposed relates) that each owned thesubject to the uniform capitalization rules if they months after the due date of the return (exclud-property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes upare otherwise deductible. For more information, ing extensions). Attach the statement to theto but not including the date of sale. Treat thesee chapter 8. amended return and write “Filed pursuant tobuyer as paying the taxes beginning with thesection 301.9100-2” on the statement. File theRefunds of taxes.If you receive a refund for date of sale. You can usually find this informa-amended return at the same address you filedany taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- tion on the settlement statement you received atthe original return.clude the refund in income to the extent the closing.
Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue fordeduction reduced your federal income tax in If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until
a year after the first year in which you incur realthe earlier year. For more information, see Re- they are paid because you use the cash method
estate taxes or if you want to revoke your elec-covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule) in and the buyer of your property is personally
tion to ratably accrue real estate taxes, file Formchapter 1. liable for the tax, you are considered to have
3115. For more information, including applicablepaid your part of the tax at the time of the sale.You must include in income any inter- time frames for filing, see the instructions forThis permits you to deduct the part of the tax upest you receive on tax refunds. Form 3115.to (but not including) the date of sale evenTIP
though you did not pay it. You must also include
the amount of that tax in the selling price of the
property.
If you (the seller) use an accrual method andIncome TaxesReal Estate Taxes have not elected to ratably accrue real estate
taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourThis section discusses federal, state, local, andDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local,part of the tax on the date you sell the property.foreign income taxes.or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the
general public welfare. The taxing authorityExample. Al Green, a calendar year accrualFederal income taxes. You cannot deduct
must base the taxes on the assessed value ofmethod taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm federal income taxes.
the real estate and charge them uniformlyCounty. He has not elected to ratably accrue
against all property under its jurisdiction. De-property taxes. November 30 of each year is theState and local income taxes.A corporation
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in-assessment and lien date for the current real or partnership can deduct state and local in-
clude taxes charged for local benefits andproperty tax year, which is the calendar year. He come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-
improvements that increase the value of thesold the property on June 30, 2005. Under his nership as business expenses. An individual
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later. accounting method he would not be able to can deduct state and local income taxes only as
If you use an accrual method, you generallyclaim a deduction for the taxes because the sale an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
cannot accrue real estate taxes until you payoccurred before November 30. He is treated as 1040).
them to the government authority. However, youhaving accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu- However, an individual can deduct a state
can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during theary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct ittax on gross income (as distinguished from net
year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later. for 2005. income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-
ness as a business expense.Taxes for local benefits.Generally, you can-Electing to ratably accrue.If you use an ac-
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and Accrual of contested income taxes.If youcrual method, you can elect to accrue real estate
improvements that tend to increase the value of use an accrual method, can deduct taxes beforetax related to a definite period ratably over that
your property. These include assessments for you pay them, and contest a state or local in-period.
streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, come tax liability, a special rule applies. Under
and public parking facilities. You should in-Example. John Smith is a calendar year this special rule, you must accrue and deduct
crease the basis of your property by the amount taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real any contested amount in the tax year in which
of the assessment. estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1, the liability is finally determined.
Page 22 Chapter 6 Taxes

Page 23 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If additional state or local income taxes for a
prior year are assessed in a later year, you canOther Taxesdeduct the taxes in the year in which they were
7.originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil-The following are other taxes you can deduct ifity is not contested. You cannot deduct them inyou incur them in the ordinary course of yourthe year in which the liability is finally deter-
trade or business.mined. Insurance
The filing of an income tax return is
Excise taxes.You can deduct as a businessnot considered a contest and, in the
absence of an overt act of protest, youexpense all excise taxes that are ordinary and
TIP
Introductioncan deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, younecessary expenses of carrying on your trade or
can deduct any additional taxes in the prior yearbusiness. However, see Fuel taxes, later. You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
if you do not show some affirmative evidence of essary cost of insurance as a business expense
denial of the liability. if it is for your trade, business, or profession.Franchise taxes.You can deduct corporate However, you may have to capitalize certainHowever, if you consistently deduct addi-franchise taxes as a business expense. insurance costs under the uniform capitalizationtional assessments in the year they are paid or
rules. For more information, see Capitalizedfinally determined (including those for which
Premiums, later.there was no contest), you must continue to doFuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,
so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlierand other motor fuels that you use in your busi-Topicsyear unless you receive permission to changeness are usually included as part of the cost ofThis chapter discusses:your method of accounting. For more informa-the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-tion on accounting methods, see When Can I rate item. • Deductible premiumsDeduct an Expense? in chapter 1.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for• Nondeductible premiums
federal excise tax you paid on fuels used forForeign income taxes. Generally, you can • Capitalized premiumscertain purposes. For more information, seetake either a deduction or a credit for income • When to deduct premiumsPublication 510.taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a
U.S. possession. However, an individual cannot
take a deduction or credit for foreign income
Useful ItemsOccupational taxes. You can deduct as a
taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. You may want to see:business expense an occupational tax chargedtax under the foreign earned income exclusionat a flat rate by a locality for the privilege ofor the foreign housing exclusion. For information Publicationworking or conducting a business in the locality.on these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax
❏ 15-B Employer’s Tax Guide to FringeGuide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens
BenefitsAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,Personal property tax.You can deduct any
see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-tax imposed by a state or local government on❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
viduals. personal property used in your trade or busi-❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsness.
❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on aForm (and Instructions)Employment Taxes
service or on the purchase or use of property as
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnpart of the cost of the service or property. If theIf you have employees, you must withhold vari-
service or the cost or use of the property is aous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em- See chapter 14 for information about gettingdeductible business expense, you can deductployers must withhold their employees’ share of publications and forms.social security and Medicare taxes along withthe tax as part of that service or cost. If the
state and federal income taxes. You may alsoproperty is merchandise bought for resale, the
need to pay certain employment taxes from yoursales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If
own funds. These include your share of socialthe property is depreciable, add the sales tax toDeductible Premiumssecurity and Medicare taxes as an employer,the basis for depreciation. For more information
along with unemployment taxes. on basis, see Publication 551. You generally can deduct premiums you pay for
You should treat the taxes you withhold from the following kinds of insurance related to yourDo not deduct state and local salesyour employees’ pay as wages on your tax re- trade or business. taxes imposed on the buyer that youturn. You can deduct the employment taxes you must collect and pay over to the stateCAUTION
!
1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-must pay from your own funds as taxes. or local government. Also, do not include thesecident, or similar losses.taxes in gross receipts or sales.Example. You pay your employee $18,000 2. Credit insurance that covers losses froma year. However, after you withhold various business bad debts.taxes, your employee receives $14,500. YouSelf-employment tax. You can deduct
3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-also pay an additional $1,500 in employmentone-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-ance for employees, including long-termtaxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 asness expense in figuring your adjusted grosscare insurance.wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay fromincome. This deduction only affects your incomeyour own funds as taxes. tax. It does not affect your net earnings froma. If a partnership pays accident and
For more information on employment taxes, health insurance premiums for its part-self-employment or your self-employment tax.
see Publication 15 (Circular E). ners, it generally can deduct them asTo deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line guaranteed payments to partners.27, the amount shown on the Deduction for
Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer, b. If an S corporation pays accident andone-half of self-employment tax line of Scheduleyou may have to make payments to a state health insurance premiums for its 2%SE (Form 1040).unemployment compensation fund or to a state shareholder-employees, it generally can
For more information on self-employmentdisability benefit fund. Deduct these payments deduct them, but must also include
tax, see Publication 334.as taxes. them in the shareholder’s wages sub-
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 23

Page 24 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ject to federal income tax withholding. your partnership or S corporation paid them and• An individual who requires substantial su-
See Publication 15-B. you included the premium amounts in your pervision to be protected from threats to
gross income. Take the deduction on line 29 ofhealth and safety due to severe cognitive
4. Liability insurance. Form 1040. impairment.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your The certification must have been made by aQualified long-term care insurance.Youpersonal liability for professional negli- licensed health care practitioner within the previ-can include premiums paid on a qualifiedgence resulting in injury or damage to pa- ous 12 months.long-term care insurance contract for you, yourtients or clients. spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourBenefits received.For information on ex-
deduction. But, for each person covered, you6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by cluding benefits you receive from a long-term
can include only the smaller of the followingstate law that covers any claims for bodily care contract from gross income, see Publica-
amounts.injuries or job-related diseases suffered by tion 525.
employees in your business, regardless of
1. The amount paid for that person. Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-fault.
tion for any month you were eligible to partici-2. The amount shown below. (Use thea. If a partnership pays workers’ compen- pate in any employer (including your spouse’s)person’s age at the end of the year.)sation premiums for its partners, it gen- subsidized health plan at any time during that
erally can deduct them as guaranteed a. Age 40 or younger–$270 month. This rule is applied separately to plans
payments to partners. that provide long-term care insurance and plansb. Age 41 to 50–$510 that do not provide long-term care insurance.b. If an S corporation pays workers’ com-
c. Age 51 to 60–$1,020 However, any medical insurance payments notpensation premiums for its 2%
deductible on line 29 of Form 1040 can be in-shareholder-employees, it generally cand. Age 61 to 70–$2,720 cluded as medical expenses on Schedule Adeduct them, but must also include
e. Age 71 or older–$3,400 (Form 1040) if you itemize deductions.them in the shareholder’s wages.
Effect on itemized deductions.Subtract the7. Contributions to a state unemployment in-Qualified long-term care insurance con-health insurance deduction from your medicalsurance fund are deductible as taxes iftract.A qualified long-term care insuranceinsurance when figuring medical expenses onthey are considered taxes under state law.contract is an insurance contract that only pro-Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-8. Overhead insurance that pays for business tions.ices. The contract must meet all the followingoverhead expenses you have during longrequirements.periods of disability caused by your injury Effect on self-employment tax.Do not sub-
or sickness. • It must be guaranteed renewable. tract the health insurance deduction when figur-
ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-• It must provide that refunds, other than
ers vehicles used in your business for lia-refunds on the death of the insured orHow to figure the deduction.Generally, youbility, damages, and other losses. If youcomplete surrender or cancellation of thecan use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-operate a vehicle partly for personal use,contract, and dividends under the contracttions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofdeduct only the part of the insurance pre-may be used only to reduce future premi-the following apply, you must use the worksheetmium that applies to the business use of ums or increase future benefits. in this chapter.the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-
• It must not provide for a cash surrenderage rate to figure your car expenses, you • You had more than one source of incomevalue or other money that can be paid,cannot deduct any car insurance premi- subject to self-employment tax.assigned, pledged, or borrowed.ums.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (re-• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-10. Life insurance covering your officers and lating to foreign earned income).penses incurred for services or items thatemployees if you are not directly or indi-
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-• You are using amounts paid for qualifiedrectly a beneficiary under the contract.
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer long-term care insurance to figure the de-
11. Business interruption insurance that paysor the contract makes per diem or other duction.
for lost profits if your business is shut downperiodic payments without regard to ex-If you are claiming the health coverage taxdue to a fire or other cause. penses. credit, complete Form 8885 before you figure
this deduction.Qualified long-term care services.Quali-Self-Employed Health fied long-term care services are: Health coverage tax credit.You may be
Insurance Deduction able to take this credit only if you were an eligible• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al-peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-You may be able to deduct 100% of the amount ternative TAA recipient, or Pension Benefithabilitative services, andpaid for medical and dental insurance and quali- Guaranty Corporation pension recipient. Usefied long-term care insurance for you, your• Maintenance or personal care services.Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax Credit, to fig-spouse, and your dependents if you are one of ure the amount, if any, of your health insuranceThe services must be required by a chronically illthe following. credit.individual and prescribed by a licensed health• A self-employed individual with a net profit More than one health plan and business.care practitioner.reported on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F. If you have more than one health plan during theChronically ill individual.A chronically illyear and each plan is established under a differ-• A partner with net earnings from self-em-individual is a person who has been certified asent business, you must use separate work-ployment reported on Schedule K-1 (Formone of the following. sheets (Worksheet 7-A) to figure each plan’s net1065), box 14, code A.
earnings limit. Include the premium you paid• An individual who has been unable, due to• A shareholder owning more than 2% of under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-loss of functional capacity for at least 90the outstanding stock of an S corporation rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)days, to perform at least two activities ofwith wages from the corporation reported from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For adaily living without substantial assistanceon Form W-2. plan that provides long-term care insurance, thefrom another individual. Activities of daily
total of the amounts entered for each person onThe insurance plan must be established under living are eating, toileting, transferring
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than theyour business. You may be allowed this deduc- (general mobility), bathing, dressing, and
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person.tion whether you paid the premiums yourself or continence.
Page 24 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 25 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your business if the person is anWorksheet 7-A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
owner or part owner of the business orWorksheet (Keep for your records.)
has lent money to the business.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997,1.Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse, and you generally cannot deduct the premi-
your dependents. (Do not include payments for any month you were ums on any life insurance policy, en-
eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your dowment contract, or annuity contract if
spouse’s employer or any amount you claim on line 4 of Form 8885. you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term care insurance.)1. ciary. The disallowance applies without
2.For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, regard to whom the policy covers.enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts.
c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
ship, you take out an insurance policyb) The amount shown below. (Use the person’s age at the end of
on your own life and name your part-the year.)
ners as beneficiaries to induce them to$270—if that person is age 40 or younger
retain their investments in the partner-$510—if age 41 to 50
ship, you are considered a beneficiary.$1,020—if age 51 to 60
You cannot deduct the insurance premi-$2,720—if age 61 to 70
ums.$3,400—if age 71 or older
(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to 4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take outparticipate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your
a policy on your life or on the life of an-or your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered,
other person with a financial interest infigure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter
your business to get or protect a businessthe total of those amounts........................... 2.
loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as3.Add the total of lines 1 and 2............................ 3.
a business expense. Nor can you deduct4.Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or
the premiums as interest on businessbusiness under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
loans or as an expense of financing loans.business is an S corporation, skip to line 11.)................. 4.
In the event of death, the proceeds of the5.Enter the total of all net profits* from: line 31, Schedule C (Form
1040); line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form policy are not taxed as income even if they
1040); or box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065); plus any other are used to liquidate the debt.
income allocable to the profitable businesses. See the instructions for
Schedule SE (Form 1040). (Do not include any net losses shown on
these schedules.)................................... 5.
6.Divide line 4 by line 5................................. 6.
Capitalized Premiums7.Multiply Form 1040, line 27 by the percentage on line 6.......... 7.
8.Subtract line 7 from line 4.............................. 8.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must9.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to the
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectsame trade or business in which the insurance plan is established . . .9.
costs for certain production or resale activities.10.Subtract line 9 from line 8.............................. 10.
Include these costs in the basis of property you11.Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a
produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is
ing them as a current deduction. You recover theestablished....................................... 11.
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost12.Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the amount
of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseentered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Form 2555-EZ, line
18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above.......... 12. dispose of the property.
13.Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies........... 13. Indirect costs include premiums for insur-
14.Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller of ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-
the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. (Do not include ment, materials, property produced, or property
this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on acquired for resale.Schedule A (Form 1040).).............................. 14.
Uniform capitalization rules.You may be* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business,subject to the uniform capitalization rules if youdo not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business
do any of the following, unless the property isfrom Schedule SE, line 4b.
produced for your use other than in a business* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you
created. It does not include capital gain income. or an activity carried on for profit.
1. Produce real property or tangible personalings due to sickness or disability. However,property. For this purpose, tangible per-see the discussion on overhead insurance,Nondeductible sonal property includes a film, sound re-item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear- cording, video tape, book, or similarlier.Premiums property.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities. 2. Acquire property for resale.You cannot deduct premiums on the following
kinds of insurance. a. For contracts issued before June 9,However, these rules do not apply to the follow-
1997, you cannot deduct the premiumsing property.1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot on a life insurance policy covering you,deduct amounts credited to a reserve set 1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifan employee, or any person with a fi-up for self-insurance. This applies even if your average annual gross receipts arenancial interest in your business if youyou cannot get business insurance cover- $10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.are directly or indirectly a beneficiary ofage for certain business risks. However, the policy. You are included among 2. Property you produce if you meet either ofyour actual losses may be deductible. See possible beneficiaries of the policy if thethe following conditions.Publication 547. policy owner is obligated to repay a
a. Your indirect costs of producing theloan from you using the proceeds of the2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-
property are $200,000 or less.miums for a policy that pays for lost earn- policy. A person has a financial interest
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 25

Page 26 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. You use the cash method of accounting Useful Items
and do not account for inventories. You may want to see:
8. PublicationMore information. For more information on
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofPublication 538 and the regulations under Inter- Assetsnal Revenue Code section 263A.
Costs You Form (and Instructions)
❏ 3468 Investment CreditCan DeductWhen To Deduct ❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credit
Premiums or Capitalize See chapter 14 for information about getting
publications and forms.You can usually deduct insurance premiums in
the tax year to which they apply.
IntroductionCash method. If you use the cash method of
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-This chapter discusses costs you can elect toCarrying Charges
miums in the tax year you actually paid them,deduct or capitalize.
even if you incurred them in an earlier year. Carrying charges include the taxes and interestYou generally deduct a cost as a currentHowever, see Prepayment, later. you pay to carry or develop real property or tobusiness expense by subtracting it from yourcarry, transport, or install personal property.Accrual method. If you use an accrual income in either the year you incur it or the yearCertain carrying charges must be capitalizedmethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-you pay it. under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-ance premiums before the tax year in which you
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able tomation on capitalization of interest, see chapterincur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot
5.) You can elect to capitalize carrying chargesrecover it over a period of years through periodicdeduct insurance premiums before the tax year
not subject to the uniform capitalization rules,deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-
but only if they are otherwise deductible.ception for recurring items applies). For more ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to
You can elect to capitalize carrying chargesinformation about the accrual method of ac-the basis of property to which it relates.separately for each project you have and forcounting, see chapter 1. For information aboutA partnership, corporation, estate, or trusteach type of carrying charge. For unimprovedthe exception for recurring items, see Publica-makes the election to deduct or capitalize theand unproductive real property, your election istion 538. costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-good for only 1 year. You must decide whether
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses inration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualto capitalize carrying charges each year the
advance, even if you pay them in advance. This property remains unimproved and unproductive.partner, shareholder, or beneficiary electsrule applies to any expense paid far enough in For other real property, your election to capital-whether to deduct or capitalize explorationadvance to, in effect, create an asset with a ize carrying charges remains in effect until con-costs.useful life extending substantially beyond the struction or development is completed. For
end of the current tax year. You may be subject to the alternativepersonal property, your election is effective until
Expenses such as insurance are generally minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct anythe date you install or first use it, whichever is
allocable to a period of time. You can deduct of the expenses discussed in thisCAUTION
!
later.
insurance expenses for the year to which theychapter, other than carrying charges and the
are allocable. How to make the election.To make the elec-costs of removing architectural barriers and re-
tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state-tired assets.
Example. In 2005, you signed a 3-year in- ment saying which charges you elect toFor more information on the alternative mini-surance contract. Even though you paid the pre- capitalize. Attach it to your original tax return formum tax, see the instructions for one of themiums for 2005, 2006, and 2007 when you the year the election is to be effective. However,
following forms.signed the contract, you can only deduct the if you timely filed your return for the year without
premium for 2005 on your 2005 tax return. You making the election, you can still make the elec-
can deduct in 2006 and 2007 the premium allo- tion by filing an amended return within 6 months• Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-cable to those years. of the due date of the return (excluding exten-dividuals. sions). Attach the statement to the amendedDividends received.If you receive dividends return and write “Filed pursuant to section• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax—from business insurance and you deducted the 301.9100-2” on the statement. File the amendedCorporations.premiums in prior years, at least part of the return at the same address you filed the originaldividends generally are income. For more infor- return.mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (taxTopicsbenefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I
This chapter discusses:Deduct?
• Carrying charges Research and
• Research and experimental costs Experimental Costs
• Intangible drilling costs
The costs of research and experimentation are• Exploration costs generally capital expenses. However, you can
elect to deduct these costs as a current business• Development costs
expense. Your election to deduct these costs is• Circulation costs binding for the year it is made and for all later
years unless you get IRS approval to make a• Environmental cleanup costs
change.• Business start-up and organizational costsIf you meet certain requirements, you may
elect to defer and amortize research and experi-• Reforestation costs
mental costs. For information on electing to de-• Retired asset removal costs fer and amortize these costs, see Research and
• Barrier removal costs Experimental Costs in chapter 9.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 27 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Research and experimental costs defined. IF you . . . THEN . . .
Research and experimental costs are reasona-Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in theble costs you incur in your trade or business forexperimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all lateractivities intended to provide information thatbusiness expense years.would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-
ment or improvement of a product. UncertaintyDo not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
exists if the information available to you does notexperimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first
establish how to develop or improve a product orbusiness expense receive an economic benefit from the research. See
the appropriate design of a product. Whether Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 9.
costs qualify as research and experimental
costs depends on the nature of the activity to
which the costs relate rather than on the nature you filed the original return or within 2 years after
of the product or improvement being developed the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.Intangibleor the level of technological advancement. Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.The costs of obtaining a patent, includingDrilling Costs If you capitalize the drilling and developmentattorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-perfecting a patent application, are research andThe costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermalice during the tax year, you may be able to claimexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in-wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. Youa business energy credit. See the instructionscurred to obtain another’s patent are not re-can usually recover them through depreciationfor Form 3468 for more information.search and experimental costs. or depletion. However, you can elect to deductNonproductive well. If you capitalize yourintangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi-Product. The term “product” includes any of IDCs, you have another option if the well isness expense. These are certain drilling andthe following items. nonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of thedevelopment costs for wells in the United States• Formula. nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. Youin which you hold an operating or working inter-must indicate and clearly state your election on• Invention. est. You can deduct only costs for drilling oryour tax return for the year the well is completed.preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, or• Patent. Once made, the election for oil and gas wells isgeothermal steam or hot water. binding for all later years. You can revoke your• Pilot model. You can elect to deduct only the costs ofelection for a geothermal well by filing anitems with no salvage value. These include• Process. amended return that does not claim the loss.wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-
• Technique. Costs incurred outside the United States.lated to drilling wells and preparing them for
You cannot deduct as a current business ex-production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-• Property similar to the items listed above. pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil,ment work done by contractors under any form
It also includes products used by you in your gas, or geothermal well located outside theof contract is also an IDC. However, seetrade or business or held for sale, lease, or United States. However, you can elect to includeAmounts paid to contractor that must be capital-license. the costs in the adjusted basis of the well toized, later.
figure depletion or depreciation. If you do notCosts not included.Research and experi- You can also elect to deduct the cost ofmake this election, you can deduct the costsmental costs do not include expenses for any of drilling exploratory bore holes to determine theover the 10-year period beginning with the taxthe following activities. location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon year in which you paid or incurred them. Thesedeposits if the shaft is capable of conducting• Advertising or promotions. rules do not apply to a nonproductive well.hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It
• Consumer surveys. does not matter whether there is any intent to
produce hydrocarbons.• Efficiency surveys.
If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as aExploration Costs• Management studies. current business expense, you can elect to de-
duct them over the 60-month period beginning• Quality control testing. The costs of determining the existence, location,with the month they were paid or incurred.extent, or quality of any mineral deposit are• Research in connection with literary, his-
ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs leadtorical, or similar projects. Amounts paid to contractor that must be to the development of a mine. You recover thesecapitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor• The acquisition of another’s patent, model, costs through depletion as the mineral is re-must be capitalized if they are either:production, or process. moved from the ground. However, you can elect
to deduct domestic exploration costs paid or• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of
incurred before the beginning of the develop-When and how to elect.You make the elec- depreciable property, or
ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas,tion to deduct research and experimental costs• Amounts paid only out of production orand geothermal wells).by deducting them on your tax return for the yearproceeds from production if thesein which you first pay or incur research and How to make the election.You elect to de-amounts are depletable income to the re-experimental costs. If you do not make the elec- duct exploration costs by taking the deductioncipient.tion to deduct research and experimental costs on your income tax return, or on an amended
in the first year in which you pay or incur the income tax return, for the first tax year for which
How to make the election. You elect to de-costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred
duct IDCs as a current business expense byonly with approval from the IRS. during the tax year. Your return must adequately
taking the deduction on your income tax returndescribe and identify each property or mine, andResearch credit.If you pay or incur qualifiedfor the first tax year you have eligible costs. Noclearly state how much is being deducted forresearch expenses, you may be able to take theformal statement is required. If you file Scheduleeach one. The election applies to the tax yearresearch credit. For more information about theC (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Otheryou make this election and all later tax years.research credit, see the instructions to Formexpenses.”6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities. Partnerships. Each partner, not the part-For oil and gas wells, your election is bindingnership, elects whether to capitalize or to deductfor the year it is made and for all later years. Forthat partner’s share of exploration costs.geothermal wells, your election can be revoked
by the filing of an amended return on which youReduced corporate deductions for explora-
do not take the deduction. You can file thetion costs. A corporation (other than an S
amended return for the year up to the normalcorporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes-
time of expiration for filing a claim for credit ortic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re-
refund, generally, within 3 years after the datemaining 30% of costs and amortize them over
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 27

Page 28 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the 60-month period starting with the month the pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chapter• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- 10.) If you do not make this election, you musterty.ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-
mining exploration costs over a 10-year period. ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur• The acquisition of circulation through the
For more information on this method of amorti- them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-purchase of any part of the business of
zation, see Internal Revenue Code sectionment costs. another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
59(e). zine, or other periodical, including the
The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-
be added to its basis in the property to figure scribers.
cost depletion. However, the amount amortizedDevelopment Costs
is treated as additional depreciation and is sub- Other treatment of circulation costs.If youject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-You can deduct costs paid or incurred during thedo not want to deduct circulation costs as asition of the property. See Section 1250 tax year for developing a mine or any othercurrent business expense, you can elect one ofProperty under Depreciation Recapture in chap- natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)the following ways to recover these costs.ter 3 of Publication 544. located in the United States. These costs must
These rules also apply to the deduction ofbe paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or• Capitalize all circulation costs that are
development costs by corporations. See Devel- minerals in commercially marketable quantities.properly chargeable to a capital account.
opment Costs, later. Development costs include those incurred for• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearyou by a contractor. Also, development costsperiod beginning with the tax year theyRecapture of exploration expenses.When include depreciation on improvements used inwere paid or incurred.your mine reaches the producing stage, youthe development of ores or minerals. They domust recapture any exploration costs you not include costs for the acquisition or improve-elected to deduct. Use either of the followingment of depreciable property. How to make the election.You elect to capi-methods. talize circulation costs by attaching a statementInstead of deducting development costs in
the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treatto your return for the first tax year the electionMethod 1—Include the deducted costs in
them as deferred expenses and deduct themapplies. Your election is binding for the year it isgross income for the tax year the mine reaches
ratably as the units of produced ores or mineralsmade and for all later years, unless you get IRSthe producing stage. Your election must be
benefited by the expenses are sold. This elec-approval to revoke it.clearly indicated on the return. Increase your
tion applies each tax year to expenses paid oradjusted basis in the mine by the amount in-
incurred in that year. Once made, the election iscluded in income. Generally, you must elect
binding for the year and cannot be revoked forthis recapture method by the due date (includ-
any reason.ing extensions) of your return. However, if you Environmental Cleanup
timely filed your return for the year without
How to make the election. The election tomaking the election, you can still make the Costs
deduct development costs ratably as the ores orelection by filing an amended return within 6
minerals are sold must be made for each mineEnvironmental cleanup (remediation) costs aremonths of the due date of the return (excluding
or other natural deposit by a clear indication ongenerally capital expenditures. However, youextensions). Make the election on your
your return or by a statement filed with the IRSamended return and write “Filed pursuant to can elect to deduct these costs as a current
office where you file your return. Generally, yousection 301.9100-2” on the form where you are business expense if certain requirements (dis-
must make the election by the due date of theincluding the income. File the amended return cussed later) are met. This special tax treatment
return (including extensions). However, if youat the same address you filed the original re- is generally available for qualified environmental
timely filed your return for the year without mak-turn. cleanup costs you pay or incur before January 1,
ing the election, you can still make the election2006. However, the expensing period is ex-Method 2—Do not claim any depletion deduc-by filing an amended return within 6 months oftended to December 31, 2007 for qualified envi-tion for the tax year the mine reaches the pro-the due date of the return (excluding exten-ronmental cleanup costs paid or incurred afterducing stage and any later tax years until thesions). Clearly indicate the election on yourAugust 27, 2005, in the Gulf Opportunity (GO)depletion you would have deducted equals theamended return and write “Filed pursuant toZone. See Publication 4492, Information forexploration costs you deducted. section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return atTaxpayers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina, Rita,
the same address you filed the original return.and Wilma, for more information on the GOYou also must recapture deducted explora- Zone.tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty fromForeign development costs. The rules dis-mine property before it reaches the producingcussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applyQualified environmental cleanup costs.stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction forto foreign development costs. Qualified environmental cleanup costs are gen-the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty and
erally costs you pay or incur to abate or controlany later tax years, until the depletion you wouldReduced corporate deductions for develop-hazardous substances at a qualified contami-have deducted equals the exploration costs youment costs. The rules discussed earlier fornated site.deducted. reduced corporate deductions for explorationGenerally, if you dispose of the mine before Hazardous substance. Hazardous sub-costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-you have fully recaptured the exploration costs stances are defined in section 101(14) of thevelopment costs.you deducted, recapture the balance by treating Comprehensive Environmental Response,
all or part of your gain as ordinary income. Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and
Under these circumstances, you generally certain substances are designated as hazard-
treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it is ous in section 102 of the Act. Substances areCirculation Costsless than your adjusted exploration costs with not hazardous if a removal or remedial action is
respect to the mine. If your gain is more than prohibited under sections 104 and 104(a)(3) ofA publisher can deduct as a current businessyour adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi- the Act. After August 27, 2005, petroleum prod-expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,nary income only a part of your gain, up to the ucts, within the GO Zone, are treated as hazard-or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,amount of your adjusted exploration costs. ous substances.magazine, or other periodical. For example, a
publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extraForeign exploration costs.If you pay or incur Qualified contaminated site.A qualified
employees for a limited time to get new sub-exploration costs for a mine or other natural contaminated site is any area that meets both of
scriptions through telephone calls. Circulationdeposit located outside the United States, you the following requirements.
costs are deductible even if they normally wouldcannot deduct all the costs in the current year.
be capitalized. 1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,You can elect to include the costs (other than for
for the production of income, or as inven-an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjusted This rule does not apply to the following
tory.basis of the mineral property to figure cost de- costs that must be capitalized.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 29 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. There has been a release, threat of re- section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return at
lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub- the same address you filed the original return.Business Start-Up and
stance at or on the site. The election applies when computing taxable
income for the current tax year and all subse-Organizational CostsYou must get a statement from the designated quent years.state environmental agency that the site meets For additional information on reforestationBusiness start-up and organizational costs arerequirement (2). costs, see chapter 9.generally capital expenditures. However, youA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of businessRecapture. This deduction may have to bethe national priorities list under sectionstart-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paidrecaptured as ordinary income under section105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,0001245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of themental Response, Compensation, and Liabilitydeduction is reduced by the amount your totalproperty that would have received an addition toAct of 1980. To find out if a site is on the nationalstart-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000.basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-priorities list, contact the U.S. EnvironmentalAny remaining costs must be amortized. Forditure. For more information on recapturing theProtection Agency. information about amortizing start-up and orga-deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationExpenditures for depreciable property. nizational costs, see chapter 9. under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub-You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-Start-up costs include any amounts paid orlication 544.ciable property used in connection with theincurred in connection with creating an active
abatement or control of hazardous substancestrade or business or investigating the creation or
at a qualified contaminated site. However, theacquisition of an active trade or business. Orga-
part of the depreciation for such property that isnizational costs include the costs of creating aRetired Asset Removalotherwise allocated to the qualified contami-corporation. For more information on start-up
nated site shall be treated as a qualified environ-and organizational costs, see chapter 9. Costsmental cleanup cost.
How to make the election. You elect to de-If you retire and remove a depreciable asset induct the start-up or organizational costs byWhen and how to elect.You elect to deduct connection with the installation or production ofclaiming the deduction on the income tax returnenvironmental cleanup costs by taking the de- a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs(filed by the due date including extensions) forduction on the income tax return (filed by the due of removing the retired asset. However, if youthe tax year in which the active trade or businessdate including extensions) for the tax year in replace a component (part) of a depreciablebegins. However, if you timely filed your returnwhich the costs are paid or incurred. The costs asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-for the year without making the election, you canare deducted differently depending on the type placement is an improvement and deduct thestill make the election by filing an amendedof business entity involved. costs if the replacement is a repair.return within 6 months of the due date of the
Individuals. Deduct the environmental return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate
cleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line ofthe election on your amended return and write
Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the schedule“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File the
requires you to separately identify each expense Barrier Removal Costsamended return at the same address you filed
included in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198the original return. The election applies when
The cost of an improvement to a business assetElection” on the line next to the environmentalcomputing taxable income for the current tax
is normally a capital expense. However, you cancleanup costs. year and all subsequent years.
elect to deduct the costs of making a facility orAll other entities.All other taxpayers (in- public transportation vehicle more accessible tocluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts) and usable by those who are disabled or elderly.deduct the environmental cleanup costs on the You must own or lease the facility or vehicle forReforestation Costs“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed- use in connection with your trade or business.eral income tax return. On a schedule attached A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-Reforestation costs are generally capital expen-to the return that separately identifies each ex- tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, orditures. However, you can elect to deduct up topense included in “Other Deductions” write similar real or personal property. A public trans-$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0“Section 198 Election” on the line next to the portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus orfor a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paidamount for environmental cleanup costs. railroad car, that provides transportation serviceor incurred after October 22, 2004, for eachMore than one environmental cleanup to the public (including service for your custom-qualified timber property. This limit is increasedcost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur more ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-for small timber producers with qualified timberthan one environmental cleanup cost, you can ing transportation services).property located in certain areas affected byelect to deduct one or more of such expendi- You cannot deduct any costs that you paid orHurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. For moretures for that year. You can elect to deduct one incurred to completely renovate or build a facilityinformation, see Publication 4492. The remain-expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex- or public transportation vehicle or to replaceing costs can be amortized over an 84-monthpenditure (whether or not they are of the same depreciable property in the normal course ofperiod. For information about amortizing refor-type or paid or incurred with respect to the same business.estation costs see chapter 9.qualified contaminated site). An election to de- Qualifying reforestation costs are the directDeduction limit.The most you can deduct asduct an expenditure for one year has no effectcosts of planting or seeding for forestation ora cost of removing barriers to the disabled andon other years. You must make a separate elec-reforestation. Qualified timber property is prop-the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,tion for each year in which you intend to deducterty that contains trees in significant commercialyou can add any costs over this limit to the basisqualified environmental cleanup costs. quantities. See chapter 9 for more informationof the property and depreciate these excess
on qualifying reforestation costs and qualifiedcosts.Recapture. This deduction may have to be timber property.
recaptured as ordinary income under section Partners and partnerships. The $15,000
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of theHow to make the election.You elect to de- limit applies to a partnership and also to each
property that would have received an addition toduct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming partner in the partnership. A partner can allocate
basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-the deduction on your timely filed income tax the $15,000 limit in any manner among the
diture. For more information on recapturing thereturn (including extensions) for the tax year the partner’s individually incurred costs and the
deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationexpenses were paid or incurred. However, if you partner’s distributive share of partnership costs.
under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub- timely filed your return for the year without mak- If the partner cannot deduct the entire share of
lication 544. ing the election, you can still make the election partnership costs, the partnership can add any
by filing an amended return within 6 months of costs not deducted to the basis of the improved
More information. For more information the due date of the return (excluding exten- property.
about the environmental cleanup cost deduc- sions). Clearly indicate the election on your A partnership must be able to show that any
tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198. amended return and write “Filed pursuant to amount added to basis was not deducted by the
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 29

Page 30 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
partner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000Other barrier removals.To be deductible, recapture. See Disposition of Section 197 In-
expenses of removing any barrier not coveredlimit (as determined by the partner). If the part- tangibles, later.
by the above standards must meet all three ofnership cannot show this, it is presumed that the
Geological and geophysical costs.You canthe following tests. partner was able to deduct the distributive share
amortize certain geological and geophysicalof the partnership’s costs in full.
1. The removed barrier must be a substantialcosts paid or incurred in tax years beginning
barrier to access or use of a facility orExample. John Duke’s distributive share of after August 8, 2005, ratably over a 24-month
public transportation vehicle by personsABC partnership’s deductible expenses for the period. See Geological and Geophysical Costs,who have a disability or are elderly.removal of architectural barriers was $14,000. later.
John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his sole2. The removed barrier must have been a
Certain atmospheric pollution control facili-proprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 ofbarrier for at least one major group of per-
ties. You can elect to amortize certain atmos-them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 ofsons who have a disability or are elderly
pheric pollution control facilities placed inthe $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex- (such as people who are blind, deaf, or
penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of his service after April 11, 2005, over an 84-monthwheelchair users).
own expenses to the basis of the property used period. See Pollution Control Facilities, later.3. The barrier must be removed without cre-in his business. Also, if ABC can show that Johnating any new barrier that significantly im-could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) ofpairs access to or use of the facility orhis share of the partnership’s expenses becausevehicle by a major group of persons whoof how John applied the limit, ABC can add have a disability or are elderly. Introduction$6,000 to the basis of its property.
Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
How to make the election. If you elect toing) certain capital costs over a fixed period ofQualification standards.You can deduct
deduct your costs for removing barriers to theyour costs as a current expense only if the bar- time. It is similar to the straight line method of
disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onrier removal meets the guidelines and require- depreciation.
your income tax return (partnership return forments issued by the Architectural and The various amortizable costs covered inpartnerships) for the tax year the expenses wereTransportation Barriers Compliance Board this chapter are included in the list below. How-paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as aunder the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) ever, this chapter does not discuss amortizationseparate item. The election applies to all theof 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa- of bond premium. For information on that topic,qualifying costs you have during the year, up tobilities Act at www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/pubs/ see chapter 3 of Publication 550.the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, youada.txt.
must maintain adequate records to support your The following is a list of some architectural Topicsdeduction.barrier removal costs that can be deducted.For your election to be valid, you generallyThis chapter discusses:
must file your return by its due date, including• Ground and floor surfaces.
extensions. However, if you timely filed your• Deducting amortization• Walks. return for the year without making the election,
• Amortizing costs of going into business• Parking lots. you can still make the election by filing an
amended return within 6 months of the due date• Amortizing costs of getting a lease• Ramps. of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-
• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles• Entrances. cate the election on your amended return and
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.” File• Amortizing reforestation costs• Doors and doorways. the amended return at the same address you
• Amortizing costs of geological and geo-• Stairs. filed the original return. Your election is irrevoca-
physical costsble after the due date, including extensions, of• Floors. your return. • Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-• Toilet rooms. tiesDisabled access credit.If you make your• Water fountains. • Amortizing costs of research and experi-business accessible to persons with disabilities
mentation• Telephones. and your business is an eligible small business,
you may be able to claim the disabled access• Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences• Elevators. credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must
• Controls. reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by
Useful Itemsthe amount of the credit.• Signage. For more information about the disabled ac-You may want to see:• Alarms. cess credit, see Form 8826.
Publication• Protruding objects.
• Symbols of accessibility. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
AssetsYou can find the ADA guidelines and require-
ments for architectural barrier removal at ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html. 9. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
The following is a list of some deductible
transportation barrier removal costs. Form (and Instructions)
• Rail facilities. Amortization ❏ 3468 Investment Credit
• Buses. ❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization
• Rapid and light rail vehicles. ❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum Tax —What’s New CorporationsYou can find the guidelines and requirements for
transportation barrier removal at ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Disposition of multiple section 197www.fta.dot.gov/ Individualsintangibles.Multiple section 197 intangibles14534_5608_ENG_HTML.htm. disposed of after August 8, 2005, in a single
See chapter 14 for information about getting Also, you can access the ADA website at transaction or a series of related transactions,
are treated as a single asset for purposes ofwww.ada.gov for additional information. publications and forms.
Page 30 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 31 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
trade or business (in the same field as the• It is chargeable to a capital account.
one you entered into).How To Deduct • It could be amortized over the life of the
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day corporation if the corporation had a fixed
Amortization your active trade or business begins. life.
• It is incurred before the end of the first taxYou deduct amortization that begins during theStart-up costs include costs for the followingyear in which the corporation is in busi-current year by completing Part VI of Form 4562items. ness. A corporation using the cashand attaching it to your current year’s return.
• An analysis or survey of potential markets,method of accounting can amortize orga-For a later year, do not report your deductionproducts, labor supply, transportation facil-nizational costs incurred within the first taxfor amortization on Form 4562 unless you beginities, etc. year, even if it does not pay them in thatto amortize a different amortizable item in that year.year. In that case, list on the Form 4562 not only• Advertisements for the opening of the
the item you are beginning to amortize in thebusiness. The following are examples of organizationallater year, but any items you had previously• Salaries and wages for employees who costs.begun to amortize and are still amortizing. Forare being trained and their instructors.example, you began amortizing one lease in • The cost of temporary directors.
2004, and a second lease in 2005. You would• Travel and other necessary costs for se-• The cost of organizational meetings.show the second lease on line 42 of the 2005curing prospective distributors, suppliers,
Form 4562, and the first on line 43. or customers. • State incorporation fees.
If you do not have to report amortization on• Salaries and fees for executives and con-• The cost of accounting services for settingForm 4562 for years after the year the amortiza-sultants, or for similar professional serv-up the corporation.tion begins, deduct amortization directly on theices. • The cost of legal services (such as draft-“Other expenses” line of Schedule C or F (Form
ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the origi-1040) or the “Other deductions” line of Form
Nonqualifying costs.Start-up costs do not nal stock certificates, and minutes of1065, 1120, 1120-A, or 1120-S. However, if you
include deductible interest, taxes, or researchorganizational meetings).are amortizing reforestation costs, see Where to
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-report under Reforestation Costs, later.
perimental Costs, later. Nonqualifying costs.The following costs are
Purchasing an active trade or business. not organizational costs. They are capital ex-
Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-penses that you cannot amortize.
Going Into Business tive trade or business include only investigative• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-costs incurred in the course of a general searchcurities, such as commissions, profes-When you go into business, treat all costs youfor or preliminary investigation of the business.sional fees, and printing costs.incur to get your business started as capitalThese are the costs that help you decide
expenses. Capital expenses are part of yourwhether to purchase a new business and which• Costs associated with the transfer of as-
basis in the business. Generally, you recoveractive business to purchase. Costs you incur insets to the corporation.
costs for particular assets through depreciationan attempt to purchase a specific business are
deductions. You generally cannot recover othercapital expenses that you cannot amortize.
Costs of Organizingcosts until you sell the business or otherwise go
out of business. Example. In June, you hired an accountinga Partnership
firm and a law firm to assist you in the potentialHowever, you can elect to amortize certain
The costs of organizing a partnership are thepurchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ’s indus-costs for setting up and organizing your busi-
direct costs of creating the partnership.try and analyzed the financial projections ofness. For costs paid or incurred before October
XYZ. In September, the law firm prepared and23, 2004, you can elect an amortization period of
Qualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-submitted a letter of intent to XYZ. The letter60 months or more. For costs paid or incurred
nizational cost only if it meets all the followingstated that a binding commitment would resultafter October 22, 2004, you can elect to deduct a
tests.only after a purchase agreement was signed.limited amount of start-up and organizational
The law firm and accounting firm continued tocosts (see chapter 8). The costs that are not • It is for the creation of the partnership andprovide services including a review of XYZ’sdeducted currently can be amortized ratably not for starting or operating the partner-books and records and the preparation of aover a 180-month period. The amortization pe- ship trade or business.purchase agreement. In October, you signed ariod starts with the month your active trade or
• It is chargeable to a capital account.purchase agreement with XYZ.business begins.
The costs to investigate the business beforeThe cost must qualify as one of the following. • It could be amortized over the life of thesubmitting the letter of intent to XYZ are amortiz-partnership if the partnership had a fixed• A business start-up cost. able investigative costs. The costs for serviceslife.after that time relate to the attempt to purchase• An organizational cost for a corporation. • It is incurred by the due date of the part-the business and must be capitalized.
• An organizational cost for a partnership. nership return (excluding extensions) forDisposition of business.If you completely the first tax year in which the partnershipdispose of your business before the end of theis in business. However, if the partnershipamortization period, you can deduct any remain-Business Start-Up Costs uses the cash method of accounting anding deferred start-up costs. However, you canpays the cost after the end of its first taxStart-up costs are costs for creating an activededuct these deferred start-up costs only to theyear, see Cash method partnership undertrade or business or investigating the creation orextent they qualify as a loss from a business.How To Amortize, later.acquisition of an active trade or business.
• It is for a type of item normally expected toStart-up costs include any amounts paid or in-Costs of Organizing benefit the partnership throughout its en-curred in connection with any activity engaged ina Corporation tire life.for profit and for the production of income in
anticipation of the activity becoming an activeThe costs of organizing a corporation are theOrganizational costs include the followingtrade or business. direct costs of creating the corporation.fees.
Qualifying costs.A start-up cost is amortiz-Qualifying costs.You can amortize an orga- • Legal fees for services incident to the or-able if it meets both the following tests.nizational cost only if it meets all the followingganization of the partnership, such as ne-tests.• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or gotiation and preparation of the
incurred it to operate an existing active• It is for the creation of the corporation. partnership agreement.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Accounting fees for services incident to sions). For more information, see the instruc- costs with the dates the first and last costs were
tions for Part VI of Form 4562. incurred.the organization of the partnership.
Once you make the election to amortize After a partnership makes the election to• Filing fees. start-up or organizational costs, you cannot re-amortize organizational costs, it can later file an
voke it. amended return to include additional organiza-
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs tional costs not included in the partnership’sIf your business is organized as a corpora-
cannot be amortized. original return and statement.tion or partnership, only your corporation or part-
nership can elect to amortize its start-up or• The cost of acquiring assets for the part-organizational costs. A shareholder or partnernership or transferring assets to the part-cannot make this election. You, as shareholdernership. or partner, cannot amortize any costs you incurGetting a Lease
in setting up your corporation or partnership.• The cost of admitting or removing part-
The corporation or partnership can amortizeners, other than at the time the partnership If you get a lease for business property, you
these costs.is first organized. recover the cost by amortizing it over the term of
However, you, as an individual, can elect tothe lease. The term of the lease for amortization• The cost of making a contract concerningamortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-purposes generally includes all renewal optionsthe operation of the partnership trade orest in an existing partnership. These costs qual-(and any other period for which you and thebusiness (including a contract between aify as business start-up costs if you acquire thelessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-partner and the partnership). partnership interest. newed). However, renewal periods are not in-
• The costs for issuing and marketing inter- cluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting the
Start-up costs election statement.If youests in the partnership (such as broker- lease is for the term of the lease remaining on
elect to amortize your start-up costs, attach aage, registration, and legal fees and the acquisition date (not including any period for
separate statement that contains the followingprinting costs). These “syndication fees” which you may choose to renew, extend, or
information.are capital expenses that cannot be de- continue the lease).
preciated or amortized. Enter your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562• A description of the business to which the
if you are deducting amortization that beginsstart-up costs relate.
during the current year, or on the appropriateLiquidation of partnership.If a partnership is• A description of each start-up cost in-line of your tax return if you are not otherwiseliquidated before the end of the amortizationcurred. required to file Form 4562.period, the unamortized amount of qualifying For more information on the costs of getting• The month your active business began (ororganizational costs can be deducted in the a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease inwas acquired).partnership’s final tax year. However, these chapter 4.costs can be deducted only to the extent they• The number of months in your amortiza-qualify as a loss from a business. tion period.
How To Amortize Filing the statement early.You can elect Section 197 Intangiblesto amortize your start-up costs by filing the state-
You deduct start-up and organizational costs inment with a return for any tax year before theYou must generally amortize over 15 years theequal amounts over the applicable amortizationyear your active business begins. If you file thecapitalized costs of “section 197 intangibles” youperiod (discussed earlier). You can choose anstatement early, the election becomes effectiveacquired after August 10, 1993. You must amor-amortization period for start-up costs that is dif-in the month of the tax year your active businesstize these costs if you hold the section 197ferent from the period you choose for organiza-begins. intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-tional costs, as long as both are not less than the
ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-Revised statement. You can file a revisedapplicable amortization period. Once you
tion of income.statement to include any start-up costs not in-choose an amortization period, you cannot
cluded in your original statement. However, youchange it. You may not be able to amortize sec-cannot include on the revised statement anyTo figure your deduction, divide your total tion 197 intangibles acquired in acost you previously treated on your return as astart-up or organizational costs by the months in transaction that did not result in a sig-CAUTION
!
cost other than a start-up cost. You can file thethe amortization period. The result is the amount nificant change in ownership or use. Seerevised statement with a return filed after theyou can deduct for each month. Anti-Churning Rules, later.return on which you elected to amortize yourYour amortization deduction each year is thestart-up costs.Cash method partnership.A partnership us- applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basis
ing the cash method of accounting cannot de- (for purposes of determining gain), figured byOrganizational costs election statement.Ifduct an organizational cost it has not paid by the amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).you elect to amortize your corporation’s orend of the tax year. However, any cost the part- The 15-year period begins with the later of:partnership’s organizational costs, attach a sep-nership could have deducted as an organiza-arate statement that contains the following infor-• The month the intangible is acquired, ortional cost in an earlier tax year (if it had beenmation.paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of • The month the trade or business or activity
• A description of each cost.payment. engaged in for the production of income
begins.• The amount of each cost.
You cannot deduct amortization for the month• The date each cost was incurred.How To Make the Election you dispose of the intangible.
• The month your corporation or partnershipTo elect to amortize start-up or organizational If you pay or incur an amount that increasesbegan active business (or acquired thecosts, you must complete and attach Form 4562 the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-business).and an accompanying statement (explained ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize it
later) to your return for the first tax year you are• The number of months in your amortiza-over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-
in business. If you have both start-up and orga-tion period. ning with the month the basis increase occurs.
nizational costs, attach a separate statement to You are not allowed any other depreciationyour return for each type of cost. Partnerships. The statement prepared foror amortization deduction for an amortizable
a cash basis partnership must also indicate theGenerally, you must file the return by the due section 197 intangible.
amount paid before the end of the year for eachdate (including any extensions). However, if you
cost.timely filed your return for the year without mak- Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease.
ing the election, you can still make the electionYou do not need to separately list any part- The amortization period for any section 197 in-
by filing an amended return within 6 months ofnership organizational cost that is less than $10. tangible leased under a lease agreement en-
the due date of the return (excluding exten-Instead, you can list the total amount of these tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exempt
Page 32 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 33 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
organization, governmental unit, or foreign per- which the business would not otherwise be capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing
son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not available or operational. or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-
be less than 125 percent of the lease term. See lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-Workforce in place, etc.This includes thesection 197(f)(10) of the Internal Revenue Code. ing license.composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-
Cost attributable to other property.The perience, education, or training). It also includesCovenant not to compete. Section 197 in-rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply tothe terms and conditions of employment, tangibles include a covenant not to compete (orany amount that is included in determining thewhether contractual or otherwise, and any othersimilar arrangement) entered into in connectioncost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-value placed on employees or any of their attrib-with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orble. For example, if the cost of computerutes. business, or a substantial portion of a trade orsoftware is not separately stated from the cost ofFor example, you must amortize the part ofbusiness. An interest in a trade or businesshardware or other tangible property and youthe purchase price of a business that is for theincludes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-consistently treat it as part of the cost of theexistence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, youration engaged in a trade or business.hardware or other tangible property, these rulesmust amortize the cost of acquiring an existingAn arrangement that requires the formerdo not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-employment contract or relationship with em-owner to perform services (or to provide prop-quiring real property held for the production ofployees or consultants. erty or the use of property) is not similar to arental income is considered the cost of goodwill,Business books and records, etc.This in- covenant not to compete to the extent thegoing concern value, or any other section 197cludes the intangible value of technical manuals,amount paid under the arrangement representsintangible. training manuals or programs, data files, andreasonable compensation for those services or
accounting or inventory control systems. It alsofor that property or its use.Section 197 includes the cost of customer lists, subscription
Intangibles Defined lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,Franchise, trademark, or trade name. A
and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, andfranchise, trademark, or trade name is a section
The following assets are section 197 in- television advertisers. 197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase
tangibles. or renewal costs, other than certain contingentPatents, copyrights, etc.This includes pack-payments that you can deduct currently. For1. Goodwill. age design, computer software, and any interestinformation on currently deductible contingentin a film, sound recording, videotape, book, or2. Going concern value. payments, see chapter 13.other similar property, except as discussed later
3. Workforce in place. under Assets That Are Not Section 197 In- Professional sports franchise. A
tangibles. franchise engaged in professional sports and4. Business books and records, operating any intangible assets acquired in connectionsystems, or any other information base,Customer-based intangible.This is the com-with acquiring the franchise (including playerincluding lists or other information concern-position of market, market share, and any othercontracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz-ing current or prospective customers.value resulting from the future provision ofable over a 15-year period.goods or services because of relationships with5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-customers in the ordinary course of business.Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, asign, pattern, know-how, format, or similarFor example, you must amortize the part of thesection 197 intangible. Section 197 in-item. purchase price of a business that is for thetangibles include any right under a license, con-6. A customer-based intangible. existence of the following intangibles. tract, or other arrangement providing for the use
7. A supplier-based intangible. of any section 197 intangible. It also includes• A customer base.
any term interest in any section 197 intangible,8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7).• A circulation base. whether the interest is outright or in trust.
9. A license, permit, or other right granted by• An undeveloped market or market growth.
a governmental unit or agency (including Assets That Are Not• Insurance in force.issuances and renewals). Section 197 Intangibles• A mortgage servicing contract.10. A covenant not to compete entered into in
The following assets are not section 197 in-connection with the acquisition of an inter-• An investment management contract.
tangibles.est in a trade or business. • Any other relationship with customers in-
11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name.volving the future provision of goods or1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership,
services. trust, or estate.12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest
in, any item in this list. 2. Any interest under an existing futures con-Accounts receivable or other similar rights totract, foreign currency contract, notionalincome for goods or services provided to cus-You cannot amortize any of the in- principal contract, interest rate swap, ortomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-tangibles listed in items (1) through similar financial contract.ness are not section 197 intangibles.(8) that you created rather than ac-CAUTION
!
3. Any interest in land.quired unless you created them in acquiringSupplier-based intangible.This is the value
assets that make up a trade or business or aresulting from the future acquisition of goods or4. Most computer software. (See Computer
substantial part of a trade or business. services used or sold by the business becausesoftware, later.)
of business relationships with suppliers.Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- 5. Any of the following assets not acquired inFor example, you must amortize the part ofness based on expected continued customer connection with the acquisition of a tradethe purchase price of a business that is for thepatronage due to its name, reputation, or any or business or a substantial part of a tradeexistence of the following intangibles.other factor. or business.
• A favorable relationship with distributorsGoing concern value. This is the additional a. An interest in a film, sound recording,(such as favorable shelf or display spacevalue of a trade or business that attaches to video tape, book, or similar property.at a retail outlet).property because the property is an integral part
b. A right to receive tangible property orof an ongoing business activity. It includes value• A favorable credit rating.
services under a contract or from a gov-based on the ability of a business to continue to• A favorable supply contract. ernmental agency.function and generate income even though
there is a change in ownership (but does not c. An interest in a patent or copyright.include any other section 197 intangible). It alsoGovernment-granted license, permit, etc.
d. Certain rights that have a fixed durationincludes value based on the immediate use or This is any right granted by a governmental unit
or amount. (See Rights of fixed durationavailability of an acquired trade or business, or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-
or amount, later.)such as the use of earnings during any period in tal unit. For example, you must amortize the
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

Page 34 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. An interest under either of the following.• Going concern value. • You acquired the intangible from a dece-
• A covenant not to compete. dent and its basis was stepped up to itsa. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-
fair market value.ble property. • A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-b. A debt that was in existence when the• A customer-related information base, tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-interest was acquired. customer-based intangible, or similar item.feror you acquired it from. This exception
does not apply if the transaction in which7. A right to service residential mortgages un-
you acquired the intangible and the trans-less the right is acquired in connection withSafe Harbor for Creative
action in which the seller or transferor ac-the acquisition of a trade or business or aProperty Costs quired it are part of a series of relatedsubstantial part of a trade or business.
transactions.If you are engaged in the trade or business of8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par-
film production, you may be able to amortize the• The gain-recognition exception, discussedties to a corporate organization or reorgan-
creative property costs for properties not set forlater, applies.ization in which any part of a gain or loss is
production within 3 years of the first capitalizednot recognized.
transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-Related person. For purposes of theIntangible property that is not amortizablebly over a 15-year period beginning on the firstanti-churning rules, the following are related per-under the rules for section 197 intangibles canday of the second half of the tax year in whichsons.be depreciated if it meets certain requirements.you properly write off the costs for financial ac-You generally must use the straight line method • An individual and his or her brothers, sis-counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period,over its useful life. For certain intangibles, the ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,you dispose of the creative property rights, youdepreciation period is specified in the law and ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),must continue to amortize the costs over theregulations. For example, the depreciation pe- and lineal descendants (children, grand-remainder of the 15-year period.riod for computer software that is not a section children, etc.).Creative property costs include costs paid or197 intangible is generally 36 months.
• A corporation and an individual who owns,incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,For more information on depreciating intan-
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of thescripts, story outlines, motion picture productiongible property, see Intangible Property under
value of the corporation’s outstandingrights to books and plays, and other similarCan You Use MACRS To Depreciate Your Prop-
stock.properties for purposes of potential future filmerty in chapter 1 of Publication 946.
development, production, and exploitation. • Two corporations that are members of theComputer software. Section 197 intangibles Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-same controlled group as defined in sec-do not include the following types of computerenue Procedure 2004-36. For more information,tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenuesoftware. see Revenue Procedure 2004-36 on page 1063 Code, except that “more than 20%” is sub-
stituted for “at least 80%” in that definitionof Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-24, available1. Software that meets all the following re-
and the determination is made without re-at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-24.pdf.quirements.
gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) ofA change in the treatment of creativea. It is, or has been, readily available for section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-property costs is a change in methodpurchase by the general public. tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)of accounting.CAUTION
!
b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license. • A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more
than 20% of the value of the corporation’sc. It has not been substantially modified.Anti-Churning Rules outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-This requirement is considered met if directly, by or for the trust or grantor of thethe cost of all modifications is not more Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizingtrust.than the greater of 25% of the price ofmost section 197 intangibles if the transaction in
the publicly available unmodified which you acquired them did not result in a• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-
software or $2,000. significant change in ownership or use. Theseary and beneficiary, of any trust.
rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and2. Software that is not acquired in connectionand to any other section 197 intangible that isthe fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-with the acquisition of a trade or businessnot otherwise depreciable or amortizable. ferent trusts, if the same person is theor a substantial part of a trade or business.Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot grantor of both trusts.
use 15-year amortization for the intangible if anyComputer software defined. Computer • The executor and beneficiary of an estate.of the following conditions apply.software includes all programs designed to • A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-cause a computer to perform a desired function.1. You or a related person (defined later) heldganization and a person who directly orIt also includes any database or similar item thator used the intangible at any time from Julyindirectly controls the organization (oris in the public domain and is incidental to the25, 1991, through August 10, 1993. whose family members control it).operation of qualifying software.
2. You acquired the intangible from a person• A corporation and a partnership if theRights of fixed duration or amount.Section who held it at any time during the period insame persons own more than 20% of the197 intangibles do not include any right under a(1) and, as part of the transaction, the uservalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-contract or from a governmental agency if thedid not change. poration and more than 20% of the capitalright is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade or profits interest in the partnership.3. You granted the right to use the intangibleor business (or in an activity engaged in for the
• Two S corporations, and an S corporationproduction of income) but not as part of a to a person (or a person related to that
and a regular corporation, if the same per-purchase of a trade or business and either: person) who held or used it at any time
sons own more than 20% of the value ofduring the period in (1). This applies only if• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or the outstanding stock of each corporation.the transaction in which you granted the
• Is of a fixed amount that, except for theright and the transaction in which you ac-• Two partnerships if the same personsrules for section 197 intangibles, would bequired the intangible are part of a series ofown, directly or indirectly, more than 20%recovered under a method similar to the related transactions. See Related person, of the capital or profits interests in bothunit-of-production method of cost recov-later, for information about the kinds ofpartnerships.ery. persons that are related.
• A partnership and a person who owns,However, this does not apply to the following directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theintangibles. Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do not capital or profits interests in the partner-
apply in the following situations.• Goodwill. ship.
Page 34 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 35 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Two persons who are engaged in tradesAnti-abuse rule.You cannot amortize any Changes in amortization that are not a change
in method of accounting include the following.or businesses under common control (assection 197 intangible acquired in a transaction
described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internalfor which the principal purpose was either of the• A change in computing amortization in theRevenue Code). following. tax year in which your use of the asset
changes.• To avoid the requirement that the intangi-When to determine relationship.Persons
ble be acquired after August 10, 1993. • An adjustment in the useful life of an am-are treated as related if the relationship existed
ortizable asset.at the following time. • To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
• Generally, the making of a late amortiza-• In the case of a single transaction, imme-
tion election or the revocation of a timelyMore information. For more informationdiately before or immediately after the
valid amortization election.about the anti-churning rules, including addi-transaction in which the intangible was ac-
tional rules for partnerships, see sectionquired. • Any change in the placed-in-service date
1.197-2(h) of the regulations. of an amortizable asset.• In the case of a series of related transac-
tions (or a series of transactions that com- See section 1.446-1T(e)(2)(d)(ii) of the Regu-Incorrect Amount ofprise a qualified stock purchase under lations for more information and examples.Amortization Deductedsection 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code), immediately before the earliest Automatic approval.In some instances, youIf you did not deduct the correct amortization fortransaction or immediately after the last may be able to get automatic approval from thea section 197 intangible in any year, you may betransaction. IRS to change your method of accounting forable to make a correction for that year by filingamortization. For a list of automatic accountingan amended return. See Amended Return, next.Ownership of stock. In determining method changes, see the Instructions for FormIf you are not allowed to make the correction onwhether an individual directly or indirectly owns 3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115an amended return, you can change your ac-any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the for more information on getting approval, auto-
counting method to claim the correct amortiza-following rules apply. matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-
tion. See Changing Your Accounting Method,tions to the automatic approval process.Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned bylater. In addition, Revenue Procedure 2006-12 onor for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust page 310 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-3,is considered owned proportionately by or for its available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.Amended Return irb06-03.pdf, contain additional guidance.
Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownIf you did not deduct the correct amortization,the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his Disposition ofyou can file an amended return to correct theor her family. Family includes only brothers andfollowing. Section 197 Intangiblessisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse,
ancestors, and lineal descendants. • A mathematical error made in any year.A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-
ble property used in your trade or business. IfRule 3. An individual owning (other than by• A posting error made in any year. you held the intangible for more than 1 year, anyapplying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is• An amortization deduction for a sectiongain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-considered to own the stock directly or indirectly197 intangible for which you have notable amortization, is ordinary income (sectionowned by or for his or her partner. adopted a method of accounting. 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangibles
Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2, are disposed of in a single transaction or a
or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per- series of related transactions, treat all of theWhen to file.If an amended return is allowed,son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that section 197 intangibles as if they were a singleyou must file it by the later of the following dates.person. Do not treat stock constructively owned asset for purposes of determining the amount of
by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining
the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to makenal return for the year in which you did notgain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. If
another person the constructive owner of the you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gaindeduct the correct amount. (A return filed
stock. or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain orearly is considered filed on the due date.)
loss. For more information on ordinary or capital• 2 years from the time you paid your tax forgain or loss on business property, see chapter 3Gain-recognition exception.This exception that year. in Publication 544.to the anti-churning rules applies if the person
you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) Nondeductible loss.You cannot deduct anyChanging Yourmeets both of the following requirements. loss on the disposition or worthlessness of aAccounting Method section 197 intangible that you acquired in the• That person would not be related to you
same transaction (or series of related transac-(as described under Related person, ear- Generally, you must get IRS approval to changetions) as other section 197 intangibles you stilllier) if the 20% test for ownership of stockyour method of accounting. File Form 3115,have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis ofand partnership interests were replaced byApplication for Change in Accounting Method, toeach remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-a 50% test. request a change to a permissible method ofble by a proportionate part of the nondeductibleaccounting for amortization.• That person chose to recognize gain on loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-The following are examples of a change inthe disposition of the intangible and pay deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-method of accounting for amortization.income tax on the gain at the highest tax ble by the following fraction.
rate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for• A change in the amortization method, pe-• The numerator is the adjusted basis ofinformation on making this choice. riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-each remaining intangible on the date of
tizable asset. the disposition.If this exception applies, the anti-churning
• A change in the accounting for amortiz-rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-
able assets from a single asset account tobasis in the intangible that is more than the gain ses of all remaining amortizable section
a multiple asset account (pooling), or vicerecognized by the transferor. 197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-
versa. tion.Notification.If the person you acquired the
intangible from chooses to recognize gain under• A change in the accounting for amortiz-
the rules for this exception, that person mustable assets from one type of multiple as-Covenant not to compete.A covenant not to
notify you in writing by the due date of the returnset account to a different type of multiplecompete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-
on which the choice is made. asset account. ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Page 36 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pose of your entire interest in the trade or Generally, you must make the election on a• Site preparation.business for which you entered into the cove- timely filed return (including extensions) for the
• Seeds or seedlings.nant. tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year• Labor.Nonrecognition transfers.If you acquire a without making the election, you can still makesection 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-• Tools. the election by filing an amended return within 6fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect
• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-months of the due date of the return (excludingto the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi-
ing and seeding. extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad-
justed basis. You amortize this part of the ment to the amended return and write “Filed
Qualifying costs do not include costs for whichadjusted basis over the intangible’s remaining pursuant to section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562.the government reimburses you under aamortization period in the hands of the trans- File the amended return at the same addresscost-sharing program, unless you include theferor. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers you filed the original return.reimbursement in your income.to a corporation, partnership contributions and
distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-Qualified timber property.Qualified timberWhere to report.The following chart showstary conversions. property is property that contains trees in signifi-where to report your amortization deduction forIn a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotqualifying reforestation costs after you enter itversion of a section 197 intangible, you mustor other site that you own or lease. The propertycontinue to amortize the part of your adjusted on Form 4562.qualifies only if it meets all the following require-basis in the acquired intangible that is not more If you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .ments.than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or
converted intangible over the remaining amorti-• It is located in the United States. Schedule C
zation period of the exchanged or converted (Form 1040) Line 27• It is held for the growing and cutting ofintangible. Amortize over a new 15-year periodtimber you will either use in, or sell for useSchedule Fthe part of your adjusted basis in the acquiredin, the commercial production of timber(Form 1040) Line 34intangible that is more than your adjusted basisproducts.in the exchanged or converted intangible. Form 1120 Line 26
• It consists of at least one acre planted withForm 1120-A Line 22Example. You own a section 197 intangible tree seedlings in the manner normally
you have amortized for 4 full years. It has aused in forestation or reforestation.Form 1120S Schedules K and K-1
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
Form 1065 Schedules K and K-1exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kindQualified timber property does not include
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-property on which you have planted shelter beltsNone of the Line 36 of Form 1040visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.above (identify as “RFST”)tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the
Amortization period.The 84-month amorti-acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining
zation period starts on the first day of the firstYou cannot report your amortization deductionin the original 15-year amortization period for the
month of the second half of the tax year youon Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).transferred asset. You amortize the other
incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year Partner or shareholder.If you are a part-payer), regardless of the month you actuallyperiod. ner in a partnership or a shareholder in an Sincur the costs. You can claim amortization de-
corporation, see the instructions for Scheduleductions for no more than 6 months of the first
K-1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for informationand last (eighth) tax years of the period.
on where to report any allocated amortization forReforestation Costs Life tenant and remainderman.If one per- qualifying reforestation costs.
son holds the property for life with the remainderYou can elect to deduct a limited amount of Estate. If the estate does not file Schedulegoing to another person, the life tenant is entitledreforestation costs paid or incurred during the C or F for the activity in which the qualifyingto the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-tax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 8. reforestation costs were incurred, include thetion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-You can elect to amortize the qualifying costsmainder interest in the property is ignored foramortization deduction on line 15a of Formthat are not deducted currently over an amortization purposes. 1041.84-month period. There is no limit on the amount
of your amortization deduction for reforestationRecapture. If you dispose of qualified timber
costs paid or incurred during the tax year. Revoking the election.You must get IRS ap-property within 10 years after the tax year you
The election to amortize reforestation costs proval to revoke your election to amortize quali-incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report
incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-fying reforestation costs. Your application to
tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544revoke the election must include your name,
tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, orfor more information. address, the years for which your election was inbeneficiary cannot make that election. effect, and your reason for revoking it. You, orInvestment credit.Amortizable reforestationA partner’s or shareholder’s share of amor- your duly authorized representative, must signcosts qualify for the investment credit, whethertizable costs is figured under the general rules the application and file it at least 90 days beforeor not they are amortized. See the instructionsfor allocating items of income, loss, deduction,
the due date (without extensions) for filing yourfor Form 3468 for information on the investmentetc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-
income tax return for the first tax year for whichcredit.ortizable costs of an estate are divided between
your election is to end.the estate and the income beneficiary based onHow to make the election.To elect to amor-the income of the estate allocable to each.tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part
A trust cannot elect to amortize refor-VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that Send the application to:estation costs and cannot deduct itscontains the following information.
share of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
• A description of the costs and the datescosts of a partnership, S corporation, or estate.you incurred them. Internal Revenue ServiceQualifying costs.Reforestation costs are the• A description of the type of timber beingAssociate Chief Counseldirect costs of planting or seeding for forestationgrown and the purpose for which it is Passthroughs and Special Industriesor reforestation. Qualifying costs include onlygrown. CC:PSIthose costs you must capitalize and include in
1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300the adjusted basis of the property. They include Attach a separate statement for each property
Washington, DC 20224costs for the following items. for which you amortize reforestation costs.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 37 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tain atmospheric pollution control facilities(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the
placed in service after April 11, 2005, can beamended return and write “Filed pursuant toGeological and
amortized over 84 months. To qualify, the fol-section 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the
lowing must apply. amended return at the same address you filedGeophysical Costs
the original return.• The facility must be acquired and placedFor tax years beginning after August 8, 2005, Your election is binding for the year it isin service after April 11, 2005. If acquired,you can amortize the cost of geological and made and for all later years unless you get IRSthe original use must begin with you aftergeophysical expenses paid or incurred in con- approval to change to a different method.April 11, 2005.nection with oil and gas exploration or develop-
• The facility must be used in connectionment within the U.S. These costs can be
with an electric generation plant or otheramortized ratably over a 24-month period begin-
property placed in operation after Decem-ning on the mid-point of the tax year in which the Optional Write-offber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.expenses were paid or incurred.
If you retire or abandon the property during of Certain Tax• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect thethe 24-month amortization period, no amortiza-facility, only the basis attributable to thetion deduction is allowed in the year of retire- Preferencesconstruction, reconstruction, or erectionment or abandonment. completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.
You can elect to amortize certain tax preference
items over an optional period beginning in the
Basis reduction for corporations.A corpo- tax year in which you incurred the costs. If you
ration must reduce the amortizable basis of amake this election there is no AMT adjustment.Pollution pollution control facility by 20% before figuringThe applicable costs and the optional recovery
the amortization deduction.Control Facilities periods are as follows:
More information. For more information on • Circulation costs — 3 years,You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified
the amortization of pollution control facilities,pollution control facility over 60 months. How- • Intangible drilling and development costssee section 169 of the Internal Revenue Codeever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilities — 60 months,and the related regulations.placed in service after April 11, 2005, for an
• Mining exploration and development costsexception. The cost of a pollution control facility
— 10 years, andthat is not eligible for amortization can be depre-
ciated under the regular rules for depreciation. • Research and experimental costs — 10Research andAlso, you can claim a special depreciation allow- years.
ance on a certified pollution control facility that is
Experimental Costsqualified property even if you elect to amortize How to make the election.To elect to amor-its cost. You must reduce its cost (amortizable tize qualifying costs over the optional recoveryYou can amortize your research and experimen-basis) by the amount of any special allowance
period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-tal costs, deduct them as current business ex-you claim. See chapter 3 of Publication 946.
penses, or write them off over a 10-year period. tach a statement containing the following infor-A certified pollution control facility is a new
If you elect to amortize these costs, deduct themmation to your return for the tax year in which theidentifiable treatment facility used in connection
in equal amounts over 60 months or more. Theelection begins.with a plant or other property in operation before
amortization period begins the month you first1976, to reduce or control water or atmospheric • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-receive an economic benefit from the expendi-pollution or contamination. The facility must do cation number,tures. For a definition of “research and experi-so by removing, changing, disposing, storing, or
mental costs” and information on deducting • Type of cost and the specific amount ofpreventing the creation or emission of pollu-
them as current business expenses, see chap-the cost for which you are making thetants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility
ter 8. election.must be certified by state and federal certifying
authorities. Optional write-off method. Rather than Generally, the election must be made on aThe facility must not significantly increaseamortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-timely filed return (including extensions) for thethe output or capacity, extend the useful life, orrent expense, you have the option of deductingtax year in which you incurred the costs. How-reduce the total operating costs of the plant or(writing off) research and experimental costsever, if you timely filed your return for the yearother property. Also, it must not significantlyratably over a 10-year period beginning with thewithout making the election, you can still makechange the nature of the manufacturing or pro-tax year in which you incurred the costs.the election by filing an amended return within 6duction process or facility.
months of the due date of the return (excludingThe federal certifying authority will not certifyCosts you can amortize. You can amortize extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amendedyour property to the extent it appears you willcosts chargeable to a capital account if you meetreturn and write “Filed pursuant to sectionrecover (over the property’s useful life) all or partboth the following requirements. 301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the amendedof its cost from the profit based on its operation
return at the same address you filed the original• You paid or incurred the costs in your(such as through sales of recovered wastes).
return.trade or business.The federal certifying authority will describe the
nature of the potential cost recovery. You must• You are not deducting the costs currently.Revoking the election.You must get IRSthen reduce the amortizable basis of the facility
consent to revoke your election. Your request toby this potential recovery.
revoke the election must be submitted to the IRSHow to make the election.To elect to amor-New identifiable treatment facility.A new in the form of a letter ruling before the end of thetize research and experimental costs, completeidentifiable treatment facility is tangible depre- tax year in which the optional recovery periodPart VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment ends. The request must contain all of the infor-come tax return. Generally, you must file thefacility. It does not include a building and its mation necessary to demonstrate the rare andreturn by the due date (including extensions).structural components unless the building is ex- unusual circumstances that would justify grant-However, if you timely filed your return for theclusively a treatment facility. ing revocation. If the request for revocation isyear without making the election, you can still
approved, any unamortized costs are deductibleAtmospheric pollution control facilities make the election by filing an amended return
in the year the revocation is effective.placed in service after April 11, 2005.Cer- within 6 months of the due date of the return
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 37

Page 38 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individuals, corporations, estates,• The number of units of mineral sold during
and trusts who claim depletion deduc-the tax year (determined under your
tions may be liable for alternative min-method of accounting, as explained next).CAUTION
!
10. imum tax.
You must estimate or determine recoverable
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-
Depletion ucts using the current industry method and theMineral Property
most accurate and reliable information you can
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells,obtain.
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-What’s New othermal deposits). For this purpose, the termNumber of units sold. You determine the
“property” means each separate interest younumber of units sold during the tax year basedException to oil depletion deduction for in-own in each mineral deposit in each separateon your method of accounting. Use the followingdependent producers. For tax years endingtract or parcel of land. You can treat two or moretable to make this determination.after August 8, 2005, the 50,000 barrels-per-dayseparate interests as one property or as sepa-limit for purposes of determining if an indepen-rate properties. See section 614 of the InternalIF you THEN the units solddent producer of oil or gas can use the percent-Revenue Code and the related regulations foruse ... during the year are ...age depletion method is increased to 75,000rules on how to treat separate mineral interests.The cash The units sold for whichbarrels, based on the average, rather than theThere are two ways of figuring depletion onmethod of you receive paymentactual, daily runs for the tax year. See Refiners mineral property. accounting during the tax yearwho cannot claim percentage depletion, later.
(regardless of the year of• Cost depletion.
sale).• Percentage depletion.
An accrual The units sold based onGenerally, you must use the method that givesmethod of your inventories andIntroduction you the larger deduction. However, unless youaccounting method of accounting forare an independent producer or royalty owner,Depletion is the using up of natural resources by inventory.you generally cannot use percentage depletionmining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells,tion deduction allows an owner or operator to The number of units sold during the tax yearlater.account for the reduction of a product’s does not include any for which depletion deduc-reserves. tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.Cost DepletionThere are two ways of figuring depletion:
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For Figuring the cost depletion deduction.To figure cost depletion you must first determinemineral property, you generally must use the Once you have figured your property’s basis forthe following.method that gives you the larger deduction. For depletion, the total recoverable units, and thestanding timber, you must use cost depletion.• The property’s basis for depletion. number of units sold during the tax year, you can
figure your cost depletion deduction by taking• The total recoverable units of mineral inTopics the following steps.the property’s natural deposit.This chapter discusses:
• The number of units of mineral sold duringStep Action Result
the tax year.• Who can claim depletion  1 Divide your property’s Rate per
• Mineral property basis for depletion by unit.
Basis for depletion.To figure the property’s total recoverable units.• Timber basis for depletion, subtract all the following
 2 Multiply the rate per Costfrom the property’s adjusted basis.
unit by units sold depletion
during the tax year. deduction.1. Amounts recoverable through:
a. Depreciation deductions,
Who Can Note. You must keep accounts for the de-b. Deferred expenses (including deferred
pletion of each property and adjust these ac-exploration and development costs),Claim Depletion? counts each year for units sold and depletionand
claimed.If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-c. Deductions other than depletion.
erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gasfor depletion. More than one person can have an2. The residual value of land and improve-property. Owners of oil and gas property mayeconomic interest in the same mineral deposit orments at the end of operations. use an elective safe harbor in determining thetimber. property’s recoverable reserves for purposes of3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-You have an economic interest if both the computing cost depletion. If this election isposes other than mineral production.following apply. made, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce-
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of yourdure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal Revenue• You have acquired by investment any in-
property is your original cost or other basis, plusBulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/terest in mineral deposits or standing tim-
certain additions and improvements, and minusirs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf.ber.
certain deductions such as depletion allowed orTo make the election, attach a statement to• You have a legal right to income from theallowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedyour timely filed (including extensions) originalextraction of the mineral or cutting of thebasis can never be less than zero. See Publica-return for the first tax year for which the safetimber to which you must look for a returntion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationharbor is elected. The statement must indicateof your capital investment. on adjusted basis. that you are electing the safe harbor provided by
A contractual relationship that allows you an Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, ifTotal recoverable units.The total recover-economic or monetary advantage from products made, is effective for the tax year in which it isable units is the sum of the following.of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, made and all subsequent years. It cannot be
in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- revoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but• The number of units of mineral remaining
ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of, may be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, itat the end of the year (including units re-
mineral property is not an economic interest. cannot be re-elected for the next 5 years.covered but not sold).
Page 38 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 39 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• If, during the year, you dispose of an item indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one ofPercentage Depletion
of section 1245 property that was used in the following.
connection with mineral property, reduceTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply a • The value of the outstanding stock of aany allowable deduction for mining ex-certain percentage, specified for each mineral, corporation.penses by the part of any gain you mustby your gross income from the property during
report as ordinary income that is allocablethe tax year. • The interest in the profits or capital of a
The rates to be used and other conditions to the mineral property. See section partnership.
and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-• The beneficial interests in an estate orcussed later under Independent Producers and mation on how to figure the ordinary gaintrust.Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells. allocable to the property.
Rates and other rules for percentage depletion Any interest owned by or for a corporation,of other specific minerals are found later in partnership, trust, or estate is considered to beOil and Gas WellsMines and Geothermal Deposits. owned directly both by itself and proportionately
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oilby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.Gross income. When figuring your percent-
or gas well unless at least one of the followingage depletion, subtract from your gross income
applies. Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-from the property the following amounts.
pletion.You cannot claim percentage deple-• You are either an independent producer or• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred tion if both the following apply.a royalty owner.for the property.
1. You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod-• The well produces natural gas that is ei-• The part of any bonus you paid for a lease
ucts directly or through a related person inther sold under a fixed contract or pro-on the property allocable to the product
any of the following situations.duced from geopressured brine.sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
income) for the tax year. a. Through a retail outlet operated by youIf you are an independent producer or royaltyA bonus payment includes amounts you paid as or a related person.owner, see Independent Producers and Royaltya lessee to satisfy a production payment re-Owners, next. b. To any person who is required under antained by the lessor. agreement with you or a related personFor information on the depletion deduction
Use the following fraction to figure the part of to use a trademark, trade name, orfor wells that produce natural gas that is either
the bonus you must subtract. service mark or name owned by you orsold under a fixed contract or produced from
a related person in marketing or distrib-geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,
No. of units sold in the tax year uting oil, natural gas, or their by-prod-later.BonusRecoverable units from the × ucts.Paymentsproperty
c. To any person given authority under anIndependent Producers andFor oil and gas wells and geothermal depos- agreement with you or a related personRoyalty Ownersits, gross income from the property is defined to occupy any retail outlet owned,
later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property other leased, or controlled by you or a relatedIf you are an independent producer or royaltythan a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well, person.owner, you figure percentage depletion using agross income from the property is defined later
rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. 2. The combined gross receipts from saleserty based on your average daily production of(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, ordomestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up toTaxable income limit.The percentage deple- their by-products by all retail outlets takenyour depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-tion deduction generally cannot be more than into account in (1) are more than $5 millionever, certain refiners, as explained next, and50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your for the tax year.certain retailers and transferees of proven oiltaxable income from the property figured without
For the purpose of determining if this ruleand gas properties, as explained later, cannotthe depletion deduction and the deduction for
applies, do not count the following.claim percentage depletion. For information ondomestic production activities under section 199
figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentageof the Internal Revenue Code. • Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)depletion, later.Taxable income from the property means of oil or natural gas to commercial or in-gross income from the property minus all allowa- dustrial users.ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de-Refiners who cannot claim percentage
pletion or qualified domestic production depletion. For tax years ending before August• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-
activities) attributable to mining processes, in-9, 2005, you cannot claim percentage depletionment of Defense.
cluding mining transportation. These deductibleif you or a related person refine crude oil and you• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod-items include the following. and the related person refined more than 50,000ucts outside the United States if none ofbarrels on any day during the tax year. For tax• Operating expenses. your domestic production or that of a re-years ending after August 8, 2005, this limit islated person is exported during the tax• Certain selling expenses. increased to 75,000 barrels, based on averageyear or the prior tax year.(rather than actual) daily refinery runs for the tax• Administrative and financial overhead.year. The average daily refinery run is computedRelated person. To determine if you and• Depreciation. by dividing total refinery runs for the tax year byanother person are related persons, see Re-the total number of days in the tax year.• Intangible drilling and development costs. lated person under Refiners who cannot claim
Related person. You and another person percentage depletion, earlier.• Exploration and development expendi- are related persons if either of you holds a signif-tures. Sales through a related person.You areicant ownership interest in the other person or ifconsidered to be selling through a related per-a third person holds a significant ownership in-The following rules apply when figuring your son if any sale by the related person producesterest in both of you.taxable income from the property for purposes gross income from which you may benefit be-For example, a corporation, partnership, es-of the taxable income limit. cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significantest in the person.• Do not deduct any net operating loss de-ownership interest in it are related persons. AYou are not considered to be selling throughduction from the gross income from thepartnership and a trust are related persons if onea related person who is a retailer if all the follow-property. person holds a significant ownership interest ining apply.each of them.• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
For purposes of the related person rules,• You do not have a significant ownershiptributions from the gross income from the
significant ownership interest means direct or interest in the retailer.property.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 39

Page 40 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You sell your production to persons who ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) for percentage depletion purposes without regard
his net profits interest. to the RMFP.are not related to either you or the retailer.
Gross income from the property does notPaul determined his percentage participation• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas include lease bonuses, advance royalties, orto be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income hefrom your customers or persons related to other amounts payable without regard to pro-received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue fromyour customers. duction from the property.the property). Paul determined his share of the
• There are no arrangements for the retaileroil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-Average daily production exceeds deplet-to acquire oil or natural gas you producedrels × 11%). able quantities.If your average daily produc-for resale or made available for purchase tion for the year is more than your depletable oilby the retailer. Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.Gen- or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance forerally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas• Neither you nor the retailer knows of orrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity isproperty as follows.controls the final disposition of the oil or6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number ofnatural gas you sold or the original sourcebarrels of your depletable oil quantity that you1. Figure your average daily production of oilof the petroleum products the retailer ac-choose to apply. If you claim depletion on bothor natural gas for the year.quired for resale. oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gaspletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-quantity for the year.Transferees who cannot claim percentage ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-natural gas quantity. 3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas
pletion if you received your interest in a proven produced from the property using a per-
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 andExample. You have both oil and natural gascentage depletion rate of 15%.
before October 12, 1990. For a definition of theproduction. To figure your depletable natural4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-term “transfer,” see section 1.613A-7(n) of thegas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels oftion, the numerator of which is the resultregulations. For a definition of the term “interest your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Yourfigured in (2) and the denominator of whichdepletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 millionin proven oil or gas property,” see section is the result figured in (1). This is yourcubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduce1.613A-7(p) of the regulations. depletion allowance for that property foryour depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000the year.Figuring percentage depletion.Generally, − 360).
as an independent producer or royalty owner, If you have production from marginal wells,Taxable income limit.If you are an indepen-you figure your percentage depletion by comput-see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenuedent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,ing your average daily production of domestic oilCode to figure your depletable oil or natural gasyour deduction for percentage depletion is lim-or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil orquantity. ited to the smaller of the following.gas quantity. If your average daily productionBusiness entities and family members.does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan- • 100% of your taxable income from theYou must allocate the depletable oil or gastity, you figure your percentage depletion by property figured without the deduction forquantity among the following related persons inmultiplying the gross income from the oil or gas depletion and the deduction for domesticproportion to each entity’s or family member’sproperty (defined later) by 15%. If your average production activities under section 199 ofproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year.daily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini-
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must tion of taxable income from the property,• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or
make an allocation as explained later under Av- see Taxable income limit, earlier, undermore of the beneficial interest is owned by
erage daily production exceeds depletable Mineral Property.the same or related persons (considering
quantities. only persons that own at least 5% of the• 65% of your taxable income from allIn addition, there is a limit on the percentagebeneficial interest). sources, figured without the depletion al-depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit, lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-• You and your spouse and minor children.later. duction activities, any net operating lossFor purposes of this allocation, a related personcarryback, and any capital loss carryback.Average daily production.Figure your aver-is anyone mentioned under Related persons in
age daily production by dividing your total do- You can carry over to the following year anychapter 12 except that item (1) in that discussion
mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by amount you cannot deduct because of theincludes only an individual, his or her spouse,
the number of days in your tax year. 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-and minor children.
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) forPartial interest.If you have a partial inter-Controlled group of corporations.Mem- the following year.est in the production from a property, figure yourbers of the same controlled group of corpora-
share of the production by multiplying total pro- For 2005, depletion on the marginal produc-tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuring
duction from the property by your percentage of tion of oil or natural gas is not limited to yourthe depletable oil or natural gas quantity. They
interest in the revenues from the property. taxable income from the property figured withoutshare the depletable quantity. Under this rule, a
the depletion deduction. For information on mar-You have a partial interest in the production controlled group of corporations is defined in
ginal production, see section 613A(c)(6) of thesection 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,from a property if you have a net profits interest
Internal Revenue Code.except that the stock ownership requirement inin the property. To figure the share of production
that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “atfor your net profits interest, you must first deter-
least 80%.”mine your percentage participation (as mea-
Partnerships and S Corporationssured by the net profits) in the gross revenue
Gross income from the property.For pur-from the property. To figure this percentage, you Generally, each partner or shareholder, and notposes of percentage depletion, gross incomedivide the income you receive for your net profits the partnership or S corporation, figures the de-from the property (in the case of oil and gasinterest by the gross revenue from the property. pletion allowance separately. (However, seewells) is the amount you receive from the sale ofThen multiply the total production from the prop- Electing large partnerships must figure deple-the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well.erty by your percentage participation to figure tion allowance, later.) Each partner or share-If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,your share of the production. holder must decide whether to use cost orbut manufacture or convert it into a refined prod-
percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholderuct before sale or transport it before sale, theExample. John Oak owns oil property in uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-gross income from the property is the represen-which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest. ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his ortative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil orDuring the year, the property produced 10,000 her taxable income from all sources.gas, before conversion or transportation.barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.
John had expenses of $90,000 attributable toIf you sold gas after you removed it from thePartner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis.
the property. The property generated a net profitpremises for a price that is lower than the RMFP, The partnership or S corporation must allocate
of $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-determine gross income from the property for to each partner or shareholder his or her share
Page 40 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 41 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property• Retailers who cannot claim percentageClay and shale used or sold forheld by the partnership or S corporation. Thedepletion (discussed under Independent use in making sewer pipe or brickspartnership or S corporation makes the alloca-Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). or used or sold for use as sintered
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas or burned lightweight aggregates 71/2%• Any partner whose average daily produc-property. Clay used or sold for use intion of domestic crude oil and natural gasEach partner’s share of the adjusted basis of making drainage and roofing tile,is more than 500 barrels during the taxthe oil or gas property generally is figured ac- flower pots, and kindred products,year in which the partnership tax yearcording to that partner’s interest in partnership and gravel, sand, and stone (otherends. Average daily production is dis-capital. However, in some cases, it is figured than stone used or sold for use bycussed earlier.according to the partner’s interest in partnership a mine owner or operator as
income. dimension or ornamental stone) 5%
The partnership or S corporation adjusts theNatural Gas Wellspartner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted You can find a complete list of minerals and
basis of the oil and gas property for any capitalYou can use percentage depletion for a well thattheir percentage depletion rates in section
expenditures made for the property and for anyproduces natural gas either sold under a fixed613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
change in partnership or S corporation interests.contract or produced from geopressured brine.Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal.
Each partner or shareholder must The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-separately keep records of his or herNatural gas sold under a fixed contract. ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) isshare of the adjusted basis in each oilRECORDS
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesreduced by 20% of:and gas property of the partnership or S corpo-for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This isration. The partner or shareholder must reducedomestic natural gas sold by the producer under• The percentage depletion deduction forhis or her adjusted basis by the depletion al-a contract that does not provide for a price in-the tax year (figured without regard to thislowed or allowable on the property each year.crease to reflect any increase in the seller’s taxreduction), minusThe partner or shareholder must use that re-
liability because of the repeal of percentage de-duced adjusted basis to figure cost depletion or • The adjusted basis of the property at thepletion for gas. The contract must have been inhis or her gain or loss if the partnership or S close of the tax year (figured without theeffect from February 1, 1975, until the date ofcorporation disposes of the property. depletion deduction for the tax year).sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,
Reporting the deduction. Information that1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax
Gross income from the property.For prop-you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figureliability into account unless demonstrated other-
your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper- erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orwise by clear and convincing evidence.
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- gas well, gross income from the property means
tion on line 20 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or the gross income from mining. Mining includesNatural gas from geopressured brine.Qual-on line 17 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). De- all the following.ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-duct oil and gas depletion for your partnership or
gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%.S corporation interest on line 20 of Schedule E • Extracting ores or minerals from the
(Form 1040). The depletion deducted on Sched-This is natural gas that is both the following.ground.ule E is included in figuring income or loss from
• Produced from a well you began to drill• Applying certain treatment processes.rental real estate or royalty properties. The in-
after September 1978 and before 1984.structions for Schedule E explain where to re- • Transporting ores or minerals (generally,port this income or loss and whether you need to• Determined in accordance with section not more than 50 miles) from the point offile either of the following forms. 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978extraction to the plants or mills in which
to be produced from geopressured brine.• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. the treatment processes are applied.
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- Excise tax. Gross income from mining in-tions. Mines and cludes the separately stated excise tax received
Geothermal Deposits by a mine operator from the sale of coal toElecting large partnerships must figure de- compensate the operator for the excise tax theCertain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,pletion allowance.An electing large partner- mine operator must pay to finance black lungincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per-ship, rather than each partner, generally must benefits.figure the depletion allowance. The partnershipcentage depletion.
figures the depletion allowance without taking Extraction. Extracting ores or minerals
into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-income from the ground includes extraction by mineMines and other natural deposits.For a nat-limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan- owners or operators of ores or minerals from theural deposit, the percentage of your gross in-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter- waste or residue of prior mining. This does notcome from the property that you can deduct asest in the partnership is not affected by the apply to extraction from waste or residue of priordepletion depends on the type of deposit.depletion allowance. mining by the purchaser of the waste or residueAn electing large partnership is one thatThe following is a list of the percentage de-or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores ormeets both the following requirements. pletion rates for the more common minerals. minerals from the waste or residue.
• The partnership had 100 or more partners DEPOSITS RATE Treatment processes. The processes in-in the preceding year.
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralSulphur, uranium, and, if from• The partnership chooses to be an electing mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentdeposits in the United States,large partnership. processes must be applied by the mine owner orasbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickel
operator. For a listing of treatment processesore, and mica............. 2 2 %Disqualified persons.An electing large considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofpartnership does not figure the depletion allow-Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, and the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-ance of its partners that are disqualified per-certain oil shale, if from deposits in
lations.the United States........... 1 5 %sons. Disqualified persons must figure it
themselves, as explained earlier. Transportation of more than 50 miles.IfBorax, granite, limestone, marble,
All the following are disqualified persons.mollusk shells, potash, slate, the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be
soapstone, and carbon dioxide transported more than 50 miles to plants or mills• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-produced from a well........ 1 4 % to be treated because of physical and otherpletion (discussed under Independent Pro-
Coal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10% requirements, the additional authorized trans-ducers and Royalty Owners, earlier).
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 41

Page 42 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
portation is considered mining and included in in the property by a fraction, the numerator ofDepletion unit.You figure your depletion
the computation of gross income from mining. unit each year by taking the following steps.which is the bonus and the denominator of which
is the total bonus and royalties expected to beIf you wish to include transportation of 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis ofreceived. To figure cost depletion on advancedmore than 50 miles in the computation the timber on hand at the beginning of theroyalties, use the computation explained earlierof gross income from mining, file an year. Adjusted basis is defined under Costunder Cost Depletion, treating the number ofapplication in duplicate with the IRS. Include on Depletion in the discussion on Mineralunits for which the advanced royalty is receivedthe application the facts concerning the physical Property.as the number of units sold.and other requirements which prevented the
2. Add to the amount determined in (1) theconstruction and operation of the plant within 50Figuring percentage depletion. In the cost of any timber units acquired duringmiles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-case of mines, wells, and other natural depositsthe year and any additions to capital.cation to: other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you
may use the percentage rates discussed earlier3. Figure the number of timber units to take
Internal Revenue Service under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo- into account by adding the number of tim-
Associate Chief Counsel nus or advanced royalty payments are generallyber units acquired during the year to the
Passthroughs and Special Industries part of the gross income from the property tonumber of timber units on hand in the ac-
CC:PSI:FO which the rates are applied in making the calcu-count at the beginning of the year and then
1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300lation. However, in the case of independent pro-adding (or subtracting) any correction to
Washington, DC 20224 ducers and royalty owners of oil and gas the estimate of the number of timber units
property, bonuses and advance royalty pay- remaining in the account.Disposal of coal or iron ore.You cannot take ments are not a part of gross income. 4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)
Terminating the lease.If you receive a bo- This is your depletion unit.or iron ore mined in the United States if both the
nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or isfollowing apply.
abandoned before you derive any income fromExample. You bought a timber tract for• You disposed of it after holding it for morethe extraction of mineral, include in income for$160,000 and the land was worth as much asthan 1 year. the year of expiration, termination, or abandon-the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.• You disposed of it under a contract underment, the depletion deduction you took. AlsoBased on an estimated one million board feetwhich you retain an economic interest inincrease your adjusted basis in the property to(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yourthe coal or iron ore. restore the depletion deduction you previouslydepletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷subtracted. 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple-Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital
For advanced royalties, include in income fortion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF ×gain.
the year of lease termination, the depletion$80).Disposal to related person.This rule doesclaimed on minerals for which the advanced
not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore to When to claim depletion.Claim your deple-royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-
one of the following persons. tion allowance as a deduction in the year of saleduced before termination. Increase your ad-
or other disposition of the products cut from thejusted basis in the property by the amount you• A related person (as listed in chapter 12). timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting ofinclude in income.• A person owned or controlled by the same timber as a sale or exchange (explained below).
interests that own or control you. Include allowable depletion for timber productsDelay rentals.These are payments for defer-
not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as aring development of the property. Since delay
cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod-Geothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-
ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis forlocated in the United States or its possessionscome that is not subject to depletion. These
determining gain or loss in the tax year you sellqualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. Arentals can be avoided by either abandoning the
the timber products.geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir oflease, beginning development operations, or
natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquidobtaining production. Example. Assume the same facts as in theor vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a previous example except that you sold only halfgeothermal deposit is not considered a gas well. of the timber products in the cutting year. YouFigure gross income from the property for a would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletiongeothermal steam well in the same way as for oilTimber that year. You would add the remaining $20,000and gas wells. See Gross income from the prop- depletion to your closing inventory of timbererty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent- You can figure timber depletion only by the costproducts.age depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotmethod. Percentage depletion does not apply to
be more than 50% of your taxable income from Electing to treat the cutting of timber as atimber. Base your depletion on your cost or other
the property. sale or exchange.You can elect, under cer-basis in the timber. Your cost does not include
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timberthe cost of land or any amounts recoverable
Lessor’s Gross Income held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.through depreciation.
You must make the election on your income taxDepletion takes place when you cut standingA lessor’s gross income from the property that return for the tax year to which it applies. If youtimber. You can figure your depletion deductionqualifies for percentage depletion usually is the make this election, subtract the adjusted basiswhen the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelytotal of the royalties received from the lease. for depletion from the fair market value of themeasured in the process of exploitation.However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property, timber on the first day of the tax year in which
gross income does not include lease bonuses, you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.Figuring cost depletion.To figure your costadvanced royalties, or other amounts payable You generally report the gain as long-term capi-depletion allowance, you multiply the number ofwithout regard to production from the property. tal gain. The fair market value then becomestimber units cut by your depletion unit.
your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or lossBonuses and advanced royalties.Bonuses Timber units. When you acquire timber on the sale or other disposition of the productsand advanced royalties are payments a lesseeproperty, you must make an estimate of thecut from the timber. For more information, seemakes before production to a lessor for the grantquantity of marketable timber that exists on theTimber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Salesof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil toproperty. You measure the timber using boardand Other Dispositions of Assets.be extracted from leased property. If you are thefeet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you laterYou may revoke an election to treat the cut-lessor, your income from bonuses and ad- determine that you have more or less units ofting of timber as a sale or exchange withoutvanced royalties received is subject to an allow-timber, you must adjust the original estimate.IRS’s consent. The prior election (and revoca-ance for depletion. The term “timber property” means your eco-tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orFiguring cost depletion.To figure cost de- subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For-
block representing a separate timber account.pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis est Activities Schedule, for more information.
Page 42 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 43 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber) from a decedent is determined in the same way• Created or acquired in your trade or busi-to your income tax return if you claim a deduc- as debts sold by a business. If you are in a tradeness, ortion for timber depletion, choose to treat the or business, a loss from the debts is a business
• Closely related to your trade or businesscutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or make bad debt if the debts were closely related to your
when it became partly or totally worthless.an outright sale of timber. trade or business when they became worthless.
Otherwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi-
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi-ness bad debt.
ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt
Example 1.  In 2004, Arnie died leaving hisis business related.
business, including the accounts receivable, toThe bad debts of a corporation are always
his son Carl. Certain receivables become worth-business bad debts.
less in 2005. Carl can deduct the loss as a11.
Credit sales.Business bad debts are mainlybusiness bad debt because the debt was closely
the result of credit sales to customers. Goodsrelated to his business when it became worth-
and services customers have not paid for areless.
recorded in your books as either accounts re-Business
Example 2.  In 2004, Charlie died leavingceivable or notes receivable. If you are unable to
his business to his son George, but leaving thecollect any part of these receivables, the uncol-
Bad Debts receivables to his daughter Diane. The receiv-lectible part is a business bad debt.
ables become worthless in 2005. Diane is not Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair
engaged in any trade or business during 2004 ormarket value when received are deductible only
2005. Therefore, Diane’s loss is a nonbusinessat that value, even though the fair market valueIntroduction bad debt even though the original debt wasmay be less than face value. If you bought an
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, incurred in a business.account receivable for less than its face value,
you have a bad debt. There are two kinds of badthe amount you can deduct if it becomes worth-Liquidation.If you liquidate your businessdebts—business and nonbusiness. This chap-less is the amount you paid for it. and some of your accounts receivable becometer covers business bad debts. worthless, they are business bad debts.You can take a bad debt deductionGenerally, a business bad debt is one that only if the amount owed you was pre-comes from operating your trade or business. viously included in gross income. ThisCAUTION
! Types of Business BadYou can deduct business bad debts on yourapplies to amounts owed you from all sources ofDebtsbusiness tax return. taxable income, including sales, services, rents,All other bad debts are nonbusiness badand interest. The following are situations that may result in adebts and are deductible only as short-term cap- business bad debt.Accrual method. If you use an accrualital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
method of accounting, you generally report in-information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub- Loans to clients and suppliers.If you make
come as you earn it. You can only take a badlication 550. a loan to a client, supplier, employee, or distribu-
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable iftor for a business reason and it becomes worth-
you have previously included the uncollectibleTopics less, you have a business bad debt.
amount in income.This chapter discusses: If you qualify, you can use the Example. John Smith, an advertising agent,
nonaccrual-experience method of accountingmade loans to certain clients to keep their busi-• Definition of business bad debt discussed later. Under this method, you do notness. One of these clients went bankrupt and• When a debt becomes worthless have to accrue income that, based on your ex-could not repay him. Since the main reason for
perience, you do not expect to collect. making the loan was business related, the debt• How to treat business bad debts
was a business debt and John can take a busi-Cash method. If you use the cash method• Recovery of a business bad debt ness bad debt deduction.of accounting, you generally report income
• Where to deduct business bad debts when you receive payment. You cannot take aDebts of political parties.If a political party
bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you(or other organization that accepts contributions
because you never included those amounts inor spends money to influence elections) owesUseful Items income. For example, a cash basis architectyou money and the debt becomes worthless,You may want to see: cannot take a bad debt deduction if a client doesyou can take a bad debt deduction only if you
not pay the bill because the architect’s fee wasuse an accrual method of accounting and meetPublication not previously included in income. all the following tests.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Debts from a former business. If you sell 1. The debt arose from the sale of goods or
❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for your business but keep its receivables, theseservices in the ordinary course of your
Individuals, Estates, and Trustsdebts are business debts since they arose out oftrade or business.
your trade or business. If one of these debts❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 2. More than 30% of your receivables ac-later becomes worthless, the loss is still a busi-Assets crued in the year of the sale were fromness bad debt. These debts would also be busi-sales to political parties.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses ness debts if sold to the new owner of the
business. 3. You made substantial continuing efforts to❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal If you sell your business to one person and collect on the debt.Rights, and Claims for Refund sell your receivables to someone else, the activi-
ties of the new holder of the debts determineLoan or capital contribution.You cannotSee chapter 14 for information about gettingwhether they are business or nonbusiness debts take a bad debt deduction for a loan you made topublications and forms. for that person. A loss from the debts is a busi- a corporation if, based on the facts and circum-
ness bad debt to the new holder if that person stances, the loan is actually a contribution to
acquired the debts in his or her trade or business capital.
or if the debts were closely related to the newDebts of an insolvent partner.If your busi-
Business Bad Debt holder’s trade or business when they becameness partnership breaks up and one of yourworthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts isformer partners is insolvent and cannot pay anyDefined a nonbusiness bad debt. of the partnership’s debts, you may have to pay
A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-Debt acquired from a decedent.The char- more than your share. If you pay any part of the
lessness of a debt that was either: acter of a loss from debts of a business acquired insolvent partner’s share of the debts, you can
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 43

Page 44 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
take a bad debt deduction for the amount you comes worthless when there is no longer any fulfills the charge-off requirement for the later
pay. chance the amount owed will be paid. year.
It is not necessary to go to court if you canTotally worthless debts.If a debt becomesBusiness loan guarantee.If you guarantee ashow that a judgment from the court would betotally worthless, you can deduct the entiredebt that becomes worthless, the debt can qual-uncollectible. You must only show that you haveamount, except any amount deducted in an ear-ify as a business bad debt if all the followingtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt.lier tax year when the debt was only partly worth-requirements are met. Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-less.dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of• You made the guarantee in the course of You do not have to make an actualan unsecured and unpreferred debt.your trade or business. charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt
deduction for a totally worthless debt. However,Property received for debt.If you receive• You have a legal duty to pay the debt.
you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reduce• You made the guarantee before the debt later rules the debt is only partly worthless, youthe debt by the fair market value of the propertybecame worthless. You meet this require- will not be allowed a deduction for the debt inreceived. You can deduct the remaining debt asment if you reasonably expected you that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessa bad debt if and when it becomes worthless.would not have to pay the debt without full bad debt is limited to the amount actuallyIf you later sell the property, any gain on thereimbursement from the issuer. charged off.sale is due to the appreciation of the property. It
is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information• You receive reasonable consideration for Filing a claim for refund.If you did not deducton the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.making the guarantee. You meet this re- a bad debt on your original return for the year it
quirement if you made the guarantee in became worthless, you can file a claim for aExample. Patti owed Margaret $5,000. Inaccord with normal business practice or credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-partial satisfaction of the debt, Patti gave Mar-for a good faith business purpose. less, you must file the claim by the later of thegaret property worth $2,000. Margaret deductedfollowing dates.the remaining $3,000 as a bad debt but did notExample. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne • 7 years from the date your original returnget a tax benefit from the deduction as she hadDress Company. She guaranteed payment of a was due (not including extensions).no taxable income. Margaret later sold the prop-$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-erty for a $1,000 gain. Even though Margaret did• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne’s largestnot get a tax benefit from the earlier bad debtclients. Elegant Fashions later filed for bank-deduction, she must include the $1,000 gain inIf the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt,ruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Ms. Zayneher income. It is not a recovery of her bad debt.you must file the claim by the later of the follow-made full payment to the bank. She can take a
ing dates.business bad debt deduction, since her guaran-
tee was made in the course of her trade or • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-
business for a good faith business purpose. She nal return.How To Treatwas motivated by the desire to retain one of her
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.better clients and keep a sales outlet. There are two ways to treat business bad debts.
You may have longer to file the claim if you wereEmployee. Any guarantee you make to pro-• The specific charge-off method. physically or mentally unable to handle yourtect or improve your job is closely related to your
financial affairs for a time. For details and moretrade or business as an employee. • The nonaccrual-experience method.
information about filing a claim, see Publication
Deductible in the year paid.If you make a Generally, you must use the specific charge-off556.
payment on a loan you guaranteed, you canmethod. However, you can use the
Use one of the following forms to file a claim.deduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsnonaccrual-experience method if you meet the
against the borrower. requirements discussed later under
Table 11-1. Forms Used To File aNonaccrual-Experience Method.Rights against a borrower. When you Claimmake payment on a loan you guaranteed, you
Specific Charge-Off Methodmay have the right to take the place of the IF you filed as
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have a... THEN file...If you use the specific charge-off method, youthis right, or some other right to demand pay-can deduct specific business bad debts thatSole proprietorment from the borrower, you cannot take a bad  Form 1040Xbecome either partly or totally worthless duringor farmerdebt deduction until these rights become partlythe tax year.or totally worthless. Corporation  Form 1120X
Partly worthless debts.You can deduct spe-Joint debtor. If two or more debtors jointly S corporation  Form 1120Scific bad debts that become partly uncollectible.owe you money, your inability to collect from one (check box F(5))Your tax deduction is limited to the amount youdoes not enable you to deduct a proportionatecharge off on your books during the year. You doPartnership  Form 1065amount as a bad debt. not have to charge off and deduct your partly (check box G(5))
worthless debts annually. You can delay theBankruptcy claim. If a person who owes you
charge off until a later year. You cannot, how-money becomes bankrupt, the amount you can
ever, deduct any part of a debt after the year itdeduct as a bad debt is the amount owed to you Nonaccrual-Experiencebecomes totally worthless.minus the amount you receive from distribution Methodof the bankrupt person’s assets. Significantly modified debt. An exception
to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has If you use an accrual method of accounting andSale of mortgaged property.If mortgaged orbeen significantly modified and on which the qualify under the rules explained in this section,pledged property is sold for less than the debt,holder recognized gain. For more information, you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodthe unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is asee Regulations section 1.166-(3)(a)(3). for bad debts. Under this method, you do notbad debt. accrue service related income you expect to beDeduction disallowed.You can generally uncollectible.take a partial bad debt deduction only in the yearYou generally can use the nonaccrual-expe-you make the charge-off on your books. If, underrience method for accounts receivable for serv-audit, the IRS does not allow your deduction andWhen Debt Is ices you performed only if:the debt becomes partly worthless in a later tax
year, you can deduct the amount you charge off• The services are provided in the fields ofWorthless
in that year plus the disallowed amount accounting, actuarial science, architecture,
You do not have to wait until a debt is due to charged-off in the earlier year. The charge off in consulting, engineering, health, law, or the
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be- the earlier year, unless reversed on your books, performing arts, or
Page 44 Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts

Page 45 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You meet the $5 million annual gross re- that has not expired before the beginning of the
ceipts test for all prior years. tax year in which the recovery takes place, youIntroduction
treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.You are allowed a limited deduction for the costA bad debt deduction that contributes to a netService related income.You can use the of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve-operating loss helps lower taxes in the year tononaccrual-experience method only for hicle refueling property you place in service dur-which you carry the net operating loss.amounts earned by performing services. You ing the tax year. Also, you are allowed a tax
cannot use this method for amounts owed to youMore information.See Publication 536 forcredit of 10% of the cost of any qualified electric
from activities such as lending money, selling vehicle you place in service during the tax year.more information about net operating losses.
goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights to
You can take the electric vehiclereceive payment.
credit or the deduction for clean-fuel
Gross receipts test. You meet the gross re- vehicle property regardless of
TIP
ceipts test if your average annual gross receiptsWhere To Deduct whether you use the vehicle in a trade or busi-
for the 3 prior tax years does not exceed ness. However, you can take a deduction for
$5,000,000. Use the following table to find where to deductclean-fuel vehicle refueling property only if you
your business bad debts. use the property in your trade or business.Interest or penalty charged.Generally, you
cannot use the nonaccrual-experience method
Table 11-2. Where To Deduct a Bad Topicsfor amounts due on which you charge interest or
Debt This chapter discusses:a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a
discount offered for early payment as the charg-
IF you file as THEN deduct your bad • The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
a... debt on... ertyapply.
Sole proprietor  Line 27 of Schedule C • The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle refuel-• You otherwise accrue the full amount due
(Form 1040) ing propertyas gross income at the time you provide
the services. Farmer  Line 34 of Schedule F • Recapture of the deductions
(Form 1040)• You treat the discount allowed for early • The electric vehicle creditpayment as an adjustment to gross in- Corporation  Line 15 of Form 1120 • Recapture of the creditcome in the year of payment. or Form 1120-A
S corporation  Line 10 of Form 1120SMethods available.You can use any of the Useful Items
Partnership  Line 12 of Form 1065following nonaccrual-experience methods. You may want to see:
• 6-year moving average method. Publication
• Actual experience method.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
• Modified Black Motor method. Expenses
• Modified 6-year moving average method. ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets• Alternative nonaccrual-experience
method. 12. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
Apply the nonaccrual-experience method sepa-
Form (and Instructions)rately to each account receivable.
You generally cannot change from one ❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle CreditElectric andmethod to another without IRS approval. You ❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Creditmay be able to obtain automatic consent to
change your method of accounting. See sectionClean-Fuel See chapter 14 for information about getting1.448-2T(g) of the regulations for more informa- publications and forms.tion on obtaining consent to change to a
Vehiclesnonaccrual-experience method or to change
from one method to another.
For more information about the Definitionsnonaccrual-experience method, including the $5What’s Newmillion gross receipts test, see section 448(d)(5) The following definitions apply throughout thisof the Internal Revenue Code and section chapter.Clean-fuel vehicle and refueling property1.448-2T of the regulations.
deduction. The clean-fuel vehicle and refuel-Clean-burning fuels. The following areing property deduction will expire for vehiclesclean-burning fuels.placed in service after December 31, 2005.
1. Natural gas.Recovery Alternative motor vehicle credit.The En-
2. Liquefied natural gas.ergy Policy Act of 2005 added a new credit forIf you deduct a bad debt on your tax return andalternative motor vehicles placed in service after3. Liquefied petroleum gas.later recover (collect) all or part of it, you may2005. For details, see Form 8910, Alternativehave to include all or part of the recovery in 4. Hydrogen.Motor Vehicle Credit.gross income. The amount you include is limited
5. Electricity.to the amount you actually deducted. However,
you can exclude the amount deducted that did 6. Any other fuel that is at least 85% alcoholnot reduce your tax. Report the recovery as (any kind) or ether.“Other income” on the appropriate businessReminder
form or schedule. Motor vehicle.A motor vehicle is any vehicleSee  Recoveries in Publication 525 for moreMaximum qualified electric vehicle credit.that has four or more wheels and is manufac-information. The maximum qualified electric vehicle credittured primarily for use on public streets, roads,
will be 25% of the otherwise allowable amount inNet operating loss (NOL) carryover.If a and highways. It does not include a vehicle oper-
2006.bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover ated exclusively on a rail or rails.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 45

Page 46 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualifying property. This is property For vehicles that may be propelled by both aRecharging property. This property in-
used in the following ways. clean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your de- cludes any equipment used to provide electricity
duction is generally the additional cost of permit- to the battery of a motor vehicle propelled by
1. Predominantly outside the United States.ting the use of the clean-burning fuel. electricity. It includes low-voltage recharging
equipment, high-voltage (quick) charging equip-2. Predominantly to furnish lodging or in con- Clean-fuel vehicle property does notment, and ancillary connection equipment suchnection with the furnishing of lodging. include an electric vehicle that quali-as inductive charging equipment. It does notfies for the electric vehicle credit, dis-CAUTION
!
3. By certain tax-exempt organizations. include property used to generate electricity,cussed later. such as solar panels or windmills, and does not4. By governmental units or foreign persons include the battery used in the vehicle.or entities. Qualified property.Your property must meet
the following requirements to qualify for the de-
Deduction limit. The maximum deductionduction.
you can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refueling
property placed in service at one location is1. It must be acquired for your own use andDeductions for $100,000. To figure your maximum deductionnot for resale.
for any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the total2. Its original use must begin with you.Clean-Fuel Vehicle you (or any related person or predecessor)
claimed for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property3. Either—and Refueling Property placed in service at that location for all earlier
a. The motor vehicle of which it is a partyears.You are allowed a limited deduction for the costmust satisfy any federal or state emis-of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve- If the deduction limit applies, you mustsions standards that apply to each fuelhicle refueling property. These deductions are specify on your tax return the propertyby which the vehicle is designed to beallowed only in the tax year you place the prop- (and the portion of the property’s cost)CAUTION
!
propelled, orerty in service. you are using as a basis for the deduction.
b. It must satisfy any federal and stateYou cannot claim these deductions for the Related persons. For this purpose, the fol-emissions certification, testing, and war-part of the property’s cost you claim as a section lowing are considered related persons.ranty requirements that apply.179 deduction. For information on the section
179 deduction, see Publication 946. 1. An individual and his or her brothers and4. It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-
sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,fined earlier.Deduction for Clean-Fuel ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
and lineal descendants (children, grand-Vehicle Property
children, etc.).Deduction limit. The maximum deduction
The deduction for this property may be claimedyou can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicle2. An individual and a corporation if the indi-regardless of whether the property is used in aproperty with respect to any motor vehicle is onevidual owns, directly or indirectly, moretrade or business. of the following. than 50% in value of the outstanding stock
of the corporation.1. $50,000 for a truck or van with a grossClean-fuel vehicle property.Clean-fuel vehi- vehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds3. Two corporations that are members of thecle property is either of the following kinds ofor for a bus with a seating capacity of atsame controlled group as defined in sec-property. least 20 adults (excluding the driver). tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.
2. $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross vehi-1. A motor vehicle (defined earlier) produced 4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.
cle weight rating over 10,000 pounds butby an original equipment manufacturer and 5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if thenot more than 26,000 pounds.designed to be propelled by a clean-burn- same person is a grantor of both trusts.ing fuel. These include designated hybrid3. $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1) or6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the samegas-electric automobiles which, at this (2). trust.time, only include the Ford Escape Hybrid,
Honda Accord Hybrid, Honda Insight, 7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-Honda Civic Hybrid, Lexus RX 400h, Mer-Deduction for Clean-Fuel rate trusts if the same person is a grantorcury Mariner Hybrid, Toyota HighlanderVehicle Refueling Property of both trusts.Hybrid, and Toyota Prius. Those desig-
8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation ifnated automobiles do not qualify for theYour property must meet the following require-
the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,electric vehicle credit. For other than thosements to qualify for this deduction.
directly or indirectly, more than 50% indesignated automobiles, the only part of a
1. It must be depreciable property. value of the outstanding stock of the cor-vehicle’s basis that qualifies for the deduc-
poration.tion is the part attributable to: 2. Its original use must begin with you.
9. A person and a tax-exempt educational ora. A clean-fuel engine that can use a 3. It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-charitable organization that is controlled di-clean-burning fuel, fined earlier. rectly or indirectly by that person or by
b. The property used to store or deliver members of the family of that person.
the fuel to the engine, or Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property. 10. A corporation and a partnership if the
Clean-fuel vehicle refueling property is anyc. The property used to exhaust gases same persons own more than 50% in
property (other than a building or its structuralfrom the combustion of the fuel. value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
components) used to do either of the following.poration and more than 50% of the capital
2. Any property installed on a motor vehicle or profits interest in the partnership.1. Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel (de-(including installation costs) to enable it to
fined earlier) into the fuel tank of a motor 11. Two S corporations or an S corporationbe propelled by a clean-burning fuel if:
vehicle propelled by the fuel, but only if the and a regular corporation if the same per-
a. The property is an engine (or modifica- storage or dispensing is at the point where sons own more than 50% in value of the
tion of an engine) that can use a the fuel is delivered into the tank. outstanding stock of each corporation.
clean-burning fuel, or 2. Recharge motor vehicles propelled by 12. A partnership and a person if the person,
b. The property is used to store or deliver electricity, but only if the property is lo- directly or indirectly owns, more than 50%
that fuel to the engine or to exhaust cated at the point where the vehicles are of the capital or profits interests in the part-
gases from the combustion of that fuel. recharged. nership.
Page 46 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 47 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
13. Two partnerships if the same persons own,Clean-Fuel Vehicle Property Clean-Fuel Vehicle
directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the Refueling Property
You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuelcapital or profits interest in both partner-
vehicle property if the property ceases to qualifyYou must recapture the deduction for clean-fuelships.
vehicle refueling property if the property ceaseswithin 3 years after the date you placed it in
14. An executor of an estate and a beneficiary to qualify at any time before the end of its depre-service. The property will cease to qualify if it is
of the estate unless the sale or exchange ciation recovery period. The property will ceasechanged in any of the following ways.
is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest. to qualify if it is changed in any of the following
ways.1. It is modified so that it can no longer beTo determine whether an individual directly
propelled by a clean-burning fuel.or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock of 1. It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refuel-a corporation, see Ownership of stock under 2. It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel vehi-ing property (for example, by being con-Related Persons in Publication 538. cle property (for example, by failing to verted to store and dispense gasoline).meet emissions standards).
2. It is no longer used 50% or more in yourHow To Claim 3. It becomes nonqualifying property, definedtrade or business.the Deductions earlier.
3. It becomes nonqualifying property, defined
How you claim the deductions for clean-fuel earlier.
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell orvehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refueling
otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsproperty depends on the use of the property and Sales or other dispositions.If you sell orafter the date you placed it in service and knowthe kind of income tax return you file. otherwise dispose of the property before the endor have reason to know that it will be changed inof its recovery period and know or have reasonany of the ways described above, you are sub-Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel vehi- to know that it will be changed in any of the wayscle property by individuals.Individuals can ject to the recapture rules. In other dispositionsdescribed above, you are subject to the recap-claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-(including a disposition by reason of an accidentture rules. In other dispositions (including a dis-erty used for nonbusiness purposes by includingor other casualty), the recapture rules do notposition by reason of an accident or otherthe deduction in the total on line 36 of Formapply. casualty), the recapture rules do not apply.1040. Also, enter the amount of your deductionIf the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theThe deduction (minus any recaptureand “Clean Fuel” on the dotted line next to linededuction (minus any recapture) is consideredamount) is considered depreciation when figur-36. If you use the vehicle partly for business, seedepreciation when figuring the part of any gaining the part of any gain from the disposition thatthe next two discussions. from the disposition that is ordinary income. Seeis ordinary income. See Publication 544 forPublication 544 for more information on disposi-more information on dispositions of depreciableDeduction for business clean-fuel vehicletions of depreciable property. property.property by employees.Employees who use
clean-fuel vehicle property for business, orRecapture amount. Figure your recapture Recapture amount. Figure your recapturepartly for business and partly for nonbusinessamount by multiplying the deduction by the fol-amount by multiplying the deduction youpurposes, should include the entire deduction inlowing percentage. claimed by the following fraction.the total on line 36 of Form 1040. Also, enter the
• 100% if the recapture date is within theamount of your deduction and “Clean Fuel” on
Total Recoveryfirst full year after the date the vehicle wasthe dotted line next to line 36. recovery years beforeplaced in service. _period for the the recaptureSole proprietors.Sole proprietors must claim• 662/3% if the recapture date is within theproperty yeardeductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andsecond full year after the date the vehicle
clean-fuel vehicle refueling property used forwas placed in service. Total recovery period for the propertybusiness on the Other expenses line of either
• 331/3% if the recapture date is within theSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form
third full year after the date the vehicleHow to report.How you report the recapture1040). If clean-fuel vehicle property is used
amount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling propertywas placed in service.partly for nonbusiness purposes, claim the non-
depends on how you claimed the deduction forbusiness part of the deduction as explained ear-
that property.Recapture date.The recapture date is gen-lier under Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel
erally the date of the event that causes thevehicle property by individuals. Sole proprietors.Include the amount onrecapture. However, the recapture date for anthe Other income line of either Schedule Cevent described in item (3), earlier, is the firstPartnerships. Partnerships claim the deduc- (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).day of the recapture year in which the eventtions for clean-fuel vehicle property and Partnerships and corporations (includingoccurs.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 20 of S corporations).Include the amount on theForm 1065. Other income line of the form you file.How to report.How you report the recapture
amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in-S corporations.S corporations claim the de- Basis Adjustmentscome depends on how you claimed the deduc-ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
tion for that property.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 19 of You must reduce the basis of your clean-fuel
Form 1120S. Deducted by individuals as vehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refueling
nonbusiness-use property. Include the property by the deduction claimed. If, in a later
C corporations.C corporations claim the de-amount on line 21 of Form 1040. year, you must recapture part or all of the deduc-
ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and tion, increase the basis of the property by theDeducted by employees as business-useclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 26 of amount recaptured. If the property is deprecia-property. Include the amount on line 21 ofForm 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120-A). ble property, you can recover this additionalForm 1040. basis over the property’s remaining recovery
Deducted by sole proprietors as period beginning with the tax year of recapture.Recapture of business-use property.Include the amount If you were using the percentage ta-the Deductions on the Other income line of either Schedule C bles to figure your depreciation on the(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).If the property ceases to qualify, you may have property, you will not be able to con-CAUTION
!
to recapture the deduction. You recapture thePartnerships and corporations (includingtinue to do so. See Publication 946 for informa-
deduction by including it, or part of it, in yourS corporations).Include the amount on thetion on figuring your depreciation without the
income. Other income line of the form you file. tables.
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 47

Page 48 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Box 13, code U, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).C corporations.Include the amount on line
See the instructions for Form 1120S. 10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 4 of Part IElectric Vehicle Credit
(Form 1120-A). Check the box for “Other” andC corporations. C corporations claim the attach the required schedule. See the instruc-You can choose to claim a tax credit for a quali-credit by entering the amount from line 20 offied electric vehicle you place in service during tions for Form 1120.Form 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule Jthe year. You can make this choice regardless of(Form 1120), checking the “Form 8834” box.whether the property is used in a trade or busi- Basis AdjustmentsSee the instructions for Form 1120.ness.
If you claim a tax credit for a qualified electricRecapture of the Credit vehicle you place in service during the year, youQualified Electric Vehicle
must reduce your basis in that vehicle by theThe electric vehicle credit is subject to recaptureA vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it meets lesser of:if, within 3 years after the date you place theall of the following requirements. vehicle in service, it ceases to qualify for the
1. $4,000, orelectric vehicle credit. You recapture the credit1. It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier) pow-by adding it, or part of it, to your income tax for2. 10% of the cost of the vehicle.ered primarily by an electric motor drawingthe year in which the recapture event occurs.current from rechargeable batteries, fuel This basis reduction rule applies even if theThe vehicle will cease to qualify if it iscells, or other portable sources of electrical credit allowed is less than that amount.changed in either of the following ways.current.
If you must recapture part or all of the credit,1. It is modified so that it is no longer prima-2. You were the first person to use it. increase the basis of your vehicle by the amountrily powered by electricity. recaptured. If the qualified electric vehicle is3. You acquired it for your own use and not
2. It becomes nonqualifying property, definedfor resale. depreciable property, you can recover the addi-
earlier. tional basis over the vehicle’s remaining recov-4. It has never been used as a nonelectric ery period beginning with the tax year ofvehicle. Sales or other dispositions.If you sell orrecapture.
otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 years5. It is not nonqualifying property, defined
If you were using the percentage ta-after the date you placed it in service and knowearlier.
bles to figure your depreciation on theor have reason to know that it will be changed in
vehicle, you will not be able to con-CAUTION
!
either of the ways described above, you areHybrid gas-electric vehicles are not
tinue to do so. See Publication 946 for informa-subject to the recapture rules. In other disposi-qualified electric vehicles. However,
tion on figuring your depreciation without thetions (including a disposition by reason of ancertain of these vehicles may qualifyCAUTION
!
tables.accident or other casualty), the recapture rulesfor clean-fuel vehicles.
do not apply.
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theAmount of the Credit credit (minus any recapture amount) is consid-
ered depreciation when figuring the part of any
The credit is generally 10% of the cost of each
gain from the disposition that is ordinary income.qualified electric vehicle you place in service
See Publication 544 for more information onduring the year. If your vehicle is a depreciable
dispositions of depreciable property. 13.business asset, you must reduce the cost of the
vehicle by any section 179 deduction beforeRecapture amount. Figure your recapturefiguring the 10% credit. If you need informationamount by multiplying the credit by the followingon the section 179 deduction, see Publicationpercentage.946. Other Expenses• 100% if the recapture date is within the
first full year after the date the vehicle wasCredit limits.The credit is limited to $4,000
placed in service.for each vehicle. The total credit is limited to the
excess of your regular tax liability, reduced by What’s New• 662/3% if the recapture date is within thecertain credits, over your tentative minimum tax.second full year after the date the vehicleTo figure the credit limit, complete Form 8834 Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-was placed in service.and attach it to your tax return. age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,• 331/3% if the recapture date is within thepickup, or panel truck in 2005 is 40.5 cents athird full year after the date the vehicleHow To mile from January 1 to August 31 and 48.5 centswas placed in service.Claim the Credit a mile from September 1 to December 31 for all
business miles. For more information, see CarRecapture date.The recapture date is gen-You must complete and attach Form 8834 to and truck expenses, under Miscellaneous Ex-erally the date of the event that causes theyour tax return to claim the electric vehicle penses.recapture. However, the recapture date for ancredit. Enter your credit on your tax return asevent described in item (2), earlier, is the firstdiscussed next. Meal expense deduction subject to “hours ofday of the recapture year in which the eventservice” limits.In 2006, this deduction in-occurs.Individuals.Individuals claim the credit by en- creases to 75% of the reimbursed meals yourtering the amount from line 20 of Form 8834 onHow to report. Report the recapture amountemployees consume while they are subject toline 55 of Form 1040. Check box “c” and specifyas follows. the Department of Transportation’s “hours ofForm 8834. service” limits. For more information, see MealIndividuals.Include the amount on line 63
expenses when subject to “hours of service”of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dotted linePartnerships. Partnerships enter the amount
limits, later.next to line 63.from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 15f of Sched-
ule K (Form 1065). The partnership then allo-Partnerships. Include in Box 15, code V,cates the credit to the partners in Box 15, codeSchedule K-1 (Form 1065) the information aU, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). See the in-partner needs to figure the recapture of thestructions for Form 1065. Introductioncredit.
This chapter covers business expenses thatS corporations. S corporations enter the S corporations.Include in Box 13, code V,
may not have been explained to you, as a busi-amount from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13g of of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) the information a
ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica-Schedule K (Form 1120S). The S corporation shareholder needs to figure the recapture of the
then allocates the credit to the shareholders in credit. tion.
Page 48 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 49 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Topics Table 13–1. Reporting Reimbursements
This chapter discusses:
IF the type of reimbursement (or other
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2• Travel, meals, and entertainment
An accountable plan with:• Bribes and kickbacks
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.• Charitable contributions
Adequate accounting made and excess• Education expenses returned
• Lobbying expenses Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Adequate accounting and return of excess• Penalties and fines
both required but excess not returned• Repayments (claim of right)
Per diem or mileage allowance up to theNo amount.• Other miscellaneous expenses federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
Useful Items
You may want to see: Per diem or mileage allowance up to theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Publication Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. TheExpenses
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only❏ 526 Charitable Contributions Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
rate only and excess not returned❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
A nonaccountable plan with:❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education excess, or both, not required by plan
❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
See chapter 14 for information about getting
publications and forms. However, for tax purposes, only 50% of these• The advance is reasonably calculated notcosts are allowed by law as a tax deduction.to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-A reimbursement or allowance arrangement penses.(including per diem allowances, discussed later)
• You make the advance within a reasona-Reimbursement of depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta-
ble period of time.ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If you
Travel, Meals, and reimburse these expenses under an accounta-
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar-ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-
Entertainment rangement are not substantiated, or an excessable to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,
reimbursement is not returned within a reasona-and entertainment expenses on your tax return.
The following discussion explains how to handle ble period of time by an employee, you are not If you reimburse these expenses under a
any reimbursements or allowances you may allowed to deduct these expenses as reim-nonaccountable plan, then you must report the
provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex- bursed under an accountable plan. Instead,reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wage
penses when incurred by your employees. If you treat the reimbursed expenses as paid under aand Tax Statement, and deduct them as wages
are self-employed and report your income and nonaccountable plan, discussed later.on the appropriate line of your tax return. If you
expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040),make a single payment to your employees and itAdequate accounting. Your employees mustsee Publication 463. includes both wages and an expense reim- adequately account to you for their travel,To be deductible for tax purposes, expensesbursement, you must specify the amount attribu-meals, and entertainment expenses. They mustincurred for travel, meals, and entertainmenttable to reimbursement and report it accordingly.give you documentary evidence of their travel,must be ordinary and necessary expenses in-See Table 13–1, Reporting Reimbursements. mileage, and other employee business ex-curred while carrying on your trade or business.
penses. This evidence should include itemsGenerally, you also must show that entertain-
such as receipts, along with either a statementment expenses (including meals) are directlyAccountable Plans of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, orrelated to, or associated with, the conduct of
similar record in which the employee enteredAn accountable plan, requires your employeesyour trade or business. For more information on
each expense at or near the time the expenseto meet all of the following requirements. Theytravel, meals, and entertainment, including de-
was incurred.must:ductibility, see Publication 463.
Excess reimbursement or allowance. An1.  have paid or incurred deductible expensesReimbursements excess reimbursement or allowance is anywhile performing services as your employ-
amount you pay to an employee that is moreees,A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement” than the business-related expenses for which
provides for payment of advances, reimburse-2.  adequately account to you for these ex-the employee adequately accounted. The em-
ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-penses within a reasonable period of time,ployee must return any excess reimbursement
tainment expenses incurred by your employeesand or other expense allowance to you within a rea-
during the ordinary course of business. Upon sonable period of time.3.  return any excess reimbursement or al-satisfying your established substantiation re-lowance within a reasonable period ofquirements, you can deduct the allowable Reasonable period of time. A reasonabletime.amount on your tax return. Because of differ- period of time depends on the facts and circum-
ences between accounting methods and tax An arrangement under which you advance stances. Generally, actions that take place
law, these amounts may not be the same. For money to employees is treated as meeting (3) within the times specified in the following list will
example, you may deduct 100% of the cost of above only if the following requirements are also be treated as taking place within a reasonable
meals on your business books and records. met. period of time.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 49

Page 50 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting per diem and car allowances.ary 1 and August 31 and 48.5 cents per mile
1. You give an advance within 30 days of the The following discussion explains how to reportbetween September 1 and December 31.
time the employee has incurred the ex- per diem and car allowances. The manner inYou can choose to reimburse your employ-pense. which you report them depends on how theees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-
allowance compares to the federal rate. Seelowance. This is an allowance that includes a2. Your employees adequately account for
Table 13-1.combination of payments covering fixed and va-their expenses within 60 days after the ex-
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate topenses were paid or incurred. Allowance less than or equal to the federal
cover your employees’ variable operating costsrate. If your allowance for the employee is less3. Your employees return any excess reim-(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to coverthan or equal to the appropriate federal rate, thatbursement within 120 days after the ex-your employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-allowance is not included as part of thepenses were paid or incurred. tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using aemployee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form
FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure4. You give a periodic statement (at least W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses
2005-67 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2005-42.quarterly) to your employees that asks (including meals that may be subject to the 50%
You can read Revenue Procedure 2005-67 atthem to either return or adequately ac- limit, discussed later). See How to deduct under
many public libraries or online at www.irs.gov.count for outstanding advances and they Accountable Plans, earlier.
comply within 120 days of the date of the Allowance more than the federal rate.IfPer diem allowance. If your employee actu-statement. your employee’s allowance is more than theally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-
appropriate federal rate, you must report thecussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursedHow to deduct. You can claim a deduction for allowance as two separate items.using the per diem allowance, how you reporttravel, meals, and entertainment expenses if Include the allowance amount up to the fed-and deduct the allowance depends on whetheryou reimburse your employees for these ex- eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’sthe allowance is for lodging and meal expensespenses under an accountable plan. Generally, Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (asor for meal expenses only and whether the al-the amount you can deduct for meals and enter- explained above). This part of the allowance islowance is more than the federal rate.tainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed treated as reimbursed under an accountableRegular federal per diem rate.The regularlater. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a plan.federal per diem rate is the highest amount thesingle member Limited Liability Company, de- Include the amount that is more than thefederal government will pay to its employeesduct the reimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if theywhile away from home on travel. It has two(Form 1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form apply) of the employee’s Form W-2. Deduct it ascomponents:1040). wages subject to income tax withholding, social
If you are filing an income tax return for a security, Medicare, and federal unemployment1. lodging expense, andcorporation, the reimbursement should be in- taxes. This part of the allowance is treated as
cluded with the amount claimed on the Other 2. meal and incidental expense (M & IE).reimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex-
deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporation plained later under Nonaccountable Plans.The rates are different for different locations.Income Tax Return, or Form 1120-A, U.S. Cor- Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continentalporation Short-Form Income Tax Return. If you United States.are filing any other business income tax return, Meals and Entertainment
such as a partnership or S corporation return,Standard meal allowance.The federal rate
Under an accountable plan, you can generallydeduct the reimbursement on the appropriatefor meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductibleline of the return as provided in the instructionsstandard meal allowance. You may pay only an
business-related meal and entertainment ex-for that return. M & IE allowance to employees who travel away
penses you reimburse your employees. The de-from home if:
duction limit applies even if you reimburse them
• you pay the employee for actual expensesfor 100% of the expenses.Per Diem and Car Allowances
for lodging based on receipts submitted to
Application of the 50% limit.The 50% de-you,You may reimburse your employees under an
duction limit applies to reimbursements youaccountable plan based on travel days, miles, or• you provide for the lodging, make to your employees for expenses they incursome other fixed allowance. In these cases,
for meals while traveling away from home on• you pay for the actual expense of the lodg-your employee is considered to have accounted
business and for entertaining business custom-ing directly to the provider,to you for the amount of the expense that does
ers at your place of business, a restaurant, ornot exceed the rates established by the federal• you do not have reasonable belief thatanother location. It applies to expenses incurredgovernment. Your employee must actually sub-lodging expenses were incurred by theat a business convention or reception, businessstantiate to you the other elements of the ex-employee, or meeting, or business luncheon at a club. Thepense, such as time, place, and business
deduction limit may also apply to meals you• the allowance is computed on a basis sim-purpose.
furnish on your premises to your employees.ilar to that used in computing the
Federal rate.The federal rate can be figured employee’s wages (that is, number of Related expenses. Taxes and tips relatingusing any one of the following methods. hours worked or miles traveled). to a meal or entertainment activity you reim-
burse to your employee under an accountable1. For per diem amounts: Internet access. Per diem rates are avail-plan are included in the amount subject to theable on the Internet. You can access per diem50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-a. The regular federal per diem rate.rates at www.gsa.gov. penses, such as cover charges for admission tob. The standard meal allowance. a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinnerHigh-low method. This is a simplified
or cocktail party, or the amount you pay forc. The high-low rate. method of computing the federal per diem rate
parking at a sports arena, are all subject to thefor lodging and meal expenses for traveling
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to2. For car expenses: within the continental United States. It elimi-
and from an otherwise allowable business mealnates the need to keep a current list of the per
a. The standard mileage rate. or a business-related entertainment activity isdiem rate in effect for each city in the continental
not subject to the 50% limit.United States.b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
Under the high-low method, the per diemAmount subject to 50% limit.If you provideamount for travel during 2005 is $204 ($46 for Myour employees with a per diem allowance onlyCar allowance. Your employee is considered & IE) for certain high-cost locations. All otherfor meal and incidental expenses, the amountto have accounted to you for car expenses that areas have a per diem amount of $129 ($36 fortreated as an expense for food and beverages isdo not exceed the standard mileage rate. For M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for thethe lesser of the following.2005, the standard mileage rate for each busi-$204 per diem amount under the high-low
ness mile is 40.5 cents per mile between Janu- method are listed in Publication 1542.• The per diem allowance.
Page 50 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 51 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The federal rate for M & IE. to income tax withholding, social security, Medi- before the public if it relates to business you
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You canreasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex-
If you provide your employees with a per diemdeduct the reimbursement as compensation orample, the cost of advertising that encourages
allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buy
dental expenses, you must treat an amountity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. DeductU.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similar
equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area ofthe allowable amount as compensation or causes is usually deductible.
travel as an expense for food and beverages. Ifwages on the appropriate line of your income tax
Anticipated liabilities.Anticipated liabilitiesthe per diem allowance you provide is less thanreturn, as provided in its instructions.
or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-the federal per diem rate for the area of travel,Generally, amounts paid for meals, enter-
ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearyou can treat 40% of the per diem allowance astainment, and amusement provided to individu-
TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.the amount for food and beverages. als who are not your employees are not subject
From experience, you know you will have ex-to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directlyMeal expenses when subject to “hours of penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forrelated to the active conduct of your trade orservice” limits.For tax years beginning in these contracts. You cannot deduct any of thebusiness. Examples include:2005, 70% of the reimbursed meals your em- $15,000 this year by charging expenses to aployees consume while away from their tax • Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,reserve or liability account. You can deduct yourhome on business during, or incident to, anyor the use of a facility. You are allowed aexpenses only when you actually pay or accrueperiod subject to the Department of deduction only to the extent it is includedthem, depending on your accounting method.Transportation’s hours of service limits are de-in the gross income of the recipient as
ductible. compensation for services or as a prize orBribes and kickbacks.Engaging in the pay-See Publication 463 for a detailed discussionaward. ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminalof individuals subject to the Department of matter. Such activity could result in criminal•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-Transportation’s hours of service limits. prosecution. Any payments that appear to havequired to be reported on an information
been made, either directly or indirectly, to anDe minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.The return, for example, Form 1099-MISC.
official or employee of any government or an50% limit does not apply to an expense for foodSee the General Instructions for Forms
agency or instrumentality of any government areor beverage that is excluded from the gross 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G for more in-
not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola-income of an employee because it is a de formation about reporting requirements.
tion of the law.minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for• The cost of providing meals, entertain- Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-additional information on de minimis fringe ben-ment, goods and services, or use of facili-son in violation of any federal or state law (butefits. ties you sell to the public. For example, ifonly if that state law is generally enforced, de-you operate a nightclub, your expense forCompany cafeteria or executive dining fined below) that provides for a criminal penaltythe entertainment you furnish to your cus-room. The cost of food and beverages you or for the loss of a license or privilege to engagetomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-provide primarily to your employees on your in a trade or business are also not allowed as aness expense that is fully deductible.business premises is deductible. This includes deduction for tax purposes.the cost of maintaining the facilities for providing• The cost of providing meals, entertain-Meaning of “generally enforced.”A statethe food and beverages. These expenses are ment, or recreational facilities to the gen-law is considered generally enforced unless it issubject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as aeral public as a means of advertising ornever enforced or enforced only for infamousde minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica-promoting goodwill in the community ispersons or persons whose violations are ex-tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation tofully deductible. traordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law isyour employees and you treat them as provided
generally enforced unless proper reporting of aunder a nonaccountable plan.
violation of the law results in enforcement only
Employee activities.The expense of provid- under unusual circumstances.ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-Miscellaneous Kickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re-cluding the use of a facility) for your employees
ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com-is deductible. The benefit must be primarily forExpenses mon kickback situation occurs when money oryour employees who are not highly compen-
property is given to someone as payment forsated. In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentinfluencing a third party to purchase from, useFor this purpose, a highly compensated em-expenses, other miscellaneous expenses thatthe services of, or otherwise deal with the per-ployee is an employee who meets either of theare deductible, subject to limitations, include:son who pays the kickback. In many cases, thefollowing requirements.
person whose business is being sought or en-• Amounts paid for the reasonable cost of
1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi- joyed by the person who pays the kickback is notadvertising that are directly related to your
ness during the year or the preceding year. aware of the payment.business activities. Generally, amounts
An employee is treated as owning any in- For example, the Yard Corporation is in thepaid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying)
terest owned by his or her brother, sister, business of repairing ships. It engages in theare not deductible for tax purposes. See
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descend- practice of returning 10% of the repair bills asLobbying expenses, later.
ants. kickbacks to the captains and chief officers of• Amounts paid that are directly related tothe vessels it repairs. Although this practice is2. Received more than $95,000 in pay for thethe conduct of business meetings of yourconsidered an ordinary and necessary expensepreceding year. You may choose to in- employees, partners, stockholders, of getting business, it is clearly a violation of aclude only employees who were also in theagents, or directors. Some minor socialstate law that is generally enforced. These ex-top 20% of employees when ranked by activities may be allowed, however thesependitures are not deductible for tax purposes,pay for the preceding year. expenses are subject to the 50% limit.whether or not the owners of the shipyard are
 For example, the expenses for food, bever-• Amounts paid that are directly related tosubsequently prosecuted.
ages, and entertainment for a company-wide and necessary for attending business Form 1099-MISC. It does not matterpicnic are not subject to the 50% limit. meetings or conventions of certain tax-ex-whether any kickbacks paid during the tax yearempt organizations. These organizationsare deductible on your income tax return in re-include business leagues, chambers ofgards to information reporting. See FormNonaccountable Plans commerce, real estates boards, and trade1099-MISC for more information.and professional associations.A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that
Car and truck expenses.The costs of operat-does not meet the requirements for an account-
ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your businessable plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,Advertising expenses.You can usually de-
are deductible. For more information on how tounder a nonaccountable plan are reported as duct as a business expense the cost of institu-
figure your deduction, see Publication 463.wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject tional or goodwill advertising to keep your name
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

Page 52 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Charitable contributions.Cash payments to your income. However, you may be able to take You are disabled if you have either of the
an organization, charitable or otherwise, may be a special deduction. The deduction applies only following.
deductible as business expenses if the pay- to amounts recovered for actual injury, not any
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-ments are not charitable contributions or gifts. If additional amount. The deduction is the smallerple, blindness or deafness) that function-the payments are charitable contributions or of the following. ally limits your being employed.gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-• The amount you received or accrued for • A physical or mental impairment that sub-penses. However, corporations (other than S damages in the tax year reduced by the stantially limits one or more of your majorcorporations) can deduct charitable contribu-amount you paid or incurred in the year tolife activities.tions on their income tax returns, subject torecover that amount.limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120
The expense qualifies as a business expenseand 1120-A for more information. Sole proprie-• Your losses from the injury you have not
if all the following apply.tors, partners in a partnership, or shareholdersdeducted.
in an S corporation may be able to deduct chari- • Your work clearly requires the expense fortable contributions made by their business on you to satisfactorily perform that work.Demolition expenses or losses. AmountsSchedule A (Form 1040). paid or incurred to demolish a structure are not• The goods or services purchased aredeductible. These amounts are added to theExample. You paid $15 to a local church for clearly not needed or used, other than in-basis of the land where the demolished structurea half-page ad in a program for a concert it is cidentally, in your personal activities.was located. Any loss for the remaining un-sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en- • Their treatment is not specifically provideddepreciated basis of a demolished structurecourage readers to buy your products. Your pay- for under other tax law provisions.would not be recognized until the property isment is not a charitable contribution. However,disposed.you may deduct it as an advertising expense.
Example. You are blind. You must use aEducation expenses. Ordinary and neces- reader to do your work, both at and away fromExample. You made a $100,000 donation sary expenses paid for the cost of the educationyour place of work. The reader’s services areto a committee organized by the local Chamberand training of your employees are deductible.only for your work. You can deduct your ex-of Commerce to bring a convention to your city,See Education Expenses in chapter 2. penses for the reader as a business expense.intended to increase business activity, includingYou may also deduct the cost of your ownyours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu-education (including certain related travel) re-Interview expense allowances.Reimburse-tion. However, you may deduct it as a businesslated to your trade or business. You must bements you make to job candidates for transpor-expense. able to show the education maintains or im-tation or other expenses related to interviews forSee Publication 526 for a discussion ofproves skills required in your trade or business,possible employment are not wages. You candonated inventory, including capital gain prop-or that it is required by law or regulations, fordeduct the reimbursements as a business ex-erty. keeping your license to practice, status, or job.pense. However, expenses for food, beverages,
For example, an attorney can deduct the cost ofand entertainment are subject to the 50% limitClub dues and membership fees.Generally,
attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain-amounts paid or incurred for membership in any
classes that are required by the state bar associ-ment.club organized for business, pleasure, recrea-
ation to maintain his or her license to practicetion, or any other social purpose are not deducti- Legal and professional fees.Fees chargedlaw.ble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure, by accountants and attorneys that are ordinaryEducation expenses you incur to meet therecreation, or other social purpose include, but and necessary expenses directly related to op-minimum requirements of your present trade orare not limited to country clubs, golf and athletic erating your business are deductible as busi-business, or those that qualify you for a newclubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs, ness expenses. However, usually legal fees youtrade or business, are not deductible. This is trueand clubs operated to provide meals under cir- pay to acquire business assets are not deducti-even if the education maintains or improvescumstances generally considered to be condu- ble. These costs are added to the basis of theskills presently required in your business. Forcive to business discussions. property.more information on education expenses, seeException. The following organizations are Fees that include payments for work of aPublication 970.not treated as clubs organized for business, personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-
pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un- ages arising from a personal injury), are notFranchise, trademark, trade name.If youless one of the main purposes is to conduct allowed as a business deduction on Schedule Cbuy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youentertainment activities for members or their or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both businesscan deduct the amount you pay or incur as aguests or to provide members or their guests and personal charges, compute the businessbusiness expense only if your payments are partwith access to entertainment facilities. portion as follows: multiply the total amount ofof a series of payments that are:
the bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is• Boards of trade.
the amount attributable to business matters, the1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-
• Business leagues. denominator of which is the total amount paid.tion of the item,
The result is the portion of the invoice attributa-• Chambers of commerce. 2. Payable at least annually for the entireble to business expenses. The portion attributa-term of the transfer agreement, and• Civic or public service organizations. ble to personal matters is the difference
3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable between the total amount and the business por-• Professional organizations such as bar as-
under a fixed formula). tion (computed above).sociations and medical associations.
Legal fees relating to personal tax adviceWhen determining the term of the transfer• Real estate boards. may be deductible on Line 22, Schedule Aagreement, include all renewal options and any(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How-• Trade associations. other period for which you and the transferrerever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita-reasonably expect the agreement to be re-tion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. Seenewed.Credit card convenience fees.Credit card Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.A franchise includes an agreement that givescompanies charge a fee to businesses who ac-
Tax preparation fees.The cost of hiring aone of the parties to the agreement the right tocept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred
tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to preparedistribute, sell, or provide goods, services, orby the business can be deducted as a business
that part of your tax return relating to your busi-facilities within a specified area.expense.
ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched-
Damages recovered. Special rules apply toImpairment-related expenses.If you are dis- ule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost
compensation you receive for damages sus- abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
tained as a result of patent infringement, breach you to be able to work (impairment-related ex- you itemize deductions.
of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola- penses) as a business expense, rather than as a You can also claim a business deduction for
tions. You must include this compensation in medical expense. amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted
Page 52 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 53 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax deficiencies for your business operated as aExceptions to denial of deduction.The • Paid in settlement of actual or possible
sole proprietor. general denial of the deduction does not apply to liability for a fine or penalty, whether civil
the following. or criminal.Licenses and regulatory fees.Licenses and
• Expenses of appearing before, or commu-• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-regulatory fees for your trade or business paid
nicating with, any local council or similar ceeding that could result in a fine or pen-annually to state or local governments generally
governing body concerning its legislation alty.are deductible. Some licenses and fees may
(local legislation) if the legislation is of di-have to be amortized. See chapter 9 for more
Examples of nondeductible penalties andrect interest to you or to you and an organ-information.
fines include the following.ization of which you are a member. AnLobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex- Indian tribal government is treated as a• Fines for violating city housing codes.penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenseslocal council or similar governing body.include amounts paid or incurred for any of the • Fines paid by truckers for violating state• Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-following activities. maximum highway weight laws.islation and communicating directly with a• Influencing legislation. covered executive branch official if those• Fines for violating air quality laws.
expenses for the tax year do not exceed• Participating in or intervening in any politi- • Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-$2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).cal campaign for, or against, any candi- garding mining safety standards and dis-date for public office. • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged charges into navigable waters.
in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-• Attempting to influence the general public,
A fine or penalty does not include any of thefessional lobbyists) on behalf of anotheror segments of the public, about elections,
following.person (but does apply to payments by thelegislative matters, or referendums.
other person to the lobbyist for lobbying• Legal fees and related expenses to defend• Communicating directly with covered ex- activities). yourself in a prosecution or civil action forecutive branch officials (defined later) in
a violation of the law imposing the fine orany attempt to influence the official actions
Moving machinery. Generally, the cost of civil penalty.or positions of those officials.
moving machinery from one city to another is a• Court costs or stenographic and printing• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-deductible expense. So is the cost of movingcharges.dinating any of the preceding activities.machinery from one plant to another, or from
one part of your plant to another. You can de-• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-Your expenses for influencing legislation andduct the cost of installing the machinery in thement.communicating directly with a covered execu-new location. However, you must capitalize thetive branch official include a portion of your laborcosts of installing or moving newly purchasedPolitical contributions.Contributions or giftscosts and general and administrative costs ofmachinery. paid to political parties or candidates are notyour business. For information on making this
Outplacement services. The costs of out- deductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-allocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula-
placement services you provide to your employ- curred to take part in any political campaign of ations.
ees to help them find new employment, such as candidate for public office are not deductible.You cannot claim a charitable or business
career counseling, r´esum´e assistance, skills as-expense deduction for amounts paid to an or- Indirect political contributions.You can-sessment, etc. are deductible.ganization if both of the following apply. not deduct indirect political contributions andThe costs of outplacement services maycosts of taking part in political activities as busi-• The organization conducts lobbying activi-cover more than one deduction category. Forness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-ties on matters of direct financial interestexample, deduct as a utilities expense the costpenses include the following.to your business. of telephone calls made under this service and
deduct as rental expense the cost of renting• Advertising in a convention program of a• A principal purpose of your contribution is
machinery and equipment for this service. political party, or in any other publication ifto avoid the rules discussed earlier that
For information on whether the value of out-any of the proceeds from the publicationprohibit a business deduction for lobbying
placement services is includable in your employ-are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-expenses.
ees’ income, see Publication 15-B. cal party or candidate.
If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-Penalties and fines.Penalties paid for late• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with aperformance or nonperformance of a contract ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmnotice on the part of dues that is allocable toare generally deductible. For instance, you ownpresentations, parties, and sportingnondeductible lobbying and political expenses,and operate a construction company. You haveevents) if any of the proceeds from theyou cannot deduct that part of the dues. been contracted to construct a building by afunction are for, or intended for, the use of
certain date. Due to construction delays, thea political party or candidate.Covered executive branch official.For
building is not completed and ready for occu-purposes of this discussion, a covered executive • Admission to an inaugural ball, gala,pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. Youbranch official is any of the following. parade, concert, or similar event if identi-are now required to pay an additional amount forfied with a political party or candidate.1. The President. each day that completion is delayed beyond the
completion date stipulated in the contract.2. The Vice President. Repairs. The cost of repairing or improvingThese additional costs are deductible business
3. Any officer or employee of the White property used in your trade or business is eitherexpenses.
House Office of the Executive Office of the a deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte-On the other hand, penalties or fines paid to
President and the two most senior level nance that keeps your property in a normal effi-any government agency or instrumentality be-
officers of each of the other agencies in cient operating condition, but that does notcause of a violation of any law are not deducti-
the Executive Office. materially increase the value or substantiallyble. These fines or penalties include the
prolong the useful life of the property is deducti-following amounts.4. Any individual who:
ble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, the• Paid because of a conviction for a crime orcost must be depreciated over the useful life ofa. Is serving in a position in Level I of theafter a plea of guilty or no contest in athe property. See Form 4562 and its instructionsExecutive Schedule under section 5312 criminal proceeding. for how to compute and claim the depreciationof title 5, United States Code,
deduction.• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal,b. Has been designated by the President state, or local law in a civil action, includ- The cost of repairs includes the costs ofas having Cabinet-level status, or ing certain additions to tax and additional labor, supplies, and certain other items. The
c. Is an immediate deputy of an individual amounts and assessable penalties im- value of your own labor is not deductible. Exam-
listed in item (a) or (b). posed by the Internal Revenue Code. ples of repairs include:
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 53

Page 54 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-• Reconditioning floors (but not replace-credit on line 70 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C. sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-ment), 1341” next to line 70. mally use them within a year. However, if the
• Repainting the interior and exterior walls usefulness of these items extends substantially
Example. For 2004, you filed a return andof a building, beyond the year they are placed in service, you
reported your income on the cash method. Ingenerally must recover their costs through de-• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters,2005, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2004preciation. For more information regarding de-and gross income under a claim of right. Your filingpreciation see Publication 946, How to
status in 2005 and 2004 is single. Your income• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- Depreciate Property.
and tax for both years are as follows:ment of fixtures).
Utilities.Business expenses for heat, lights,
2004 2004 power, telephone service, and water and sewer-Repayments. If you had to repay an amount With Income Without Income age are deductible. However, any part attributa-you included in your income in an earlier year,Taxable ble to personal use is not deductible.you may be able to deduct the amount repaid forIncome $15,000 $10,000 Telephone. The cost of basic local tele-the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amount
Tax $ 1,896 $ 1,146 phone service (including any taxes) for the firstyou repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able
telephone line you have in your home, evento take a credit against your tax for the year in 2005 2005 though you have an office in your home is notwhich you repaid it. Without Deduction With Deduction deductible. However, charges for businessType of deduction.The type of deduction Taxable long-distance phone calls on that line, as well asIncome $49,950 $44,950you are allowed in the year of repayment de- the cost of a second line into your home usedpends on the type of income you included in theTax  $9,159  $ 7,909 exclusively for business, are deductible busi-earlier year. For instance, if you repay anYour tax under Method 1 is $7,909. Your taxness expenses.amount you previously reported as a capitalunder Method 2 is $8,409, figured as follows:gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on
Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it asTax previously determined for 2004 $ 1,896
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,146
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule Decrease in 2004 tax $ 750
C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).Regular tax liability for 2005....... $9,159
Less: Decrease in 2004 tax....... − 750If you reported the amount as wages, unem- 14.
Refigured tax for 2005 $ 8,409ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness
ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (FormBecause you pay less tax under Method 1, you
1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deductionshould take a deduction for the repayment inHow To Get Taxthat is subject to the 2% limitation. However, if2005.
the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1
Repayment does not apply. This discus-(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule Helpsion does not apply to the following.A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-
duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.• Deductions for bad debts.
Repayment—$3,000 or less. If the • Deductions from sales to customers, suchYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct itas returns and allowances, and similarorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-from your income in the year you repaid it. items. tions, and get more information from the IRS in
Repayment—over $3,000. If the amount several ways. By selecting the method that is• Deductions for legal and other expenses
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de- best for you, you will have quick and easy ac-of contesting the repayment.
duct the repayment, as described earlier. How- cess to tax help.
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax creditYear of deduction (or credit).If you use Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If youfor the year of repayment if you included thethe cash method of accounting, you can take thehave attempted to deal with an IRS problemincome under a “claim of right.” This means thatdeduction (or credit, if applicable) for the taxunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-at the time you included the income, it appearedyear in which you actually make the repayment.payer Advocate.that you had an unrestricted right to it. If youIf you use any other accounting method, you canThe Taxpayer Advocate independently rep-qualify for this choice, figure your tax under bothdeduct the repayment or claim a credit for it onlyresents your interests and concerns within themethods and use the method that results in lessfor the tax year in which it is a proper deductionIRS by protecting your rights and resolvingtax. under your accounting method. For example, ifproblems that have not been fixed through nor-you use the accrual method, you are entitled toMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2005 claiming mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-the deduction or credit in the tax year in whicha deduction for the repaid amount. not change the tax law or make a technical taxthe obligation for the repayment accrues.decision, they can clear up problems that re-Method 2. Figure your tax for 2005 claiming
Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional,sulted from previous contacts and ensure thata credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these
technical, and trade journals that deal with youryour case is given a complete and impartialsteps.
business field are deductible. review.
1. Figure your tax for 2005 without deducting To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:Supplies and materials.Unless you have de-the repaid amount. ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year can deduct the cost of materials and supplies1-877-777-4778.
without including in income the amount actually consumed and used during the tax year.• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocateyou repaid in 2005. If you keep incidental materials and supplies office in your area.on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden-3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown • Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are atal materials and supplies you bought during theon your return for the earlier year. This is TTY/TDD user.tax year if all the following requirements are met.the amount of your credit.
• Visit the website at www.irs.gov/advocate.• You do not keep a record of when they are4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forused.2005 figured without the deduction (step For more information, see Publication 1546,1). • You do not take an inventory of the How To Get Help With Unresolved Taxamount on hand at the beginning and endIf Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the Problems (now available in Chinese, Korean,of the tax year.amount repaid as discussed earlier under Type Russian, and Vietnamese, in addition to English
of deduction. • This method does not distort your income. and Spanish).
Page 54 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 55 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Free tax services.To find out what services 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund in-
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to National Distribution Centerformation and follow the recorded instruc-
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax P.O. Box 8903tions or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to
publications and an index of tax topics. It also Bloomington, IL 61702-8903wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
describes other free tax information services,filed your return (3 weeks if you filed CD-ROM for tax products. You canincluding tax education and assistance pro- electronically). Have your 2005 tax return order IRS Publication 1796, Federalgrams and a list of TeleTax topics. available because you will need to know Tax Products on CD-ROM, and ob-
your social security number, your filingInternet. You can access the IRS tain:
status, and the exact whole dollarwebsite 24 hours a day, 7 days a • A CD that is released twice so you haveamount of your refund.week, at www.irs.gov to: the latest products. The first release
ships in late December and the final re-• E-file your return. Find out about com-Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-lease ships in late February.mercial tax preparation and e-file serv- ices. To ensure that IRS representatives giveices available free to eligible taxpayers. • Current-year forms, instructions, andaccurate, courteous, and professional answers,publications.• Check the status of your 2005 refund.we use several methods to evaluate the qualityClick on Where’s My Refund. Be sure to • Prior-year forms, instructions, and in-of our telephone services. One method is for await at least 6 weeks from the date you structions.second IRS representative to sometimes listenfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andin on or record telephone calls. Another is to askelectronically) and have your 2005 tax re- finding aid.some callers to complete a short survey at theturn available because you will need to • Tax law frequently asked questionsend of the call.know your social security number, your (FAQs).filing status, and the exact whole dollar Walk-in. Many products and services • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-amount of your refund. are available on a walk-in basis. sponse system.• Download forms, instructions, and publi- • Fill-in, print, and save features for mostcations. • Products. You can walk in to many post tax forms.• Order IRS products online. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick• Internal Revenue Bulletins.• Research your tax questions online. up certain forms, instructions, and publi-• Toll-free and email technical support.cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-• Search publications online by topic or Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Infor-cery stores, copy centers, city and countykeyword. mation Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdordersgovernment offices, credit unions, and of-• Figure your withholding allowances using for $25 (no handling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767fice supply stores have a collection ofour Form W-4 calculator. toll free to buy the CD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5products available to print from a• Sign up to receive local and national tax handling fee).CD-ROM or photocopy from reproduciblenews by email. CD-ROM for small businesses. IRSproofs. Also, some IRS offices and librar-• Get information on starting and operating Publication 3207, Small Business Re-ies have the Internal Revenue Code, reg-a small business. source Guide CD-ROM for 2005, hasulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and
a new look and enhanced navigation features.Phone. Many services are available Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
This year’s CD includes:by phone. search purposes.
• Helpful information, such as how to pre-• Services. You can walk in to your local
pare a business plan, find financing forTaxpayer Assistance Center every busi-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- your business, and much more.ness day for personal, face-to-face taxtions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order
• All the business tax forms, instructions,help. An employee can explain IRS let-current-year forms, instructions, and pub-
and publications needed to successfullylications and prior-year forms and instruc-ters, request adjustments to your ac-
manage a business.tions. You should receive your order count, or help you set up a payment plan.
within 10 days. • Tax law changes for 2005.If you need to resolve a tax problem,
have questions about how the tax law• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with • IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, in-
applies to your individual tax return, oryour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. structions, and publications by searching
you’re more comfortable talking with on a keyword or topic.• Solving problems. You can get
someone in person, visit your local Tax-face-to-face help solving tax problems • Web links to various government agen-
payer Assistance Center where you canevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As- cies, business associations, and IRS or-
spread out your records and talk with ansistance Centers. An employee can ex- ganizations.
IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-plain IRS letters, request adjustments to • “Rate the Product” survey—your oppor-pointment is necessary, but if you prefer,your account, or help you set up a pay- tunity to suggest changes for future edi-you can call your local Center and leavement plan. Call your local Taxpayer As- tions.
a message requesting an appointment tosistance Center for an appointment. To  An updated version of this CD is available each
resolve a tax account issue. A represen-find the number, go towww.irs.gov/local- year in early April. You can get a free copy by
tative will call you back within 2 businesscontacts or look in the phone book under calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting
days to schedule an in-person appoint-United States Government, Internal Rev- www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
ment at your convenience. To find theenue Service.
number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
or look in the phone book under Unitedto TTY/TDD equipment, call
States Government, Internal Revenue1-800-829-4059 to ask tax or to order
Service.forms and publications.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and Mail. You can send your order for
press 2 to listen to pre-recorded forms, instructions, and publications
messages covering various tax topics. to the address below and receive a
response within 10 business days after your• Refund information. If you would like to
request is received.check the status of your 2005 refund, call
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 55

Page 56 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Capitalization of interest.... 1 9AE H
Car allowance............... 5 0Accountable plan........... 4 9 Economic interest........... 3 8Health insurance, deduction for
self-employed............. 2 4Car and truck expenses..... 5 1Achievement awards ......... 6 Economic performance ...... 4
Heating equipment........... 3Carrying charges............ 2 6Advertising.................. 5 1 Education expenses.......7 ,  5 2
Help (See Tax help)Charitable:Amortization: Elderly, improvements
Contributions............... 5 2 for ........................ 2 9Anti-abuse rule............. 3 5
Anti-churning rules......... 3 4Circulation costs, newspapers Election: Iand periodicals........... 2 8Atmospheric pollution control SIMPLE IRA period......... 1 1Impairment-relatedfacilities................. 3 7Clean-fuel property......46, 47, Electric vehicle credit....... 4 8 expenses ................. 5 2Corporate organization 48 Employee benefit Improvements ................ 3costs.................... 3 1Cleanup costs, programs .................. 7 By lessee.................. 1 6Dispositions of section 197 environmental...........2 ,  2 8Employees’ pay .............. 6 For disabled and elderly.... 2 9intangibles............... 3 5Club dues ................... 5 2Employment taxes .......... 2 3Income taxes................ 2 2Experimental costs......... 3 7Comments on publication.... 1 Entertainment............... 4 9Incorrect amount ofGeological and geophysical Commitment fees ........... 1 9Environmental cleanup amortization deducted.... 3 5costs.................... 3 7Compensation .............. 1 0 costs....................2 ,  2 8Individual retirementGoing into business Computer software.......... 3 4Environmental remediation arrangements (IRAs)...... 1 4costs.................... 3 1Constant-yield method, costs (See Environmental Insurance:How to deduct............. 3 1 OID ....................... 1 9cleanup costs) Capitalized premiums....... 2 5Incorrect amount
Contested liability............ 4 Excise taxes................ 2 3 Deductible premiums....... 2 3deducted ................ 3 5
Contributions: Experimentation costs..... 2 6 , NondeductiblePartnership organization
Charitable................. 5 2 37 premiums ................ 2 5costs.................... 3 1
Political.................... 5 3Exploration costs........... 2 7 Self-employedPollution control facilities.... 3 7
Copyrights.................. 3 3 individuals............... 2 4Reforestation costs......... 3 6
Cost depletion.............. 3 8 Intangible drilling costs..... 2 7Reforestation expenses..... 2 9
FRelated person............. 3 4Cost of getting lease....16, 32 Intangibles, amortization.... 3 2
Fees:Research costs............ 3 7Cost of goods sold........... 3 Interest:
Commitment ............... 1 9Section 197 intangibles Allocation of................ 1 7Cost recovery................ 3
Legal and professional...... 5 2defined.................. 3 3 Below-market.............. 2 0Covenant not to
Loan origination............ 1 9Start-up costs.............. 3 1 Business expense for....... 1 6compete .................. 3 3
Regulatory................. 5 3Capitalized................. 1 9Anticipated liabilities........ 5 1Credit card convenience
Carrying charge............ 2 6Tax return preparation...... 5 2Assessments, local......... 2 2 fees....................... 5 2
Deductible................. 1 8Fines........................ 5 3Assistance (See Tax help) Credit, electric vehicle....... 4 8 Forgone ................... 2 0Forgone interest............ 2 0At-risk limits................. 4 Life insurance policies...... 1 9Form:Attorney fees................ 5 2 Not deductible............. 1 9D 1098 ...................... 1 8Awards: Refunds of................. 2 0De minimis OID ............. 1 8 3115 ..................22, 35Achievement................ 6 When to deduct............ 2 0Debt-financed: 4562 ...................... 3 1Length-of-service............ 6 Interview expenses.......... 5 2Distributions............... 1 8Safety achievement......... 6 5213 ....................... 5IRA .......................... 1 4Definitions: 5304-SIMPLE .............. 1 0
Achievement award......... 6 5305-S .................... 1 1
B Business bad debt.......... 4 3 5305-SA ................... 1 1K
Bad debts (See Business bad Clean-burning fuel.......... 4 5 5305-SEP .................. 9Keogh plan (See Qualifieddebts) Clean-fuel vehicle retirement plan)5305-SIMPLE .............. 1 0property................. 4 6Bonuses: 8826 ...................... 3 0Key person.................. 1 9Clean-fuel vehicle refuelingEmployee ................... 7 8834 ...................... 4 8Kickbacks ................... 5 1property................. 4 6Royalties.................. 4 2 8885 ...................... 2 4Motor vehicle.............. 4 5Bribes....................... 5 1 T .......................... 4 3Necessary expense......... 3 LBrownfields (See Environmental W - 2 ....................... 1 2Nonqualifying property...... 4 6 Leases:cleanup costs) Franchise ...............33, 52Ordinary expense........... 3 Canceling.................. 1 5Business: Franchise taxes............. 2 3Qualified electric vehicle.... 4 8 Cost of getting.........16, 32Assets...................... 3 Free tax services............ 5 4Section 197 intangibles..... 3 3 Improvements by lessee.... 1 6Books and records......... 3 3 Fringe benefits............... 7Demolition expenses........ 5 2 Leveraged ................. 1 5Meal expenses............. 5 0
Fuel taxes................... 2 3Depletion: Mineral.................... 4 2Use of car...............4 ,  5 1
Mineral property............ 3 8 Oil and gas................ 4 2Use of home................ 3
Oil and gas wells........... 3 9 Sales distinguished......... 1 5Business bad debts: GPercentage table........... 4 1 Taxes on .................. 1 5Defined.................... 4 3 Gas wells ................... 4 1Timber..................... 4 2 Legal and professionalHow to treat................ 4 4 Geological and geophysicalWho can claim............. 3 8 fees....................... 5 2Recovery .................. 4 5 costs:Depreciation (See Cost recovery) Licenses ................33, 53Types of................... 4 3 Development, oil andDevelopment costs, Limit on deductions.......... 5When worthless............ 4 4 g a s...................... 3 7miners .................... 2 8 Line of credit................ 1 8Where to deduct........... 4 5
Exploration, oil and gas..... 3 7Disabled, improvements Loans:
Geothermal wells........27, 41for ........................ 2 9 Below-market interest
C Gifts, nominal value.......... 7Drilling and development rate..................... 2 0
Campaign contribution...... 5 3 costs...................... 2 7Going into business......... 3 1 Discounted................ 2 0
Capital expenses............. 3Dues, membership .......... 5 2Goodwill .................... 3 3Origination fees............ 1 9
Page 56

Page 57 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mining exploration and Recovery of amount SIMPLE plans ........10, 11, 12Loans: (Cont.)
development costs....... 3 7 deducted ................... 4To employees............... 7 Standard meal allowance.... 5 0
Research costs............ 3 7Refiners who cannot claimLobbying expenses ......... 5 3 Standard mileage rate....... 5 0
Organization costs: percentage depletion ...... 3 9Lodging and meals........... 7 Standby charges............ 1 9
Corporate.................. 3 1Reforestation costs.....29, 36Long-term care Start-up costs...........29, 31
Partnership................ 3 1Regulatory fees............. 5 3insurance ................. 2 4 Subscriptions...........52, 54
Organizational costs........ 2 9Reimbursements ............ 4 9Losses: Suggestions for
Original issue discount...... 1 8 Accountable plan........... 4 9At-risk limits................. 4 publication................. 1
Outplacement services...... 5 3 Mileage.................... 5 0Net operating............... 4 Supplies and materials...... 5 4
Nonaccountable plan....... 5 1Passive activities............ 4
Per diem................... 5 0P TQualifying requirements..... 4 9M Passive activities............. 4 Tax help..................... 5 4Related persons:Machinery parts.............. 3Payments in kind............. 4 Tax preparation fees........ 5 2Anti-churning rules......... 3 4Meals ....................... 4 9Penalties: Taxes:Clean-fuel vehicleDeductible................. 5 3Meals and entertainment.... 5 0 Carrying charge............ 2 6deduction................ 4 6Nondeductible............. 5 3Meals and lodging............ 7 Employment ............... 2 3Coal or iron ore............ 4 2Prepayment................ 1 8Medical expenses........... 5 2 Excise..................... 2 3Payments to.............4 ,  2 0
Per diem and car allowances: Franchise.................. 2 3Methods of accounting....... 4 Refiners................... 3 9
High-low rate............... 5 0 Fuel....................... 2 3Unreasonable rent.......... 1 4Mining:
Regular rate............... 5 0 Income .................... 2 2Depletion.................. 4 1 Removal:Reporting allowance........ 5 0 Leased property............ 1 5Development costs......... 2 8 Barrier..................... 2 9Standard meal Personal property.......... 2 3Exploration costs........... 2 7 Retired asset............... 2 9allowance................ 5 0 Real estate................ 2 2Money purchase pension Rent expense,Standard mileage rate...... 5 0 Sales...................... 2 3plan....................... 1 2 capitalizing................ 1 6Percentage depletion........ 3 9 Unemployment fund........ 2 3More information (See Tax help) Repairs ..................... 5 3Personal property tax....... 2 3 Taxpayer Advocate.......... 5 4Mortgage: Repayments (claim ofPoints....................... 1 9 Telephone ................... 5 4Cost of acquiring........... 1 8 right)...................... 5 4
Political contributions....... 5 3 Timber ..................36, 42Interest.................... 1 8 Research costs .........26, 37
Pollution control Tools......................... 3Moving expenses, Retirement plans:facilities................... 3 7 Trademark, trade name..... 3 3 ,machinery ................ 5 3 Defined benefit............. 1 2
Prepaid expense............. 4 52Defined contribution........ 1 2
Extends useful life.......... 2 6 Travel....................... 4 9I R A........................ 1 4N Interest.................... 2 0Money purchase ........... 1 2TTY/TDD information........ 5 4Natural gas.................. 4 1Rent....................... 1 4Profit-sharing.............. 1 2Nonqualifying Prepayment penalty......... 1 8 Qualified................... 1 2Uintangibles................ 3 3Presumption of profit......... 5 Salary reduction Unemployment fundNot-for-profit activities....... 5 arrangement.............. 9Profit-sharing plans......... 1 2 taxes...................... 2 3Notification requirement: S E P ........................ 9Publications (See Tax help) Unpaid expenses, relatedSIMPLE IRA ............... 1 1 SIMPLE ................... 1 0person .................... 2 0
Q Utilities...................... 5 4O SQualified retirement plan.... 1 2Office in home............... 3 Salaries and wages........... 6 VOil and gas wells: Sales taxes.................. 2 3R Vacation pay................. 8Depletion.................. 3 9 Section 179 expense deductionRate Worksheet forDrilling costs............... 2 7 (See Cost recovery)Self-Employed ............ 1 3Partnerships............... 4 0 WSelf-employed health insuranceReal estate taxes............ 2 2S corporations............. 4 0 deduction ................. 2 4Wages and salaries.......... 6Recapture:Optional write-off method: Self-employment tax........ 2 3Welfare benefit funds......... 7Clean-fuel deductions...... 4 7Circulation costs........... 3 7 Self-insurance, reserveElectric vehicle credit....... 4 8Experimental costs......... 3 7 ■for ........................ 2 5Exploration expenses....... 2 8Intangible drilling and
SEP plans .................... 9Timber property............ 3 6development costs....... 3 7
Sick pay...................... 8
Page 57

Page 58 of 58 of Publication 535 12:45 -  8-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers
General Guides
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Spanish Language Publications
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2006
Highlights of 2005 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
(Circular E), Employer’s Tax Guide
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide
(Circular A), Agricultural Employer’s
Tax Guide
(Circular SS), Federal Tax Guide For
Employers in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
(Circular PR), Guía Contributiva Federal
Para Patronos Puertorriqueños
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Excise Taxes for 2006
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident
Aliens and Foreign Entities
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
Residential Rental Property
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Installment Sales
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Basis of Assets
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Starting a Business and Keeping
Records
What You Should Know About The
IRS Collection Process
Information on the United States-
Canada Income Tax Treaty
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS—How to Get Help With
Unresolved Tax Problems
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
Tax on Unrelated Business Income of
Exempt Organizations
Wage and Tax Statement
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Self-Employment Tax
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Capital Gains and Losses
Partner’s Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return
U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Employee Business Expenses
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
General Business Credit
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Moving Expenses
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Installment Sale Income
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
15
15-A
51
80
179
926
378
463
505
510
515
517
527
534
535
536
537
541
538
542
Partnerships
544
551
556
560
561
583
594
597
598
901
925
946
947
908
1544
1546
1SP
850
579SP
Qué es lo Debemos Saber Sobre El
Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes
Sch R
Sch SE
1040-ES
1040X
Sch D
Sch K-1
1120
1120S
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
2106
2106-EZ
2441
2848
3800
4868
3903
5329
6252
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Specialized Publications
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Employee’s Withholding Allowance CertificateW-4
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return
940
940-EZ
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return1040
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
587
U.S. Tax Treaties
Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney
Tax Incentives for Distressed
Communities
Employer’s Guides
Certification for Reduced Tax Rates in
Tax Treaty Countries
686
954
Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Shareholder’s Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
Sch D
Sch K-1
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals,
Estates, and Trusts
2210
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received
in a Trade or Business
8300
Depreciation and Amortization4562
Sales of Business Property4797
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income
Tax Return
1120-A
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by
computer, phone, and mail.
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone,
and mail.
Form Number and Title
W-2
Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return941
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Form Number and Title
Continuation Sheet for Schedule DSch D-1
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
15-B
Capital Construction Fund for
Commercial Fishermen
595
Page 58