Userid: SD_77WMB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...nts and Settings\77WMB\My Documents\525\P525_050108 Excess.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
What's New for 2008 .............. . 1Department
of the What's New for 2009 .............. . 2Treasury Taxable and 
Reminders ..................... . 2Internal
Revenue Introduction .................... . 2Nontaxable Service
Employee Compensation .......... . 3
Miscellaneous Compensation ....... . 3
Fringe Benefits ................ . 4Income
Retirement Plan Contributions ...... . 9
Stock Options ................ . 11
Restricted Property ............. . 13
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees .................. . 14
Clergy ..................... . 142008 Returns
Members of Religious Orders ...... . 14
Foreign Employer .............. . 14
Military ..................... . 15
Volunteers .................. . 15
Business and Investment Income .... . 16
Rents From Personal Property ..... . 16
Royalties ................... . 16
Partnership Income ............ . 16
S Corporation Income ........... . 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ........ . 17
Disability Pensions ............. . 17
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ................ . 18
Workers' Compensation ......... . 18
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits ................. . 18
Miscellaneous Income ............ . 19
Bartering ................... . 19
Canceled Debts ............... . 19
Host or Hostess ............... . 20
Life Insurance Proceeds ......... . 20
Recoveries .................. . 22
Survivor Benefits .............. . 29
Unemployment Benefits ......... . 29
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits ......... . 29
Other Income ................ . 30
Repayments ................... . 36
How To Get Tax Help ............. . 36
Index ......................... . 39
What's New for 2008
Economic stimulus payment. Any economic
stimulus payment you received is not taxable. If
your payment was directly deposited to a
tax-favored account, such as an IRA, and you
withdraw the payment by the due date (including
extensions) of your 2008 tax return, the amount
withdrawn will not be taxed and no additional tax
or penalty will apply.
Retirement plans. Your employer, under aGet forms and other information
qualified automatic contribution arrangement,faster and easier by: can treat you as having elected to have part of
your compensation contributed (elective defer-
Internet www.irs.gov ral) to a section 401(k) plan, unless you elect out
of that arrangement.
Feb 19, 2009

Page 2 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exclusion of income for volunteer firefight- Nonqualified deferred compensation plans See Nonqualified deferred compensation plans
under Employee Compensation.ers and emergency medical responders. If of nonqualified entities. Generally, for serv-
you are a volunteer firefighter or emergency ices performed after 2008, any compensation Health Savings Account (HSA). You canmedical responder, you may be able to exclude deferred under a nonqualified deferred compen- fund your HSA with a one-time direct transferfrom gross income certain rebates or reductions sation plan of a nonqualified entity is included in from your individual retirement plan, health reim-of state or local property or income taxes and up gross income when there is no substantial risk of bursement account, or health flexible spendingto $30 per month provided by a state or local forfeiture of the rights to such compensation. For account and exclude the amount of the transfergovernment. For more information, see Volun- this purpose, a nonqualified entity is: from income. However, you must include theteer firefighters and emergency medical re- amount transferred in your income, as well as1. A foreign corporation unless substantiallysponders under Volunteers. pay a 10% additional tax, if you do not remain anall of its income is:
eligible individual for at least 12 months after theRetroactive VA determination. If you receive
a. Effectively connected with the conduct month of the transfer. See Accident or Healththis type of determination, the period during
Plan under Fringe Benefits.of a trade or business in the Unitedwhich you can file a claim for refund has been
States, orextended until the end of the 1-year period be- Qualified joint venture. A qualified joint ven-ginning on the date of the determination. See the b. Subject to a comprehensive foreign in- ture conducted by you and your spouse may notdiscussion under Disability Pensions. come tax. be treated as a partnership if you file a joint
return for the tax year. See Partnership Income.Qualified military benefit. Any bonus pay-
2. A partnership unless substantially all of itsment by a state or political subdivision to an Photographs of missing children. The Inter-income is allocated to persons other than:individual because of service in a combat zone nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theis a qualified military benefit and is excluded a. Foreign persons for whom the income National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-from income. See Military. is not subject to a comprehensive for- dren. Photographs of missing children selected
eign income tax, and by the Center may appear in this publication onCasualty loss caused by Hurricane Katrina,
pages that otherwise would be blank. You canRita, or Wilma. If you claimed a deduction in b. Tax-exempt organizations. help bring these children home by looking at theany tax year for a casualty loss to your home
photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTdue to Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma and in a
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.later tax year you receive a grant as reimburse-
ment for that loss, you can report the grant as
income in the year you receive it or you can Reminderschoose to file an amended tax return for the year
Introductionyou claimed the deduction. See Recoveries. Terrorist attacks. You can exclude from in-
You can receive income in the form of money,come certain disaster assistance, disability, andDisaster relief provision. The Heartland Dis- property, or services. This publication discussesdeath payments received as a result of a terror-aster Tax Relief Act of 2008 provides tax relief to many kinds of income and explains whetherpersons affected by the severe storms, torna- ist or military action. For more information, see they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis-does, or flooding occurring in a Midwestern dis- Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter- cussions on employee wages and fringe bene-aster area. Some of the provisions are covered rorist Attacks. fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, Sin this publication. For information on other pro- corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor-Astronauts. You also can exclude death pay-visions, see Publication 4492-B, Information for mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro-ments for astronauts dying in the line of dutyAffected Taxpayers in the Midwestern Disaster ceeds, and welfare and other public assistanceafter 2002.Areas. benefits. Check the index for the location of a
Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or specific subject.Qualified settlement income. If you receive
Generally, an amount included in your in-resident alien, you must report income fromqualified settlement income as a qualified tax-
come is taxable unless it is specifically ex-sources outside the United States (foreign in-payer, report it on Form 1040, line 21, or Form
empted by law. Income that is taxable must become) on your tax return unless it is exempt by1040NR, line 21. Generally, this is interest and
reported on your return and is subject to tax.U.S. law. This is true whether you reside insidepunitive damage awards received in connection
Income that is nontaxable may have to beor outside the United States and whether or notwith the civil action In re Exxon Valdez. You may
shown on your tax return but is not taxable.you receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-be able to reduce the amount you report. See
ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. ThisExxon Valdez settlement income  under Other Constructively received income. You areapplies to earned income (such as wages andIncome. generally taxed on income that is available totips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourExcess contributions. If you receive any ex- est, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, possession.cess contributions from a 401(k) plan and any and royalties). A valid check that you received or that wasincome earned on the contributions, you must  If you reside outside the United States, you made available to you before the end of the taxinclude them in your income in the year of the may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign year is considered income constructively re-distribution. See Excess Contributions  under source earned income. For details, see Publica- ceived in that year, even if you do not cash theRetirement Plan Contributions. tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- check or deposit it to your account until the next
dent Aliens Abroad. year. For example, if the postal service tries to
deliver a check to you on the last day of the taxDisaster mitigation payments. You can ex- year but you are not at home to receive it, youclude from income grants you use to mitigateWhat's New for 2009 must include the amount in your income for that(reduce the severity of) potential damage from tax year. If the check was mailed so that it couldfuture natural disasters that are paid to youDifferential wage payments. Payments not possibly reach you until after the end of thethrough state and local governments. For moremade after 2008 by an employer to an individual tax year, and you otherwise could not get theinformation, see Disaster mitigation paymentsfor any period during which the individual is an funds before the end of the year, you include theunder Welfare and Other Public Assistanceactive duty member of the uniformed services amount in your income for the next tax year.Benefits.are treated as wages.
Assignment of income. Income received
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.Transportation fringe benefit to bicycle com- by an agent for you is income you constructively
Generally, all amounts deferred under a non-muters. The qualified employer transportation received in the year the agent received it. If you
qualified deferred compensation plan for all taxfringe benefit is expanded to include any quali- agree by contract that a third party is to receive
years are included in gross income for the cur-fied bicycle commuting reimbursement made af- income for you, you must include the amount in
rent year, unless certain requirements are met.ter 2008. your income when the third party receives it.
Page 2 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 3 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You and your employer agree ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, and the year from services performed both before
that part of your salary is to be paid directly to Administrators and after the beginning of the case.
your former spouse. You must include that You must file a statement with your income❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsamount in your income when your former tax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11
❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Incomespouse receives it. bankruptcy case. The statement must show the
allocation and describe the method used to❏ 915 Social Security and EquivalentPrepaid income. Prepaid income, such as make the allocation. For a sample of this state-Railroad Retirement Benefitscompensation for future services, generally is ment and other information, see Notice 2006-83,
included in your income in the year you receive ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education 2006-40 I.R.B. 596, available at www.irs.gov/irb/
it. However, if you use an accrual method of See How To Get Tax Help, near the end of 2006-40_IRB/ar12.html.
accounting, you can defer prepaid income you this publication, for information about getting
receive for services to be performed before the these publications. Miscellaneousend of the next tax year. In this case, you include
Compensationthe payment in your income as you earn it by
performing the services. This section discusses many types of employee
Employee compensation. The subjects are arranged in al-Comments and suggestions. We welcome
phabetical order.your comments about this publication and your Compensationsuggestions for future editions. Advance commissions and other earnings.
You can write to us at the following address: If you receive advance commissions or otherGenerally, you must include in gross income
amounts for services to be performed in theeverything you receive in payment for personal
future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, youservices. In addition to wages, salaries, commis-Internal Revenue Service
must include these amounts in your income insions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms ofIndividual Forms and Publications Branch
the year you receive them.compensation such as fringe benefits and stockSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
If you repay unearned commissions or otheroptions.1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
amounts in the same year you receive them,   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage andWashington, DC 20224
reduce the amount included in your income byTax Statement, from your employer showing the
the repayment. If you repay them in a later taxpay you received for your services. Include yourWe respond to many letters by telephone. year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or onTherefore, it would be helpful if you would in- ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re-clude your daytime phone number, including the or you may be able to take a credit for that year.ceive a Form W-2.area code, in your correspondence. See Repayments, later.If you performed services, other than as anYou can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The independent contractor, and your employer did Allowances and reimbursements.   If youasterisk must be included in the address.) not withhold social security and Medicare taxes receive travel, transportation, or other businessPlease put ªPublications Commentº on the sub- from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- expense allowances or reimbursements fromject line. Although we cannot respond individu- lected Social Security and Medicare Tax on your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En-ally to each email, we do appreciate your Wages, with your Form 1040. These wages tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you arefeedback and will consider your comments as must be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-we revise our tax products. Form 8919 for more information. tion 521, Moving Expenses.Ordering forms and publications. Visit
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare,www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and Back pay awards. Include in income amounts
either in the child's home or in your home orpublications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
other place of business, the pay you receiveaddress below and receive a response within 10 back pay. These include payments made to you
must be included in your income. If you are notdays after your request is received. for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,
an employee, you are probably self-employed and unpaid health insurance premiums. They
and must include payments for your services on should be reported to you by your employer onInternal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Form W-2.1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awardsProfit From Business. You generally are not an
you receive for outstanding work are included inemployee unless you are subject to the will and
your income and should be shown on your Formcontrol of the person who employs you as toTax questions. If you have a tax question, W-2. These include prizes such as vacation tripswhat you are to do and how you are to do it.check the information available on www.irs.gov for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award youor call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives or receive is goods or services, you must includequestions sent to either of the above addresses. neighborhood children, whether on a regular the fair market value of the goods or services in
basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare your income. However, if your employer merelyUseful Items providers apply to you. promises to pay you a bonus or award at someYou may want to see: future time, it is not taxable until you receive it orBankruptcy. If you filed for bankruptcy under it is made available to you.Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code, you mustPublication
allocate your wages and withheld income tax. Employee achievement award. If you re-❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business (For Your W-2 will show your total wages and with- ceive tangible personal property (other thanIndividuals Who Use Schedule C or held income tax for the year. On your tax return, cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asC-EZ) you report the wages and withheld income tax an award for length-of-service or safety achieve-
for the period before you filed for bankruptcy. ment, you generally can exclude its value from❏ 523 Selling Your Home
Your bankruptcy estate reports the wages and your income. However, the amount you can ex-❏ 527 Residential Rental Property withheld income tax for the period after you filed clude is limited to your employer's cost and(Including Rental of Vacation for bankruptcy. If you receive other information cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awardsHomes) returns (such as Form 1099-DIV or 1099-INT) that are not qualified plan awards) for all such
that report gross income to you, rather than to awards you receive during the year. Your em-❏ 541 Partnerships
the bankruptcy estate, you must allocate that ployer can tell you whether your award is a❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of income. qualified plan award. Your employer must makeAssets The only exception is for purposes of figuring the award as part of a meaningful presentation,
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses your self-employment tax, if you are under conditions and circumstances that do not
(Including Capital Gains and self-employed. For that purpose, you must take create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
Losses) into account all your self-employment income for guised pay.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 3

Page 4 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
However, the exclusion does not apply to the services, you must include the fair market value on your tax return. The payment is also treated
following awards. (usually the discount value) of the note in your as wages for figuring your social security and
income for the year you receive it. When you Medicare taxes and your social security and• A length-of-service award if you received it later receive payments on the note, a propor- Medicare benefits. However, these paymentsfor less than 5 years of service or if you tionate part of each payment is the recovery of are not treated as social security and Medicarereceived another length-of-service award the fair market value that you previously in- wages if you are a household worker or a farmduring the year or the previous 4 years. cluded in your income. Do not include that part worker.
• A safety achievement award if you are a again in your income. Include the rest of the
Stock appreciation rights. Do not include amanager, administrator, clerical employee, payment in your income in the year of payment.
stock appreciation right granted by your em-or other professional employee or if more If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
ployer in income until you exercise (use) thethan 10% of eligible employees previously unsecured note as payment for your services,
right. When you use the right, you are entitled toreceived safety achievement awards dur- payments on the note that are credited toward
a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofing the year. the principal amount of the note are compensa-
the corporation's stock on the date of use, minustion income when you receive them.
the fair market value on the date the right wasExample. Ben Green received three em- Severance pay. You must include in income granted. You include the cash payment in in-ployee achievement awards during the year: a amounts you receive as severance pay and any come in the year you use the right.nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at payment for the cancellation of your employ-$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo ment contract. Fringe Benefitsvalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at
Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed-$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali- Fringe benefits received in connection with theeral employee and receive a lump-sum paymentfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each performance of your services are included infor accrued annual leave when you retire oraward by itself would be excluded from income. your income as compensation unless you payresign, this amount will be included as wages onHowever, because the $1,750 total value of the fair market value for them or they are specificallyyour Form W-2.awards is more than $1,600, Ben must include excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-If you resign from one agency and are reem-$150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income. ance of services (for example, under a covenantployed by another agency, you may have to not to compete) is treated as the performance ofGovernment cost-of-living allowances. repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- services for purposes of these rules.Cost-of-living allowances generally are included ment to the second agency. You can reduce See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in thisin your income. However, they are not included gross wages by the amount you repaid in the discussion, for information on how to determinein your income if you are a federal civilian em- same tax year in which you received it. Attach to the amount to include in income.ployee or a federal court employee who is sta- your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement
tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United given to you by the agency you repaid to explain Recipient of fringe benefit. You are the re-States. the difference between the wages on your return cipient of a fringe benefit if you perform theAllowances and differentials that increase and the wages on your Forms W-2. services for which the fringe benefit is provided.your basic pay as an incentive for taking a less
You are considered to be the recipient even if itOutplacement services. If you choose todesirable post of duty are part of your compen-
is given to another person, such as a member ofaccept a reduced amount of severance pay sosation and must be included in income. For
your family. An example is a car your employerthat you can receive outplacement servicesexample, your compensation includes Foreign
gives to your spouse for services you perform.(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interviewPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical
The car is considered to have been provided totechniques), you must include the unreduceddifferentials. For more information, see Publica-
you and not to your spouse.amount of the severance pay in income.tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees
You do not have to be an employee of theHowever, you can deduct the value of theseStationed Abroad.
provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. Ifoutplacement services (up to the difference be-
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. you are a partner, director, or independent con-tween the severance pay included in income
Your employer will report to you the total amount tractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringeand the amount actually received) as a miscella-
of deferrals for the year under a nonqualified benefit.neous deduction (subject to the
deferred compensation plan. This amount is 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) on
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This Provider of benefit. Your employer or an-Schedule A (Form 1040).
amount is not included in your income. other person for whom you perform services is
However, if at any time during the tax year, Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer the provider of a fringe benefit regardless of
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is while you are sick or injured is part of your salary whether that person actually provides the fringe
not operated under those requirements, all or wages. In addition, you must include in your benefit to you. The provider can be a client or
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year income sick pay benefits received from any of customer of an independent contractor.
and all preceding tax years are included in your the following payers.
Accounting period. You must use the sameincome for the current year. This amount is in- • A welfare fund. accounting period your employer uses to reportcluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, using • A state sickness or disability fund.
ployer has the option to report taxable noncashcode Z. • An association of employers or employ- fringe benefits by using either of the followingFor information on the requirements and the ees. rules.amount to include in income, see Internal Reve-
nue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. The • An insurance company, if your employer • The general rule: benefits are reported fornotice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle- paid for the plan. a full calendar year (January 1±Decembertin 2005-2 available at www.irs.gov/irb/ 31).However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-2005-02_IRB/ar13.html. dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you • The special accounting period rule: bene-For tax years beginning after 2008, receive under the policy are not taxable. For fits provided during the last 2 months ofportions of Notice 2005-1 are obsolete more information, see Other Sickness and Injury the calendar year (or any shorter period)and replaced by final regulations is- Benefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
CAUTION
! are treated as paid during the followingsued under section 409A. For information on the later. calendar year. For example, each yearapplicability of the regulations, see the preamble your employer reports the value of bene-Social security and Medicare taxes paid byto Treasury Decision 9321, 2007-19 I.R.B. 1123, fits provided during the last 2 months ofemployer. If you and your employer have anavailable at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-19_IRB/ar07. the prior year and the first 10 months ofagreement that your employer pays your socialhtml the current year.security and Medicare taxes without deducting
Note received for services. If your employer them from your gross wages, you must report Your employer does not have to use the same
gives you a secured note as payment for your the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages accounting period for each fringe benefit, but
Page 4 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 5 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must use the same period for all employees who Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are Athletic Facilities
receive a particular benefit. an eligible individual, you and any other person,
If your employer provides you with the free orincluding your employer or a family member,You must use the same accounting period low-cost use of an employer-operated gym orcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-that you use to report the benefit to claim an other athletic club on your employer's premises,tions, other than employer contributions, are de-employee business deduction (for use of a car, the value is not included in your compensation.ductible on your return whether or not youfor example). The gym must be used primarily by employees,itemize deductions. Contributions made by your their spouses, and their dependent children.Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax- employer are not included in your income. Distri-able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other If your employer pays for a fitness programbutions from your HSA that are used to paycompensation) of Form W-2. The total value of provided to you at an off-site resort hotel orqualified medical expenses are not included inyour fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14. athletic club, the value of the program is in-
your income. Distributions not used for qualifiedThe value of your fringe benefits may be added cluded in your compensation.
medical expenses are included in your income.to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or
you may receive a separate Form W-2 showing Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide
just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 with De Minimis (Minimal) Benefitspartner's HSA are not contributions by an em-
a notation in box 14. ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- If your employer provides you with a product orbution of money and are not included in the service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldpartner's gross income. Contributions by a part- be unreasonable for the employer to account forAccident or Health Plan nership to a partner's HSA for services rendered it, the value is not included in your income.
are treated as guaranteed payments that areGenerally, the value of accident or health plan Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-
includible in the partner's gross income. In bothcoverage provided to you by your employer is counts at company cafeterias, cab fares home
not included in your income. Benefits you re- situations, the partner can deduct the contribu- when working overtime, and company picnics
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex- tion made to the partner's HSA. are not included in your income. Also see Em-
plained, later, under Sickness and Injury ployee Discounts, later.Contributions by an S corporation to a 2%Benefits. shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-For information on the items covered in this Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you adered are treated as guaranteed payments andsection, other than Long-term care coverage, turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atare includible in the shareholder-employee'ssee Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts Christmas or other holidays, do not include thegross income. The shareholder-employee canand Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. value of the gift in your income. However, if yourdeduct the contribution made to the share- employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or aLong-term care coverage. Contributions by holder-employee's HSA. similar item that you easily can exchange foryour employer to provide coverage for long-term
Qualified HSA funding distribution. You cash, you include the value of that gift as extracare services generally are not included in your
can make a one-time distribution from your indi- salary or wages regardless of the amount in-income. However, contributions made through a
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and volved.flexible spending or similar arrangement (such
you generally will not include any of the distribu-as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your
income. This amount will be reported as wages tion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi-
Dependent Care Benefitsin box 1 of your Form W-2. vidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for the
requirements for these qualified HSA fundingArcher MSA contributions. Contributions by If your employer provides dependent care bene-distributions.your employer to your Archer MSA generally are fits under a qualified plan, you may be able to
not included in your income. Their total will be exclude these benefits from your income. De-Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSA
reported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R. pendent care benefits include:received qualified HSA distributions from a
You must report this amount on Form 8853, health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual- • Amounts your employer pays directly toArcher MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance ified HSA funding distribution, you must be an either you or your care provider for theContracts. File the form with your return. eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe- care of your qualifying person while you
Health flexible spending arrangement riod beginning with the month in which the quali- work, and
(health FSA). If your employer provides a fied distribution was made and ending on the • The fair market value of care in a daycarehealth FSA that qualifies as an accident or last day of the 12th month following that month. facility provided or sponsored by your em-health plan, the amount of your salary reduction, If you fail to be an eligible individual during this ployer.and reimbursements of your medical care ex- period, other than because of death or disability,
penses and those of your spouse and depen- you must include the distribution in your income The amount you can exclude is limited to thedents, generally are not included in your income. for the tax year in which you become ineligible. lesser of:
Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA This income is also subject to an additional 10% • The total amount of dependent care bene-can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis- tax. fits you received during the year,tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee
by your employer. Generally, the distribution is • The total amount of qualified expenses
not included in your income and is not deducti- Adoption Assistance you incurred during the year,
ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for
• Your earned income,You may be able to exclude from your incomethese qualified HSA distributions.
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em- • Your spouse's earned income, orHealth reimbursement arrangement (HRA). ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies • $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-nection with your adoption of an eligible child.as an accident or health plan, coverage and rately).See Instructions for Form 8839 (Qualified Adop-reimbursements of your medical care expenses tion Expenses), for more information.and those of your spouse and dependents gen- Your employer must show the total amount of
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-erally are not included in your income. dependent care benefits provided to you during
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of yourQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can also are included as social security and Medi- Form W-2. Your employer also will include anymake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu-
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are dependent care benefits over $5,000 in yourtion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by
not included as wages in box 1. To determine wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.your employer. Generally, the distribution is not
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must  To claim the exclusion, you must completeincluded in your income and is not deductible.
complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop- either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-See Publication 969 for the requirements for
dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2these qualified HSA distributions. tion Expenses. File the form with your return.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 5

Page 6 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex- • Is provided to a group of employees, Worksheet 1. Figuring the
penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use Cost of Group-Term Life• Is provided under a policy carried by theForm 1040EZ.) Insurance To Include inemployer, andSee the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched- Income
ule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information. • Provides an amount of insurance to each Keep for Your Records
employee based on a formula that pre-
vents individual selection. 1. Enter the total amount ofEducational Assistance
your insurance coveragePermanent benefits. If your group-term life from your employer(s) ... . 1.You can exclude from your income up to $5,250 insurance policy includes permanent benefits,of qualified employer-provided educational as-
such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you 2. Limit on exclusion forsistance. For more information, see Publication
must include in your income, as wages, the cost employer-provided970.
group-term life insuranceof the permanent benefits minus the amount you
coverage ............ . 2. 50,000pay for them. Your employer should be able to
Employee Discounts tell you the amount to include in your income. 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3.
Accidental death benefits. Insurance thatIf your employer sells you property or services at
a discount, you may be able to exclude the provides accidental or other death benefits but 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
Figure to the nearest tenth 4.amount of the discount from your income. The does not provide general death benefits (travel
exclusion applies to discounts on property or insurance, for example) is not group-term life
5. Go to Table 1. Using yourservices offered to customers in the ordinary insurance. age on the last day of thecourse of the line of business in which you work.
tax year, find your ageHowever, it does not apply to discounts on real
group in the left column,property or property commonly held for invest- Former employer. If your former employer
and enter the cost from thement (such as stocks or bonds). provided more than $50,000 of group-term life column on the right for yourThe exclusion is limited to the price charged insurance coverage during the year, the amount age group ........... . 5.nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol- included in your income is reported as wages in
lowing percentage. box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .. . 6.
• For a discount on property, your em- in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the
ployer's gross profit percentage (gross 7. Enter the number of fullamount of uncollected social security and Medi-
profit divided by gross sales) on all prop- months of coverage at thiscare taxes on the excess coverage, with codes
cost ............... . 7.erty sold during the employer's previous M and N. You must pay these taxes with your
tax year. (Ask your employer for this per- income tax return. Include them in your total tax 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .. . 8.centage.) on line 61, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the
• For a discount on services, 20%. amount of the taxes on the dotted line next to 9. Enter the
line 61. premiums you
paid per month 9.Financial Counseling Fees
Two or more employers. Your exclusion forFinancial counseling fees paid for you by your 10. Enter the numberemployer-provided group-term life insurance of months youemployer are included in your income and must
coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of paid thebe reported as part of wages. If the fees are for
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by premiums ... . 10.tax or investment counseling, they can be de-
a single employer or multiple employers. If twoducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . 11.laneous deduction (subject to the 2%-of-AGI or more employers provide insurance coverage
limit). that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.   Qualified retirement planning services paid ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be Include this amount infor you by your employer may be excluded from correct. You must figure how much to include in your income as wages .. . 12.your income. For more information, see Retire- your income. Reduce the amount you figure byment Planning Services, later. any amount reported with code C in box 12 of
your Forms W-2, add the result to the wages
reported in box 1, and report the total on your Table 1. Cost of $1,000 ofGroup-Term Life Insurance
return. Group-Term Life Insurance for One
Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of Month
group-term life insurance coverage provided to
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the followingyou by your employer (or former employer) is not Age Cost
worksheet to figure the amount to include in yourincluded in your income. However, you must Under 25 ............ . $ .05
income.include in income the cost of employer-provided 25 through 29 ........ .  .06
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 If you pay any part of the cost of the insur-of coverage reduced by any amount you pay 30 through 34 ........ . .08ance, your entire payment reduces, dollar fortoward the purchase of the insurance. 35 through 39 ........ . .09dollar, the amount you otherwise would includeFor exceptions to this rule, see Entire cost in your income. However, you cannot reduce theexcluded, and Entire cost taxed, later. 40 through 44 ........ . .10amount to include in your income by:If your employer provided more than $50,000 45 through 49 ........ . .15
of coverage, the amount included in your in- • Payments for coverage in a different tax
come is reported as part of your wages in box 1 50 through 54 ........ . .23year,
of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately in 55 through 59 ........ . .43• Payments for coverage through a cafeteriabox 12 with code C.
plan, unless the payments are after-tax 60 through 64 ........ . .66
contributions, or 65 through 69 ........ . 1.27Group-term life insurance. This insurance is
term life insurance protection (insurance for a • Payments for coverage not taxed to you 70 and older ......... . 2.06fixed period of time) that: because of the exceptions discussed later
under Entire cost excluded.• Provides a general death benefit,
Page 6 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 7 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are 51 years old and work for a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and Academic health center. This is an organi-
were covered by the plan when you re-employers A and B. Both employers provide zation that meets the following conditions.
tired, orgroup-term life insurance coverage for you for • Its principal purpose or function is to pro-the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with b. You reached age 55 before January 2, vide medical or hospital care or medicalemployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You 1984, and were employed by the em- education or research.pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- ployer or its predecessor in 1983.ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to • It receives payments for graduate medical
include in your income as follows. education under the Social Security Act.
Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire • One of its principal purposes or functionscost of group-term life insurance if either of the is to provide and teach basic and clinicalWorksheet 1. Figuring the following circumstances apply. medical science and research using itsCost of Group-Term Life
own faculty.• The insurance is provided by your em-Insurance To Include in
ployer through a qualified employees'IncomeÐIllustrated
Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam-trust, such as a pension trust or a qualifiedKeep for Your Records
annuity plan. pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your
spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on• You are a key employee and your em-1. Enter the total amount of your behalf of, the institution or center for use as aployer's plan discriminates in favor of keyinsurance coverage from your home. The lodging must be located on or near aemployees.employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000 campus of the educational institution or aca-2. Limit on exclusion for
demic health center.employer-provided Meals and Lodginggroup-term life insurance Adequate rent. The amount of rent you paycoverage ............ . 2. 50,000 You do not include in your income the value of for the year for qualified campus lodging is con-3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000 meals and lodging provided to you and your sidered adequate if it is at least equal to the4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. family by your employer at no charge if the lesser of:Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0 following conditions are met. • 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,5. Go to Table 1. Using your
age on the last day of the tax or1. The meals are:
year, find your age group in • The average of rentals paid by individualsa. Furnished on the business premises ofthe left column, and enter the
(other than employees or students) foryour employer, andcost from the column on the
comparable lodging held for rent by theright for your age group .. . 5. .23 b. Furnished for the convenience of your educational institution.6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90 employer.7. Enter the number of full If the amount you pay is less than the lesser ofmonths of coverage at this these amounts, you must include the difference2. The lodging is:cost. ............... . 7. 12 in your income.8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80 a. Furnished on the business premises of
The lodging must be appraised by an inde-9. Enter the premiums your employer,
you paid per month 9. 4.15 pendent appraiser and the appraisal must be
b. Furnished for the convenience of your10. Enter the number of reviewed on an annual basis.employer, andmonths you paid
the premiums ... . 10. 12 Example. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-c. A condition of your employment. (You11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80 sor for State University, rents a home from themust accept it in order to be able to
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. university that is qualified campus lodging. Theproperly perform your duties.)Include this amount in your house is appraised at $200,000. The averageincome as wages ...... . 12. 33.00  You also do not include in your income the rent paid for comparable university lodging by
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a persons other than employees or students is
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini-The total amount to include in income for the $14,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent of
mal) Benefits, earlier.cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33. $11,000. Carl does not include in his income any
Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur- rental value because the rent he pays equals atLodging for employees affected by Midwest-ance coverage, so the wages shown on your least 5% of the appraised value of the houseern disaster. If your employer providesForms W-2 do not include any part of that $33. (5% ×  $200,000 = $10,000). If Carl paid annualin-kind lodging to you (or your spouse or depen-You must add it to the wages shown on your rent of only $8,000, he would have to includedents), you may be able to exclude from incomeForms W-2 and include the total on your return. $2,000 in his income ($10,000 − $8,000).part or all of the value of this lodging. The exclu-
sion is equal to the value of lodging furnishedEntire cost excluded. You are not taxed on from November 2008 through April 2009, up to athe cost of group-term life insurance if any of the Moving Expense Reimbursementsmaximum of $600 per month.following circumstances apply. You can exclude the value only if you had Generally, if your employer pays for your moving
your main home in a Midwestern disaster area1. You are permanently and totally disabled expenses (either directly or indirectly) and theon the applicable disaster date and you performand have ended your employment. expenses would have been deductible if yousubstantially all your work in a Midwestern dis- paid them yourself, the value is not included in2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol- aster area for the employer furnishing the lodg- your income. See Publication 521, Moving Ex-icy for the entire period the insurance is in ing. You cannot be a dependent of, or related to, penses, for more information.force during the tax year. your employer. For more information, see Publi-
cation 4492-B.3. A charitable organization to which contri-
butions are deductible is the only benefi- No-Additional-Cost ServicesFaculty lodging. If you are an employee of anciary of the policy for the entire period the educational institution or an academic health The value of services you receive from yourinsurance is in force during the tax year. center and you are provided with lodging that employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price(You are not entitled to a deduction for a does not meet the three conditions above, you is not included in your income if your employer:charitable contribution for naming a chari- still may not have to include the value of thetable organization as the beneficiary of • Offers the same service for sale to cus-lodging in income. However, the lodging mustyour policy.) tomers in the ordinary course of the line ofbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and: an adequate rent. business in which you work, and
Publication 525 (2008) Page 7

Page 8 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Does not have a substantial additional • For transporting employees between their 1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene-
homes and work place, and fit, pluscost (including any sales income given up)
to provide you with the service (regardless • On trips during which employees occupy 2. The amount, if any, specifically excludedof what you paid for the service). at least half of the vehicle's adult seating from your income by law.
capacity (not including the driver). If you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit,Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex-
no amount is included in your income.cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, or
Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-train tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv- Fair market value. The fair market value ofcard, voucher, or similar item entitling a personices. a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts andto ride mass transit (whether public or private) circumstances. It is the amount you would havefree or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuterExample. You are employed as a flight at- to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit.highway vehicle operated by a person in thetendant for a company that owns both an airline This is determined without regard to:business of transporting persons for compensa-and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you to
tion. • Your perceived value of the benefit, ortake personal flights (if there is an unoccupied
seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there Qualified parking. This is parking provided to • The amount your employer paid for the
is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The an employee at or near the employer's place of benefit.
value of the personal flight is not included in your business. It also includes parking provided on or
income. However, the value of the hotel room is near a location from which the employee com- Employer-provided vehicles. If your em-
included in your income because you do not mutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter ployer provides a car (or other highway motor
work in the hotel business. highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in- vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is
clude parking at or near the employee's home. usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit.
Under the general valuation rules, the valueRetirement Planning Services of an employer-provided vehicle is the amountTuition Reduction you would have to pay a third party to lease theIf your employer has a qualified retirement plan, same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-You can exclude a qualified tuition reductionqualified retirement planning services provided rable terms in the same geographic area wherefrom your income. This is the amount of a reduc-to you (and your spouse) by your employer are you use the vehicle. An example of a compara-tion in tuition:not included in your income. Qualified services ble lease term is the amount of time the vehicleinclude retirement planning advice, information • For education (below graduate level) fur- is available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-about your employer's retirement plan, and in- nished by an educational institution to an riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-formation about how the plan may fit into your employee, former employee who retired or plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofoverall individual retirement income plan. You became disabled, or his or her spouse and miles driven unless you prove the vehicle couldcannot exclude the value of any tax preparation, dependent children. have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis.accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-
• For education furnished to a graduate stu- Flights on employer-provided aircraft.vided by your employer. Also, see Financial
dent at an educational institution if the Under the general valuation rules, if your flightCounseling Fees, earlier. graduate student is engaged in teaching on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
or research activities for that institution. marily personal and you control the use of the
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itTransportation • Representing payment for teaching, re-
would cost to charter the flight from a third party.search, or other services if you receive theIf your employer provides you with a qualified If there is more than one employee on theamount under the National Health Servicetransportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded flight, the cost to charter the aircraft must beCorps Scholarship Program or the Armedfrom your income, up to certain limits. A qualified divided among those employees. The divisionForces Health Professions Scholarshiptransportation fringe benefit is: must be based on all the facts, including whichand Financial Assistance program.
employee or employees control the use of the• Transportation in a commuter highway ve- For more information, see Publication 970. aircraft.hicle (such as a van) between your home
and work place, Working Condition Benefits Special valuation rules. You generally can• A transit pass, or use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefitIf your employer provides you with a product or
only if your employer uses the rule. If your em-• Qualified parking. service and the cost of it would have been allow-
ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannotable as a business or depreciation deduction ifCash reimbursement by your employer for these use a different special rule to value that benefit.you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included inexpenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar- You always can use the general valuation ruleyour income.rangement is also excludable. However, cash discussed earlier, based on facts and circum-
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable stances, even if your employer uses a specialExample. You work as an engineer andonly if a voucher or similar item that can be rule.your employer provides you with a subscriptionexchanged only for a transit pass is not readily If you and your employer use a special valua-to an engineering trade magazine. The cost ofavailable for direct distribution to you. tion rule, you must include in your income thethe subscription is not included in your income
amount your employer determines under thebecause the cost would have been allowable toExclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter special rule minus the sum of:you as a business deduction if you had paid forhighway vehicle transportation and transit pass the subscription yourself.fringe benefits cannot be more than a total of 1. Any amount you repaid your employer,
$115 a month. plus
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe Valuation of Fringe Benefits 2. Any amount specifically excluded from in-benefit cannot be more than $220 a month. come by law.If a fringe benefit is included in your income, theIf the benefits have a value that is more than
The special valuation rules are the following.amount included is generally its value deter-these limits, the excess must be included in your
mined under the general valuation rule or underincome. • The automobile lease rule.the special valuation rules. For an exception,
• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule.see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not • The commuting rule.General valuation rule. You must include in
including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi- your income the amount by which the fair market • The unsafe conditions commuting rule.cle's mileage must reasonably be expected to value of the fringe benefit is more than the sum
• The employer-operated eating-facility rule.be: of:
Page 8 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 9 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information on these rules, see Pub- as having elected to have a part of your compen- 1959, funded only by employee contributions),
lication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe sation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. you should have deferred no more than the
Benefits. Before each plan year, your employer must give lesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation.
you a written notice of your rights under the For information on the non-commercial flight Limit for deferrals under section 457 plans.arrangement. You can elect to change theand commercial flight valuation rules, see sec- If you are a participant in a section 457 plan (aamount of the contributions or elect out of thetions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula- deferred compensation plan for employees ofarrangement.tions. state or local governments or tax-exempt orga-
Overall limit on deferrals. For 2008, you gen- nizations), you should have deferred no moreRetirement Plan erally should not have deferred more than a total than the lesser of your includible compensation
of $15,500 of contributions to the plans listed inContributions or $15,500. However, if you are within 3 years of
(1) through (3) above. The specific plan limits for normal retirement age, you may be allowed an
Your employer's contributions to a qualified re- the plans listed in (4) through (7) above are increased limit if the plan allows it. See In-
tirement plan for you are not included in income discussed later. creased limit, later.
at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell Your employer or plan administrator should
Includible compensation. This is the payyou whether your retirement plan is qualified.) apply the proper annual limit when figuring your
you received for the year from the employer whoHowever, the cost of life insurance coverage plan contributions. However, you are responsi-
maintained the section 457 plan. It generallyincluded in the plan may have to be included. ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensure
includes all the following payments. See Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, under that the deferrals are not more than the overall
Fringe Benefits. limit. 1. Wages and salaries.If your employer pays into a nonqualified Catch-up contributions. You may be allowed 2. Fees for professional services.plan for you, you generally must include the catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-contributions in your income as wages for the 3. The value of any employer-provided quali-rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of yourtax year in which the contributions are made. fied transportation fringe benefit (definedtax year. For more information about catch-upHowever, if your interest in the plan is not trans- under Transportation, earlier) that is notcontributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 offerable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei- included in your income.Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plansture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the (403(b) Plans). 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash)time of the contribution, you do not have to For more information about additional elec- for personal services you performed, in-include the value of your interest in your income tive deferrals to: cluding, but not limited to, the followinguntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a
items.• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reductionsubstantial risk of forfeiture.
Simplified Employee Pension in Publica-For information on distributions from a. Commissions and tips.tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-retirement plans, see Publication 575 ness. b. Fringe benefits.(or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S.
TIP
• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can BeCivil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are a c. Bonuses.
Contributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3federal employee or retiree).
of Publication 590. 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals)
to:• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals
Elective Deferrals under section 457 plans, later. a. The section 457 plan.
If you are covered by certain kinds of retirement b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange-Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans. Ifplans, you can choose to have part of your ments (section 401(k) plans) that areyou are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, youcompensation contributed by your employer to a not included in your income.generally should not have deferred more thanretirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.
c. A salary reduction simplified employee$10,500 in 2008.  Amounts you defer under aThe amount you set aside (called an elective
pension (SARSEP).SIMPLE plan count toward the overall limitdeferral) is treated as an employer contribution
($15,500 for 2008) and may affect the amountto a qualified plan. An elective deferral, other d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)you can defer under other elective deferralthan a designated Roth contribution (discussed plan).plans.later), is not included in wages subject to income
e. A savings incentive match plan for em-tax at the time contributed. However, it is in- Limit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a ployees (SIMPLE plan).cluded in wages subject to social security and participant in a tax-sheltered annuity planMedicare taxes. f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for
Elective deferrals include elective contribu- 2008 generally is $15,500. However, if you have
tions to the following retirement plans. Instead of using the amounts listed above toat least 15 years of service with a public school
determine your includible compensation, yoursystem, a hospital, a home health service1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section employer can use any of the following amounts.agency, a health and welfare service agency, a401(k) plans). church, or a convention or association of • Your wages as defined for income taxchurches (or associated organization), the limit2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ- withholding purposes.on elective deferrals is increased by the least ofees.
• Your wages as reported in box 1 of Formthe following amounts.
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen- W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
sion plans (SARSEP). 1. $3,000.
• Your wages that are subject to social se-
2. $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- curity withholding (including elective defer-
all limit that you were allowed in earlierees (SIMPLE plans). rals).
years because of this years-of-service rule.
5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans). Increased limit. During any, or all, of the3. $5,000 times your number of years of serv-
last 3 years ending before you reach normal6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re- ice for the organization, minus the total
retirement age under the plan, your plan mayporting by employer, later.) elective deferrals under the plan for earlier
provide that your limit is the lesser of:years.7. Section 457 plans.
1. Twice the dollar limit for the year, orFor more information, see Publication 571.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange- Limit for deferral under section 501(c)(18) 2. The limit for prior years minus the amount
ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu- plans. If you are a participant in a section you deferred in prior years plus the lesser
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you 501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25, of:
Publication 525 (2008) Page 9

Page 10 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Your includible compensation for the plan then must pay you the amount of the ex- Report a loss on a corrective distribution of an
excess deferral in the year the excess amountcess, along with any income earned on thatcurrent year, or
(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In-amount, by April 15 of the following year.b. The dollar limit for the current year. clude the loss as a negative amount on FormYou must include the excess deferral in your
1040, line 21 and identify it as ªLoss on Excessincome for the year of the deferral unless you
Deferral Distribution.ºCatch-up contributions. You generally have an excess deferral of a designated Roth
can have additional elective deferrals made to contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excess
Even though a corrective distribution ofyour governmental section 457 plan if: deferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do not
excess deferrals is reported on Formuse Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-• You reached age 50 by the end of the 1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as acess deferral amounts.
TIPyear, and distribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled
Excess not distributed. If you do not take over into another plan, and it is not subject to the• No other elective deferrals can be made out the excess amount, you cannot include it in additional tax on early distributions.for you to the plan for the year because of the cost of the contract even though you in-limits or restrictions. cluded it in your income. Therefore, you are
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your taxed twice on the excess deferral left in the Excess Contributionsincludible compensation or $15,500, plus planÐonce when you contribute it, and again
$5,000. However, if you are within 3 years of when you receive it as a distribution. If you are a highly compensated employee, the
retirement age and your plan provides the in- total of your elective deferrals and other contri-Excess distributed to you. If you take outcreased limit, discussed earlier, that limit may be butions made for you for any year under a sec-the excess after the year of the deferral and youhigher. tion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as areceive the corrective distribution by April 15 of
percentage of pay, no more than 125% of thethe following year, do not include it in incomeDesignated Roth contributions. Employers average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligibleagain in the year you receive it. If you receive itwith section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans can non-highly compensated employees.later, you must include it in income in both thecreate qualified Roth contribution programs so  If the total contributed to the plan is moreyear of the deferral and the year you receive it.that you may elect to have part or all of your than the amount allowed under the ADP test, theAny income on the excess deferral taken out iselective deferrals to the plan designated as af- excess contributions must be either distributedtaxable in the tax year in which you take it out. Ifter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth to you or recharacterized as after-tax employeeyou take out part of the excess deferral and thecontributions are treated as elective deferrals, contributions by treating them as distributed toincome on it, allocate the distribution proportion- you and then contributed by you to the plan. Youexcept that they are included in income. Your ately between the excess deferral and the in- may have to include the excess contributions inretirement plan must maintain separate ac- come. your income as wages on Form 1040, line 7.counts and recordkeeping for the designated You should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu- You cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ toRoth contributions. tions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or report excess contribution amounts.Qualified distributions from a Roth plan are Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
not included in income. Generally, a distribution tracts, etc., for the year in which the excess Plan years beginning before January 1, 2008.
made before the end of the 5-tax-year period If you receive excess contributions from a 401(k)deferral is distributed to you. Use the following
beginning with the first tax year for which you plan and any income earned on the contribu-rules to report a corrective distribution shown on
made a designated Roth contribution to the plan tions within 21/2 months after the close of the planForm 1099-R for 2008.
is not a qualified distribution. year, you must include them in your income in• If the distribution was for a 2008 excess the year of the contribution. If you receive themdeferral, your Form 1099-R should haveReporting by employer. Your employer gen- later, or receive less than $100 excess contribu-the code ª8º in box 7. Add the excesserally should not include elective deferrals in tions, include the excess contributions and earn-deferral amount to your wages on youryour wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, your ings in your income in the year distributed. If the2008 tax return.employer should mark the Retirement plan excess contributions are recharacterized, you
checkbox in box 13 and show the total amount must include them in income in the year a cor-• If the distribution was for a 2008 excess
deferred in box 12. rective distribution would have occurred. For adeferral to a designated Roth account,
SARSEP, the employer must notify you byyour Form 1099-R should have code ªBº inSection 501(c)(18)(D) contributions. March 15 following the year in which excessbox 7. Do not add this amount to yourWages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 should contributions are made that you must withdrawwages on your 2008 return.not have been reduced for contributions you the excess and earnings. You must include themade to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan. • If the distribution was for a 2007 excess excess contributions in your income in the yearThe amount you contributed should be identified deferral, your Form 1099-R should have of the contribution (or the year of the notificationthe code ªPº in box 7. If you did not addwith code ªHº in box 12. You may deduct the if less than $100) and include the earnings inthe excess deferral amount to your wagesamount deferred subject to the limits that apply. your income in the year withdrawn.on your 2007 tax return, you must file anInclude your deduction in the total on Form You should receive a Form 1099-R for theamended return on Form 1040X,1040, line 36. Enter the amount and year in which the excess contributions are dis-Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-ª501(c)(18)(D)º on the dotted line next to line 36. tributed to you (or are recharacterized). Addturn. If you did not receive the distribution excess contributions or earnings shown onDesignated Roth contributions.  These by April 15, 2008, you also must add it to Form 1099-R for 2008 to your wages on yourcontributions are elective deferrals but are in- your wages on your 2008 tax return. 2008 tax return if code ª8º is in box 7. If code ªPºcluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2.
or ªDº is in box 7, you may have to file an• If the distribution was for a 2006 excessDesignated Roth contributions to a section
amended 2007 or 2006 return on Form 1040X todeferral, your Form 1099-R should have401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box
add the excess contributions or earnings to yourthe code ªDº in box 7. If you did not add12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in box
wages in the year of the contribution.the excess deferral amount to your wages12.
on your 2006 tax return, you must file an Plan years beginning after December 31,amended return on Form 1040X. You alsoExcess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed the 2007. If you receive any excess contributionsmust add it to your wages on your 2008limit, you must notify your plan by the date re- from a 401(k) plan and any income earned onincome tax return.quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex- the contributions, you must include them in your
cess amount will be distributed to you. If you • If the distribution was for the income income in the year of the distribution. Contact
participate in more than one plan, you can have earned on an excess deferral, your Form your plan to find out when its plan year begins. If
the excess paid out of any of the plans that 1099-R should have the code ª8º in box 7. you received the distribution in 2008 and the
permit these distributions. You must notify each Add the income amount to your wages on plan year began after December 31, 2007, in-
plan by the date required by that plan of the your 2008 income tax return, regardless of clude the distribution in your income as wages
amount to be paid from that particular plan. The when the excess deferral was made. for 2008.
Page 10 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 11 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Even though a corrective distribution of • You can exercise the option immediately difference in income when the option becomes
excess contributions is reported on in full. substantially vested. For more information on
Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise restricted property, see Restricted Property,
TIP• The option or the property subject to thetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot later.option is not subject to any condition orbe rolled over into another plan, and it is not restriction (other than a condition to se- Transfer in arm's-length transaction. Ifsubject to the additional tax on early distribu- cure payment of the purchase price) that you transfer a nonstatutory stock option withouttions. has a significant effect on the fair market a readily determinable value in an arm's-length
value of the option. transaction to an unrelated person, you must
include in your income the money or other prop-• The fair market value of the option privi-Excess Annual Additions erty you received for the transfer, as if you hadlege can be readily determined. exercised the option.The amount contributed in 2008 to a defined The option privilege for an option to buy is the Transfer in non-arm's-length transaction.contribution plan is generally limited to the opportunity to benefit during the option's exer- If you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with-lesser of 100% of your compensation or cise period from any increase in the value of out a readily determinable value in a$46,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu- property subject to the option without risking any non-arm's-length transaction (for example, ations that exceed these limits (excess annual capital. For example, if during the exercise pe- gift), the option is not treated as exercised oradditions) may be corrected by a distribution of riod the fair market value of stock subject to an closed at that time. You must include in youryour elective deferrals or a return of your af- option is greater than the option's exercise price, income, as compensation, any money or prop-ter-tax contributions and earnings from these a profit may be realized by exercising the option erty received. When the transferee exercisescontributions. and immediately selling the stock at its higher the option, you must include in your income, asA corrective payment of excess annual addi- value. The option privilege for an option to sell is compensation, the excess of the fair markettions consisting of elective deferrals or earnings the opportunity to benefit during the exercise value of the stock acquired by the transfereefrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxable period from a decrease in the value of the prop- over the sum of the exercise price paid and anyin the year paid. A corrective payment consisting erty subject to the option. amount you included in income at the time youof your after-tax contributions is not taxable.
transferred the option. At the time of the exer-If you received a corrective payment of ex- If you or a member of your family is an cise, the transferee recognizes no income andcess annual additions, you should receive a officer, director, or more-than-10% has a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fairseparate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay- owner of an expatriated corporation,
CAUTION
! market value of the stock.ment with the code ªEº in box 7. Report the total you may owe an excise tax on the value of Any transfer of this kind of option to a relatedpayment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on line nonstatutory options and other stock-based person is treated as a non-arm's-length transac-16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A. compensation from that corporation. For more tion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the defi-Report the taxable amount shown in box 2a of information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve- nition of a related person.Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or line nue Code section 4985.
12b of Form 1040A. Recourse note in satisfaction of the exer-
Option with readily determinable value. If cise price of an option. If you are an em-Even though a corrective distribution of you receive a nonstatutory stock option that has ployee, and you issue a recourse note to yourexcess annual additions is reported on a readily determinable fair market value at the employer in satisfaction of the exercise price ofForm 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP time it is granted to you, the option is treated like an option to acquire your employer's stock, andtreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot other property received as compensation. See your employer and you subsequently agree tobe rolled over into another plan, and it is not Restricted Property, later, for rules on how much reduce the stated principal amount of the note,subject to the additional tax on early distribu- income to include and when to include it. How- you generally recognize compensation incometions. ever, the rule described in that discussion for at the time and in the amount of the reduction.
choosing to include the value of property in your
income for the year of the transfer does not Tax form. If you receive compensation fromStock Options
apply to a nonstatutory option. employer-provided nonstatutory stock options, it
If you receive an option to buy or sell stock or is reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also isOption without readily determinable value.other property as payment for your services, you reported in box 12 using code ªV.ºIf the fair market value of the option is not readilymay have income when you receive the option  If you are a nonemployee spouse and youdeterminable at the time it is granted to you(the grant), when you exercise the option (use it exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-(even if it is determined later), you do not haveto buy or sell the stock or other property), or ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-income until you exercise or transfer the option.when you sell or otherwise dispose of the option ported to you on Form 1099-MISC,
Exercise or transfer of option. When youor property acquired through exercise of the Miscellaneous Income, in box 3.
exercise a nonstatutory stock option, theoption. The timing, type, and amount of income
amount to include in your income depends oninclusion depend on whether you receive a non- Sale of the stock. There are no special in-
whether the option had a readily determinablestatutory stock option or a statutory stock option. come rules for the sale of stock acquired through
value.Your employer can tell you which kind of option the exercise of a nonstatutory stock option. Re-
you hold. port the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capi-Option with readily determinable value. tal Gains and Losses, for the year of the sale.When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option You may receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds fromthat had a readily determinable value at the timeNonstatutory Stock Options Broker and Barter Sale Transactions, reportingthe option was granted, you do not have to the sales proceeds.include any amount in income.
Your basis in the property you acquire underGrant of option. If you are granted a nonstat- Option without readily determinable value. the option is the amount you pay for it plus anyutory stock option, you may have income when When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option amount you included in income upon grant oryou receive the option. The amount of income to that did not have a readily determinable value at exercise of the option.include and the time to include it depend on the time the option was granted, the restricted Your holding period begins as of the date youwhether the fair market value of the option can property rules apply to the property received. acquired the option, if it had a readily determina-be readily determined. The fair market value of The amount to include in your income is the ble value, or as of the date you exercised oran option can be readily determined if it is ac- difference between the amount you pay for the transferred the option, if it had no readily deter-tively traded on an established market. property and its fair market value when it be- minable value.The fair market value of an option that is not comes substantially vested. If it is not substan-traded on an established market can be readily tially vested at the time you exercise thisdetermined only if all of the following conditions nonstatutory stock option (so that you may have Statutory Stock Optionsexist. to give the stock back), you do not have to
• You can transfer the option. include any amount in income. You include the There are two kinds of statutory stock options.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 11

Page 12 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Incentive stock options (ISOs), and • You do not satisfy the holding period re- Holding period requirement satisfied. If
quirement. you sold stock acquired by exercising an option• Options granted under employee stock granted under an employee stock purchasepurchase plans. • You satisfy the conditions described under plan, and you satisfy the holding period require-Option granted at a discount, under Em-
ment, determine your ordinary income as fol-For either kind of option, you must be an ployee stock purchase plan, later.
lows.employee of the company granting the option, or Report your ordinary income as wages on Form Your basis is equal to the option price at thea related company, at all times during the period 1040, line 7, for the year of the sale. time you exercised your option and acquired thebeginning on the date the option is granted and
ending 3 months before the date you exercise Holding period requirement. You satisfy stock. The timing and amount of pay period
the option (for an incentive stock option, 1 year the holding period requirement if you do not sell deductions do not affect your basis.
before if you are disabled). Also, the option must the stock until the end of the later of the 1-year Your holding period for the property you ac-
be nontransferable except at death. period after the stock was transferred to you or quire when you exercise an option begins on the
 If you do not meet the employment require- the 2-year period after the option was granted. day after you exercise the option.ments, or you receive a transferable option, your However, you are considered to satisfy the hold-
option is a nonstatutory stock option. ing period requirement if you sold the stock to Example. XYZ Company has an employee
comply with conflict-of-interest requirements. stock purchase plan. The option price is theGrant of option. If you receive a statutory lower of the stock price at the time the option isstock option, do not include any amount in your Incentive stock options (ISOs). If you sell granted or at the time the option is exercised.income when the option is granted. stock acquired by exercising an ISO, you need The value of the stock when the option wasto determine if you satisfied the holding period granted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A's payExercise of option. If you exercise a statutory requirement.
stock option, do not include any amount in in- every week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 x 48)).
Holding period requirement satisfied. Ifcome when you exercise the option. The value of the stock when the option is exer-
you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO and cised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ stockAlternative minimum tax (AMT). For the satisfy the holding period requirement, your gain ($240/$20). A's holding period for all 12 sharesAMT, you must treat stock acquired through the or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss. begins the day after the option is exercised,exercise of an ISO as if no special treatment Report the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040). even though the money used to purchase theapplied. This means that, when your rights in the The basis of your stock is the amount you paid shares was deducted from A's pay on 48 sepa-stock are transferable or no longer subject to a for the stock. rate days. A's basis in each share is $20.substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include as
Holding period requirement not satisfied.an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum Option granted at a discount. If, at theIf you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO,taxable income the amount by which the fair time the option was granted, the option price perdo not satisfy the holding period requirement,market value of the stock exceeds the option share was less than 100% (but not less thanand have a gain from the sale, the gain is ordi-price. Enter this adjustment on line 14 of Form 85%) of the fair market value of the share, andnary income up to the amount by which the6251, Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. you dispose of the share after meeting the hold-stock's fair market value when you exercised theIncrease your AMT basis in any stock you ac- ing period requirement, or you die while owningoption exceeded the option price. Any excessquire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the
the share, you must include in your income asgain is capital gain. If you have a loss from theadjustment. However, no adjustment is required
sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have any compensation, the lesser of:if you dispose of the stock in the same year you
ordinary income.exercise the option. • The excess of the fair market value of theReport the ordinary income as wages on lineSee Restricted Property, later, for more infor- share at the time the option was granted7, Form 1040. Report the capital gain or loss onmation. over the option price, orSchedule D (Form 1040). In determining capitalYour AMT basis in stock acquired • The excess of the fair market value of thegain or loss, your basis is the amount you paidthrough an ISO is likely to differ from when you exercised the option plus the amount share at the time of the disposition oryour regular tax basis. Therefore, keep
RECORDS reported as wages. death over the amount paid for the shareadequate records for both the AMT and regular under the option.tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or Example. Your employer, X Corporation, For this purpose, if the option price was not fixedloss. granted you an ISO on March 10, 2006, to buy
or determinable at the time the option was100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a
granted, the option price is figured as if theExample. Your employer, M Company, share, its fair market value at the time. You
option had been exercised at the time it wasgranted you an incentive stock option on April 6, exercised the option on January 4, 2007, when
granted.2006, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 a the stock was selling on the open market for $12
share, its fair market value at the time. You a share. On January 24, 2008, you sold the Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have aexercised the option on January 9, 2007, when stock for $15 a share. Although you held the loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you dothe stock was selling on the open market for $14 stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had not have any ordinary income.a share. On January 25, 2008, when the stock passed from the time you were granted the op-
was selling on the open market for $16 a share, tion. In 2008, you must report the difference Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,your rights to the stock first became transfera- between the option price ($10) and the value of granted you an option under its employee stockble. You include $700 ($1,600 value when your the stock when you exercised the option ($12) purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Yrights first became transferable minus $900 op- as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, Corporation for $20 a share at a time when thetion price) as an adjustment on Form 6251, line figured as follows: stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteen14.
months later, when the value of the stock wasSelling price ($15 ×  100 shares) .... . $ 1,500
$23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14Sale of the stock. You have taxable income Purchase price ($10 ×  100 shares) .. . −1,000
months after that you sold your stock for $30 aor a deductible loss when you sell the stock that Gain ...................... . $ 500
you bought by exercising the option. Your in- share. In the year of sale, you must report asAmount reported as wages
come or loss is the difference between the [($12 ×  100 shares) − $1,000] ..... . − 200 wages the difference between the option price
amount you paid for the stock (the option price) ($20) and the value at the time the option wasAmount reported as capital gain $ 300and the amount you receive when you sell it. granted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 per
You generally treat this amount as capital gain share) is capital gain, figured as follows:
or loss and report it on Schedule D (Form 1040) Employee stock purchase plan. If you sold
for the year of the sale. stock acquired by exercising an option granted Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $ 3,000
However, you may have ordinary income for under an employee stock purchase plan, you Purchase price (option price) 
the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of the need to determine if you satisfied the holding ($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000
Gain ..................... . $ 1,000stock in either of the following situations. period requirement.
Page 12 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 13 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amount reported as wages to you as additional compensation during the statement to the person for whom you per-
[($22 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 200 period the stock can be forfeited. formed the services and, if someone other than
you received the property, to that person.Amount reported as capital gain $ 800 Substantially vested. Property is substan- You must sign the statement and indicate on
tially vested when: it that you are making the choice under sectionHolding period requirement not satisfied. 83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state-• It is transferable, orIf you do not satisfy the holding period require- ment must contain all of the following informa-ment, your ordinary income is the amount by • It is not subject to a substantial risk of tion.which the stock's fair market value when you forfeiture. (You do not have a goodexercised the option exceeded the option price. • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-chance of losing it.)This ordinary income is not limited to your gain cation number.
from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis in Transferable property. Property is trans- • A description of each property for whichthe stock by the amount of this ordinary income. ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge your you are making the choice.The difference between your increased basis interest in the property to any person (other thanand the selling price of the stock is a capital gain • The date or dates on which the propertythe transferor), and if the person receiving youror loss. was transferred and the tax year for whichinterest in the property is not required to give up
you are making the choice.the property, or its value, if the substantial risk ofExample.   The facts are the same as in the forfeiture occurs. • The nature of any restrictions on the prop-previous example, except that you sold the
erty.Substantial risk of forfeiture. A substan-stock only 6 months after you exercised the
tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in theoption. You did not satisfy the holding period • The fair market value at the time of trans-
property transferred depend on performing (orrequirement, so you must report $300 as wages fer (ignoring restrictions except those that
not performing) substantial services, or on aand $700 as capital gain, figured as follows: will never lapse) of each property for
condition related to the transfer, and the possi- which you are making the choice.
Selling price ($30 ×  100 shares) ... . $3,000 bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition is
• Any amount that you paid for the property.Purchase price (option price) not satisfied.
($20 ×  100 shares) ............ . −2,000 • A statement that you have provided copiesGain ..................... . $1,000 Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to to the appropriate persons.Amount reported as wages you as compensation for services 100 shares of
[($23 ×  100 shares) − $2,000] .... . − 300 its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under the
Dividends received on restricted stock.terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock toAmount reported as capital gain Dividends you receive on restricted stock arethe corporation at $100 a share if you leave your [$3,000 ± ($2,000 + $300)] $700 treated as compensation and not as dividendjob for any reason within 3 years from the date of
income. Your employer should include thesetransfer. You must perform substantial services
payments on your Form W-2. If they also areRestricted Property over a period of time and you must resell the
reported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends andstock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-
Distributions, you should list them on ScheduleGenerally, if you receive property for your serv- less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-
B (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),ices, you must include its fair market value in ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to a
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040Ayour income in the year you receive the prop- substantial risk of forfeiture.
Filers, with a statement that you have includederty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-
Choosing to include in income for year of them as wages. Do not include them in the totalerty that has certain restrictions that affect its
transfer. You can choose to include the value dividends received.value, you do not include the value of the prop-
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi-erty in your income until it has been substantially Stock you chose to include in your in-nus any amount you paid for the property) invested. (You can choose to include the value of come. Dividends you receive on restrictedyour income for the year it is transferred. If youthe property in your income in the year it is stock you chose to include in your income in themake this choice, the substantial vesting rulestransferred to you, as discussed later, rather year transferred are treated the same as anydo not apply and, generally, any later apprecia-than the year it is substantially vested.) other dividends. You should receive a Formtion in value is not included in your compensa-Until the property becomes substantially 1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-tion when the property becomes substantiallyvested, it is owned by the person who makes the clude the dividends in your wages on your re-vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss whentransfer to you, usually your employer. However, turn. Report them as dividends.you sell the property is the amount you paid for itany income from the property, or the right to use
plus the amount you included in income as com-the property, is included in your income as addi- Sale of property not substantially vested.
pensation.tional compensation in the year you receive the These rules apply to the sale or other disposition
income or have the right to use the property. of property that you did not choose to include inIf you make this choice, you cannot
your income in the year transferred and that isWhen the property becomes substantially revoke it without the consent of the
not substantially vested.vested, you must include its fair market value, Internal Revenue Service. Consent will
CAUTION
!
If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop-minus any amount you paid for it, in your income be given only if you were under a mistake of fact
erty in an arm's-length transaction, include infor that year. Your holding period for this prop- as to the underlying transaction.
your income as compensation for the year oferty begins when the property becomes sub- If you forfeit the property after you have in- sale the amount realized minus the amount youstantially vested. cluded its value in income, your loss is the paid for the property. If you exchange the prop-amount you paid for the property minus anyExample. Your employer, the RST Corpo- erty in an arm's-length transaction for otheramount you realized on the forfeiture.ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a property that is not substantially vested, treat the
share. At the time of the sale the fair market new property as if it were substituted for theYou cannot make this choice for a non-
value of the stock is $100 a share. Under the exchanged property.statutory stock option.
terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantial The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
CAUTION
!
risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance of tory stock option to a related person is not con-
losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is not sidered an arm's-length transaction. See
substantially vested when it is transferred, so How to make the choice. You make the Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of a
you do not include any amount in your income in choice by filing a written statement with the Inter- related person.
the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-year nal Revenue Service Center where you file your If you sell the property in a transaction that is
period, the fair market value of the stock is $200 return. You must file this statement no later than not at arm's length, include in your income as
a share. You must include $19,000 in your in- 30 days after the date the property was trans- compensation for the year of sale the total of any
come [100 shares ×  ($200 fair market value − ferred. A copy of the statement must be attached money you received and the fair market value of
$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor- to your tax return for the year the property was any substantially vested property you received
poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxable transferred. You also must give a copy of this on the sale. In addition, you will have to report
Publication 525 (2008) Page 13

Page 14 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income when the original property becomes in your income the rental value of a home (in- Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed
substantially vested, as if you still held it. Report cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow- by the superiors of the order to get a job with a
as compensation its fair market value minus the ance provided to you as part of your pay. private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-
total of the amount you paid for the property and However, the exclusion cannot be more than the ployee of the school, and, at his request, the
the amount included in your income from the reasonable pay for your service. If you pay for school made the salary payments directly to the
earlier sale. the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des- order.
ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost. Because Mark is an employee of the school,
Example. In 2005, you paid your employer The home or allowance must be provided as he is performing services for the school rather$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market compensation for your services as an ordained, than as an agent of the order. The wages Markvalue of $100 and was subject to forfeiture until licensed, or commissioned minister. However, earns working for the school are included in his2008. In 2007, you sold the stock to your spouse you must include the rental value of the home or income.for $10 in a transaction not at arm's length. You the housing allowance as earnings from
had compensation of $10 from this transaction. self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040), Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of aIn 2008, when the stock had a fair market value Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to the religious order who, as a condition of member-of $120, it became substantially vested. For self-employment tax. For more information, see ship, has taken vows of poverty and obedience.2008, you must report additional compensation Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor- All claims to his earnings are renounced. Geneof $60, figured as follows: mation for Members of the Clergy and Religious received permission from the order to establishWorkers. a private practice as a psychologist and coun-Fair market value of stock at time sels members of religious orders as well asof substantial vesting ....... . $120 Members of Religious Orders nonmembers. Although the order reviewsMinus: Amount paid for stock .. . $50
Gene's budget annually, Gene controls not onlyMinus: Compensation previously If you are a member of a religious order who has the details of his practice but also the means byincluded in income from sale to taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings which his work as a psychologist is accom-spouse ................. . 10 −60 that you renounce and turn over to the order plished.Additional income $60 depends on whether your services are per- Gene's private practice as a psychologistformed for the order.Inherited property not substantially vested. does not make him an agent of the religious
If you inherit property not substantially vested at order. The psychological services provided byServices performed for the order. If you are
the time of the decedent's death, any income Gene are not the type of services that are pro-performing the services as an agent of the order
you receive from the property is considered in- vided by the order. The income Gene earns as ain the exercise of duties required by the order,
come in respect of a decedent and is taxed psychologist is earned in his individual capacity.do not include in your income the amounts
according to the rules for restricted property Gene must include in his income the earningsturned over to the order.
received for services. For information about in- from his private practice.If your order directs you to perform services
come in respect of a decedent, see Publication for another agency of the supervising church or
559. an associated institution, you are considered to Foreign Employer
be performing the services as an agent of the
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an Special rules apply if you work for a foreign
order that you turn over to the order are not employer.
Special Rules for included in your income.
U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen whoCertain Employees Example. You are a member of a church works in the United States for a foreign govern-
order and have taken a vow of poverty. You ment, an international organization, a foreignThis part of the publication deals with special renounce any claims to your earnings and turn embassy, or any foreign employer, you mustrules for people in certain types of employment: over to the order any salaries or wages you include your salary in your income.members of the clergy, members of religious earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order
Social security and Medicare taxes. Youorders, people working for foreign employers, assigns you to work in a hospital that is an
are exempt from social security and Medicaremilitary personnel, and volunteers. associated institution of the church. However,
employee taxes if you are employed in theyou remain under the general direction and con-
United States by an international organization ortrol of the order. You are considered to be anClergy
a foreign government. However, you must payagent of the order and any wages you earn at
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-If you are a member of the clergy, you must the hospital that you turn over to your order are
ices performed in the United States, eveninclude in your income offerings and fees you not included in your income.
though you are not self-employed. This rule alsoreceive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,
Services performed outside the order. If applies if you are an employee of a qualifyingmasses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the
you are directed to work outside the order, your wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-offering is made to the religious institution, it is
services are not an exercise of duties required ernment.not taxable to you.
by the order unless they meet both of the follow-If you are a member of a religious organiza-
ing requirements. Employees of international organizations ortion and you give your outside earnings to the
organization, you still must include the earnings foreign governments. Your compensation• They are the kind of services that are ordi-in your income. However, you may be entitled to for official services to an international organiza-narily the duties of members of the order.a charitable contribution deduction for the tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are
• They are part of the duties that you mustamount paid to the organization. See Publica- not a citizen of the United States or you are a
exercise for, or on behalf of, the religioustion 526. Also, see Members of Religious Or- citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are
order as its agent.ders, later. a citizen of the United States).
Your compensation for official services to aIf you are an employee of a third party, thePension. A pension or retirement pay for a foreign government is exempt from federal in-services you perform for the third party will notmember of the clergy usually is treated as any come tax if all of the following are true.be considered directed or required of you by theother pension or annuity. It must be reported on
order. Amounts you receive for these serviceslines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a • You are not a citizen of the United Statesare included in your income, even if you haveand 12b of Form 1040A. or you are a citizen of the Philippinestaken a vow of poverty. (whether or not you are a citizen of the
United States).Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of aHousing • Your work is like the work done by em-religious order and has taken a vow of poverty.
ployees of the United States in foreignSpecial rules for housing apply to members of He renounces all claims to his earnings and
countries.the clergy. Under these rules, you do not include turns over his earnings to the order.
Page 14 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 15 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The foreign government gives an equal • Benefits under a dependent-care assis- personal items such as domestic help,
exemption to employees of the United laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-tance program.
States in its country. tainment and recreation, transportation,• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a and other miscellaneous expenses.member of the Armed Forces who diedWaiver of alien status. If you are an alien • Leave allowances.after September 10, 2001.who works for a foreign government or interna-
tional organization and you file a waiver under • Readjustment allowances or termination• Payments made under the compensated
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- payments. These are considered receivedwork therapy program.
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary by you when credited to your account.• Any bonus payment by a state or politicalyou receive after the date you file the waiver is subdivision because of service in a com-not exempt under this rule. However, it may be Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corpsbat zone.exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi- volunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustmentcation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more allowance during his period of service, to be paidNote. If, in a previous year, you received ainformation about treaties. to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour ofbonus payment by a state or political subdivision
Nonwage income. This exemption applies duty. Although the allowance is not available tobecause of service in a combat zone that you
only to employees' wages, salaries, and fees. him until the end of his service, Gary must in-included in your income, you can file a claim for
Pensions and other income do not qualify for this clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it isrefund of the taxes on that income. Use Form
exemption. credited to his account.1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return, to file the claim. File a separate form forEmployment abroad. For information on the each tax year involved. Generally, you must file Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). Iftax treatment of income earned abroad, see your claim within 3 years after the date you filed you are a VISTA volunteer, you must includePublication 54. your original return or within 2 years after the meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your
date you paid the tax, whichever is later. See the income as wages.Military Instructions for Form 1040X for information on
filing that form.Payments you receive as a member of a military National Senior Service Corps programs.
service generally are taxed as wages except for Do not include in your income amounts youVolunteersretirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. receive for supportive services or reimburse-
Allowances generally are not taxed. For more ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol-The tax treatment of amounts you receive as ainformation on the tax treatment of military al- lowing programs.volunteer is covered in the following discus-lowances and benefits, see Publication 3, sions. • Retired Senior Volunteer ProgramArmed Forces' Tax Guide.
(RSVP).
Mileage reimbursements to charitable volun-Military retirement pay. If your retirement • Foster Grandparent Program.teers providing relief relating to Midwesternpay is based on age or length of service, it is
disaster areas. You can exclude from income • Senior Companion Program. taxable and must be included in your income as
amounts you receive as mileage reimburse-a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or
ments from qualified charitable organizations.on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not Service Corps of Retired ExecutivesYou cannot claim a deduction for reimbursedinclude in your income the amount of any reduc- (SCORE). If you receive amounts for support-expenses that you paid in connection with serv-tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a ive services or reimbursements forices you performed for a charity (such as auto-survivor annuity for your spouse or children out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do notmobile expenses for which you received aunder the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec- include these amounts in gross income.mileage reimbursement).tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.
For a more detailed discussion of survivor The reimbursement must be for the use of a
Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include inannuities, see Publication 575. private passenger automobile for the benefit of
your income any reimbursements you receivethe organization in providing relief related to aDisability. If you are retired on disability, for transportation, meals, and other expensesMidwestern disaster area during the period be-see Military and Government Disability Pen- you have in training for, or actually providing,ginning on the applicable disaster date and end-sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later. volunteer federal income tax counseling for theing on December 31, 2008. For more elderly (TCE).information, see Publication 4492-B.Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in- You can deduct as a charitable contribution You must keep records of miles driven, time,come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,
your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses inplace (or use), and purpose of the mileage. Theregulation, or administrative practice adminis-
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-amount you can exclude from income can be uptered by the Department of Veterans Affairs
tance (VITA) program.to the standard business mileage rate. For mile-(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or
their families are not taxable. age incurred before July 1, 2008, the standard
business mileage rate is 50.5 cents per mile. For Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi-• Education, training, and subsistence al- mileage after June 30, 2008, the standard busi- cal responders. If you are a volunteerlowances. ness mileage rate is 58.5 cents per mile. firefighter or emergency medical responder, do
• Disability compensation and pension pay- not include in your income the following benefits
ments for disabilities paid either to veter- Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive you receive from a state or local government.
ans or their families. as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader • Rebates or reductions of property or in-for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair come taxes you receive because of serv-and clothing are exempt from tax.living. ices you performed as a volunteer
Taxable allowances. The following al- firefighter or emergency medical re-• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who
lowances must be included in your income and sponder.lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
reported as wages. • Payments you receive because of serv-• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor ices you performed as a volunteerdends paid either to veterans or their ben-
children while you are a volunteer leader firefighter or emergency medical re-eficiaries, including the proceeds of a
training in the United States. sponder, up to $30 for each month youveteran's endowment policy paid before
provided services.death. • Living allowances designated by the Di-
rector of the Peace Corps as basic com- The excluded income reduces any related tax or• Interest on insurance dividends left on de-
pensation. These are allowances forposit with the VA. contribution deduction.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 15

Page 16 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your work over a specified period of time. Royal- profits, losses, and other items. However, if the
ties generally are based on the number of units agreement does not state how a specific item ofBusiness and sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a gain or loss will be shared, or the allocation
performance, or machines sold. stated in the agreement does not have substan-Investment Income
tial economic effect, your distributive share is
Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from figured according to your interest in the partner-This section provides information on the treat- oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount ship.ment of income from certain rents and royalties, you receive when natural resources are ex-and from interests in partnerships and S corpo- Partnership return. Although a partnershiptracted from your property. The royalties arerations. generally pays no tax, it must file an informationbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and
return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipare paid to you by a person or company whoIncome from sales at auctions, includ-
Income. This shows the result of the partner-leases the property from you.ing online auctions, may be business
ship's operations for its tax year and the itemsincome. For more information, see
CAUTION
! Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco- that must be passed through to the partners.Publication 334. nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). You should re-wells, you can recover your investment through
ceive from each partnership in which you are athe depletion allowance. For information on thisRents From Personal
member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.Property Partner's Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,
Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum- etc., showing your share of income, deductions,If you rent out personal property, such as equip- stances, you can treat amounts you receive credits, and tax preference items of the partner-ment or vehicles, how you report your income from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- ship for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1 for yourand expenses is generally determined by: ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.
than as royalty income. For information about• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi- Partner's return. You generally must reportgain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,ness, and partnership items on your individual return thesee Publication 544.• Whether or not the rental activity is con- same way as they are reported on the partner-
Sale of property interest. If you sell yourducted for profit. ship return. That is, if the partnership had a
complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, capital gain, you report your share on ScheduleGenerally, if your primary purpose is income or the amount you receive is considered payment D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner-profit and you are involved in the rental activity for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty ship ordinary income on Schedule E (Formwith continuity and regularity, your rental activity income. Under certain circumstances, the sale 1040).is a business. See Publication 535, Business is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on
Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
both business and not-for-profit activities. will tell you where to report each item ofon selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3
income on your individual return.of Publication 544.
TIPReporting business income and expenses. If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,If you are in the business of renting personal Qualified joint venture. If you and youror a net profit interest in a mineral property forproperty, report your income and expenses on spouse each materially participate as the onlythe life of the property, you have made a lease orSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The members of a jointly owned and operated busi-a sublease, and any cash you receive for theform instructions have information on how to ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year,assignment of other interests in the property iscomplete them. you can make a joint election to be treated as aordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.ance.Reporting nonbusiness income. If you are To make this election, you must divide all items
Part of future production sold. If you ownnot in the business of renting personal property, of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21. tributable to the business between you and your
duction, you generally treat the money you re-List the type and amount of the income on the spouse in accordance with your respective inter-
ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as adotted line next to line 21. ests in the venture. Each of you must file a
loan from the buyer. Do not include it in your separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you income or take depletion based on it. 1040).
rent personal property for profit, include your When production begins, you include all the
rental expenses in the total amount you enter on proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- S Corporation Incometion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatForm 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount and
amount to arrive at your taxable income from theªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. In general, an S corporation does not pay tax onproperty.If you do not rent personal property for profit, its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-
your deductions are limited and you cannot re- tions, and credits of the corporation are passed
port a loss to offset other income. See Activity Partnership Income through to the shareholders based on each
not for profit under Other Income in the discus- shareholder's pro rata share. You must report
A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.sion of Miscellaneous Income, later. your share of these items on your return. Gener-
The income, gains, losses, deductions, and ally, the items passed through to you will in-
credits of a partnership are passed through to crease or decrease the basis of your SRoyalties the partners based on each partner's distributive corporation stock as appropriate.
share of these items. For more information, seeRoyalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, S corporation return. An S corporation mustPublication 541.and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary file a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Taxincome. Partner's distributive share. Your distribu- Return for an S Corporation. This shows the  You generally report royalties in Part I of tive share of partnership income, gains, losses, results of the corporation's operations for its taxSchedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income deductions, or credits generally is based on the year and the items of income, losses, deduc-and Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, partnership agreement. You must report your tions, or credits that affect the shareholders'gas, or mineral interest or are in business as a distributive share of these items on your return individual income tax returns.self-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., report whether or not they actually are distributed to Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You shouldyour income and expenses on Schedule C or you. However, your distributive share of the receive from the S corporation in which you areSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba- a shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Formsis of your partnership interest at the end of theCopyrights and patents. Royalties from 1120S), Shareholder's Share of Income, Deduc-partnership year in which the losses took place.copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, tions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in-
and similar property, or from patents on inven- Partnership agreement. The partnership come, losses, deductions, and credits, of the S
tions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use agreement usually covers the distribution of corporation for the tax year. Keep Schedule K-1
Page 16 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 17 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for your records. Do not attach it to your Form until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini- 4. You would be entitled to receive disability
1040. mum retirement age generally is the age at compensation from the Department of Vet-
which you can first receive a pension or annuity erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
Shareholder's return. Your distributive share if you are not disabled. tion for it. Your exclusion under this
of the items of income, losses, deductions, or condition is equal to the amount you wouldYou may be entitled to a tax credit ifcredits of the S corporation must be shown sep- be entitled to receive from the VA.you were permanently and totally dis-arately on your Form 1040. The character of
abled when you retired. For informa-these items generally is the same as if you had
TIP Pension based on years of service. If yoution on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit forrealized or incurred them personally. receive a disability pension based on years ofthe Elderly or the Disabled.
Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) service, you generally must include it in yourBeginning on the day after you reach mini-will tell you where to report each item of income. However, if the pension qualifies for themum retirement age, payments you receive areincome on your individual return. exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis-
TIPtaxable as a pension or annuity. Report the cussed earlier), do not include in income the partpayments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orDistributions. Generally, S corporation dis- of your pension that you would have received ifon lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For moretributions are a nontaxable return of your basis the pension had been based on a percentage ofinformation on pensions and annuities, see Pub-in the corporation stock. However, in certain disability. You must include the rest of your pen-lication 575.cases, part of the distributions may be taxable sion in your income.
as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you Retroactive VA determination. If you retirecapital gain, or as both. The corporation's distri- receive payments from a retirement or from the armed services based on years of serv-butions may be in the form of cash or property. profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa- ice and are later given a retroactive serv-
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as a ice-connected disability rating by the VA, yourMore information.   For more information, see
disability pension. The payments must be re- retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-the Instructions for Form 1120S.
ported as a pension or annuity. cluded from income up to the amount of VA
disability benefits you would have been entitledAccrued leave payment. If you retire on disa- to receive. You can claim a refund of any taxbility, any lump-sum payment you receive for paid on the excludable amount (subject to theSickness and accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-payment is not a disability payment. Include it in turn on Form 1040X for each previous yearInjury Benefits your income in the tax year you receive it. during the retroactive period.
If you receive a lump-sum disability sever-Generally, you must report as income any
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-amount you receive for personal injury or sick- Military and Government ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severanceness through an accident or health plan that is Disability Pensions benefit from your income. However, you mustpaid for by your employer. If both you and your
include in your income any lump-sum readjust-employer pay for the plan, only the amount you Certain military and government disability pen- ment or other nondisability severance paymentreceive that is due to your employer's payments sions are not taxable. you received on release from active duty, even ifis reported as income. However, certain pay-
you are later given a retroactive disability ratingments may not be taxable to you. For informa- Service-connected disability. You may be
by the VA.tion on nontaxable payments, see Military and able to exclude from income amounts you re-
Government Disability Pensions and Other ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance Special statute of limitations. Generally,Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus- for personal injury or sickness resulting from under the statute of limitations a claim for creditsion. active service in one of the following govern- or refund must be filed within 3 years from the
ment services. time a return was filed. However, if you receive aDo not report as income any amounts
retroactive service-connected disability ratingpaid to reimburse you for medical ex- • The armed forces of any country.
determination, the statute of limitations is ex-penses you incurred after the plan was
TIP
• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric tended by a 1-year period beginning on the dateestablished.
Administration. of the determination. This 1-year extended pe-
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of riod applies to claims for credit or refund filed• The Public Health Service.an accident or health plan, do not include any after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any
• The Foreign Service.amounts you receive from the plan for personal tax year that began more than 5 years before the
injury or sickness as income on your tax return. date of the determination.
Conditions for exclusion. Do not includeIf your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-
the disability payments in your income if any of Example. You retired in 2003 and receive apenses you deducted in an earlier year, you may
the following conditions apply. pension based on your years of service. Onhave to include some, or all, of the reimburse-
August 6, 2008, you receive a determination ofment in your income. See Recoveries under 1. You were entitled to receive a disability service-connected disability retroactive to 2003.Miscellaneous Income, later. payment before September 25, 1975. Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxes
Cafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered paid on your pension for 2005, 2006, and 2007.2. You were a member of a listed govern-by an accident or health insurance plan through However, under the special limitation period,ment service or its reserve component, ora cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur- you can also file a claim for 2004 as long as youwere under a binding written commitmentance premiums was not included in your in- file the claim by August 6, 2009. You cannot fileto become a member, on September 24,come, you are not considered to have paid the a claim for 2003 because that tax year began1975.premiums and you must include any benefits more than 5 years before the determination.3. You receive the disability payments for ayou receive in your income. If the amount of the
combat-related injury. This is a personalpremiums was included in your income, you are Transition Rules. If you received a retroac-injury or sickness that:considered to have paid the premiums and any tive service-connected disability rating determi-
benefits you receive are not taxable. nation after December 31, 2000, and beforea. Results directly from armed conflict, June 17, 2008, you have 1 year from June 17,
b. Takes place while you are engaged in 2008, to file your claims. You cannot make anyDisability Pensions
extra-hazardous service, claims for tax years that began before 2001.
If you retired on disability, you must include in c. Takes place under conditions simulat-income any disability pension you receive under Terrorist attack or military action. Do noting war, including training exercisesa plan that is paid for by your employer. You include in your income disability payments yousuch as maneuvers, ormust report your taxable disability payments as receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter-
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war. rorist or military action.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 17

Page 18 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A terrorist action is one that is directed health and safety due to severe cognitive Railroad sick pay. Payments you receive as
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-against the United States or any of its allies impairment.
surance Act are taxable and you must include(including a multinational force in which the
them in your income. However, do not includeUnited States is participating). A military action Limit on exclusion. The exclusion for pay- them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobis one that involves the armed forces of the ments made on a per diem  or other periodic injury.United States and is a result of actual or basis under a long-term care insurance contractthreatened violence or aggression against the is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the total Black lung benefit payments. These pay-United States or any of its allies, but does not of these payments and any accelerated death ments are similar to workers' compensation andinclude training exercises. generally are not taxable.benefits made on a per diem or other periodic
basis under a life insurance contract because Federal Employees' Compensation ActLong-Term Care the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa- (FECA). Payments received under this Act forInsurance Contracts tion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In- personal injury or sickness, including paymentssurance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.Long-term care insurance contracts generally Income, later.) However, you are taxed on amounts you receiveare treated as accident and health insurance Under this limit, the excludable amount for under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45contracts. Amounts you receive from them any period is figured by subtracting any reim- days while a claim is being decided. Report this(other than policyholder dividends or premium bursement received (through insurance or oth- income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orrefunds) generally are excludable from income erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term care on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sickas amounts received for personal injury or sick- services during the period from the larger of the leave while a claim is being processed is taxableness. To claim an exclusion for payments made following amounts. and must be included in your income as wages.on a per diem or other periodic basis under a
long-term care insurance contract, you must file • The cost of qualified long-term care serv- If part of the payments you receive
Form 8853 with your return. ices during the period. under FECA reduces your social se-
curity or equivalent railroad retirementA long-term care insurance contract is an
CAUTION
! • The dollar amount for the period ($270 per benefits received, that part is considered socialinsurance contract that only provides coverage day for any period in 2008). security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-for qualified long-term care services. The con-
fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theSee Section C of Form 8853 and its instructionstract must:
taxability of these benefits, see Other Incomefor more information.• Be guaranteed renewable, under Miscellaneous Income, later.
• Not provide for a cash surrender value or You can deduct the amount you spend to buyWorkers' Compensation
other money that can be paid, assigned, back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible
Amounts you receive as workers' compensationpledged, or borrowed, for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It is
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully a miscellaneous deduction subject to the• Provide that refunds, other than refunds exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers' 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ifon the death of the insured or complete compensation act or a statute in the nature of a you buy back sick leave in the same year yousurrender or cancellation of the contract, workers' compensation act. The exemption also used it, the amount reduces your taxable sickand dividends under the contract may be leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-used only to reduce future premiums or ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsincrease future benefits, and Other compensation. Many other amountsyou receive based on your age, length of serv- you receive as compensation for sickness or• Generally not pay or reimburse expenses ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you injury are not taxable. These include the follow-incurred for services or items that would retired because of an occupational sickness or ing amounts.be reimbursed under Medicare, except injury.
where Medicare is a secondary payer or • Compensatory damages you receive forIf part of your workers' compensationthe contract makes per diem or other peri- physical injury or physical sickness,reduces your social security orodic payments without regard to ex- whether paid in a lump sum or in periodicequivalent railroad retirement benefits
CAUTION
!penses. payments. See Court awards and dam-received, that part is considered social security ages under Other Income, later.(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and
Qualified long-term care services. Qualified • Benefits you receive under an accident ormay be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability
long-term care services are: health insurance policy on which eitherof these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-
you paid the premiums or your employercellaneous Income, later.• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera- paid the premiums but you had to includepeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili- them in your income.tative services, and maintenance and Return to work. If you return to work after
personal care services, and • Disability benefits you receive for loss ofqualifying for workers' compensation, salary
income or earning capacity as a result ofpayments you receive for performing light duties• Required by a chronically ill individual and injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol-are taxable as wages.provided pursuant to a plan of care pre- icy. scribed by a licensed health care practi-
Disability pension. If your disability pensiontioner. • Compensation you receive for permanent
is paid under a statute that provides benefits loss or loss of use of a part or function of
only to employees with service-connected disa- your body, or for your permanent disfig-Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- bilities, part of it may be workers' compensation. urement. This compensation must bedividual is one who has been certified by a That part is exempt from tax. The rest of your based only on the injury and not on thelicensed health care practitioner within the previ- pension, based on years of service, is taxable as period of your absence from work. Theseous 12 months as one of the following. pension or annuity income. If you die, the part of benefits are not taxable even if your em-
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is your survivors' benefit that is a continuation of ployer pays for the accident and health
unable to perform at least two activities of the workers' compensation is exempt from tax. plan that provides these benefits.
daily living without substantial assistance
due to a loss of functional capacity. Activi- Other Sickness Reimbursement for medical care. A reim-ties of daily living are eating, toileting, bursement for medical care generally is not tax-and Injury Benefitstransferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- able. However, it may reduce your medicalnence. In addition to disability pensions and annuities, expense deduction. If you receive reimburse-
you may receive other payments for sickness or• An individual who requires substantial su- ment for an expense you deducted in an earlier
injury.pervision to be protected from threats to year, see Recoveries, later.
Page 18 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 19 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive an ªadvance reimbursementº 1040) the fair market value of the house painting Canceled Debts
or ªloanº for future medical expenses from your services you received. The house painter must
employer without regard to whether you suffered include in income the fair market value of the Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
a personal injury or sickness or incurred medical accounting services you provided. forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you
expenses, that amount is included in your in- must include the canceled amount in your in-
Example 3. You are self-employed and acome, whether or not you incur uninsured medi- come. You have no income from the canceled
member of a barter club. The club uses creditcal expenses during the year. debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt
units as a means of exchange. It adds credit includes any indebtedness for which you areReimbursements received under your em-
units to your account for goods or services you liable or which attaches to property you hold.ployer's plan for expenses incurred before the
provide to members, which you can use to If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report theplan was established are included in income.
purchase goods or services offered by other canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is aAmounts you receive under a reimburse- members of the barter club. The club subtracts business debt, report the amount on Schedule Cment plan that provides for the payment of un- credit units from your account when you receive or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Scheduleused reimbursement amounts in cash or other goods or services from other members. You F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, ifbenefits are included in your income. However,
must include in your income the value of the the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).a qualified HSA distribution from a health flexible
credit units that are added to your account, evenspending account or health reimbursement ac- Form 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentthough you may not actually receive goods orcount can be made to a health savings account. agency, financial institution, or credit unionservices from other members until a later taxFor details, see Publication 969. cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 oryear. Reimbursements received under your em- more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-
ployer's plan of the amount paid for nonprescrip- tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isExample 4. You own a small apartmenttion medicines and drugs (such as allergy shown in box 2.building. In return for 6 months rent-free use ofmedicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art Interest included in canceled debt. If anynot included in income. However, reimburse- she created. You must report as rental income interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofments of the amount paid for dietary supple- on Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market value canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestments (such as vitamins) that are merely of the artwork, and the artist must report as also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not youbeneficial to your general health are included in income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form must include the interest portion of the canceledincome. 1040) the fair rental value of the apartment. debt in your income depends on whether the
interest would be deductible if you paid it. See
Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you
If the interest would not be deductible (suchexchanged property or services through a barterMiscellaneous Income as interest on a personal loan), include in yourexchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from Broker
income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Ifand Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similarThis section discusses various types of income. the interest would be deductible (such as on astatement from the barter exchange should beYou may have taxable income from certain business loan), include in your income the netsent to you by February 17, 2009. It should showtransactions even if no money changes hands. amount of the canceled debt (the amount shownthe value of cash, property, services, credits, orFor example, you may have taxable income if in box 2 less the interest amount shown in boxscrip you received from exchanges during 2008.you lend money at a below-market interest rate 3).The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B.or have a debt you owe canceled.
Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialBackup withholding. The income you re- institution offers a discount for the early paymentBartering ceive from bartering generally is not subject to of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-regular income tax withholding. However, count is canceled debt. You must include theBartering is an exchange of property or services. backup withholding will apply in certain circum- canceled amount in your income.You must include in your income, at the time stances to ensure that income tax is collected onreceived, the fair market value of property or this income. Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-services you receive in bartering. If you ex- tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgageUnder backup withholding, the barter ex-change services with another person and you (recourse debt), and you are relieved of thechange must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofboth have agreed ahead of time as to the value mortgage when you dispose of the property, youthe income if:of the services, that value will be accepted as may realize gain or loss up to the fair marketfair market value unless the value can be shown • You do not give the barter exchange your value of the property. To the extent the mort-to be otherwise. taxpayer identification number (generally a gage discharge exceeds the fair market value ofsocial security number or an employer Generally, you report this income on Sched- the property, it is income from discharge of in-identification number), orule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However, debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion
if the barter involves an exchange of something under Excluded debt, later. Report any income• The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatother than services, such as in Example 4 be- from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusinessyou gave it an incorrect identification num-low, you may have to use another form or sched- debt that does not qualify for exclusion as otherber. ule instead. income on Form 1040, line 21.If you join a barter exchange, you must certify
You may be able to exclude part of theunder penalties of perjury that your taxpayerExample 1. You are a self-employed attor-
mortgage relief on your principal resi-identification number is correct and that you areney who performs legal services for a client, a
dence. See Excluded debt, later.not subject to backup withholding. If you do notsmall corporation. The corporation gives you
TIP
make this certification, backup withholding mayshares of its stock as payment for your services.  If you are not personally liable for a mort-begin immediately. The barter exchange willYou must include the fair market value of the gage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relievedgive you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayershares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop-Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive erty (such as through foreclosure or reposses-ilar form, for you to make this certification. Thethem. sion), that relief is included in the amount youbarter exchange will withhold tax only up to the realize. You may have a taxable gain if theamount of any cash paid to you or deposited inExample 2. You are a self-employed ac- amount you realize exceeds your adjusted basisyour account and any scrip or credit issued tocountant. You and a house painter are members in the property. Report any gain on nonbusinessyou (and converted to cash).of a barter club. Members get in touch with each property as a capital gain.other directly and bargain for the value of the See Foreclosures and Repossessions  inIf tax is withheld from your barter in-services to be performed. In return for account- Publication 544 for more information.come, the barter exchange will reporting services you provided, the house painter
the amount of tax withheld on Formpainted your home. You must report as your Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in
TIP
1099-B, or similar statement.income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form a corporation and the corporation cancels or
Publication 525 (2008) Page 19

Page 20 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
constructive distribution that is generally divi- tion (defined later). celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3
dend income to you. For more information, see of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. 
A loan to refinance a qualified student loanPublication 542, Corporations. • The debt is qualified real property busi-also will qualify if it was made by an educationalIf you are a stockholder in a corporation and ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationinstitution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- 334.zation under its program designed as describedtion, you generally do not realize income. This is
in (3)(b) above.because the canceled debt is considered as a • The cancellation is intended as a gift.
contribution to the capital of the corporation An educational institution is an organization • The debt is qualified principal residenceequal to the amount of debt principal that you with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu- indebtedness, discussed next.canceled. larly enrolled body of students in attendance at
the place where the educational activities are Qualified principal residence indebted-Repayment of canceled debt. If you included carried on. ness (QPRI). This is a mortgage secured bya canceled amount in your income and later pay A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor- your principal residence that you took out to buy,the debt, you may be able to file a claim for poration, community chest, fund, or foundation build, or substantially improve your principal res-refund for the year the amount was included in organized and operated exclusively for one or idence. QPRI cannot be more than the cost ofincome. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if more of the following purposes. your principal residence plus improvements.the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still
You must reduce the basis of your principalopen. The statute of limitations generally does • Charitable.
residence by the amount excluded from grossnot end until 3 years after the due date of your • Educational. income. To claim the exclusion, you must fileoriginal return.
Form 982, Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to• Fostering national or international amateur
Discharge of Indebtedness (and Section 1082sports competition (but only if none of the
Exceptions Basis Adjustment), with your tax return.organization's activities involve providing
athletic facilities or equipment). Principal residence. Your principal resi-There are several exceptions to the inclusion of
dence is the home where you ordinarily live most• Literary.canceled debt in income. These are explained
of the time. You can have only one principalnext. • Preventing cruelty to children or animals. residence at any one time.
Debt canceled as a result of a Midwestern • Religious. Amount eligible for exclusion. The maxi-disaster. If you qualify, you can exclude from • Scientific. mum amount you can treat as QPRI is $2 millionincome the amount of a canceled nonbusiness ($1 million if married filing separately). You can-debt. The debt must be canceled by an applica- • Testing for public safety. not exclude debt canceled because of servicesble entity after the applicable disaster date and performed for the lender or on account of anyException. You do have income if your stu-before January 1, 2010. other factor not directly related to a decline in thedent loan was made by an educational institu-You may qualify for this relief if your main value of your residence or to your financial con-tion and is canceled because of services youhome on the applicable disaster date was lo- dition.performed for the institution or other organiza-cated in a Midwestern disaster area. This exclu-
tion that provided the funds.sion does not apply to a canceled debt to the Limitation. If only part of a loan is QPRI, the
extent that real property, which was security for exclusion applies only to the extent the canceledEducation loan repayment assistance.the debt, is located outside a Midwestern disas- amount is more than the amount of the loanEducation loan repayments made to you by theter area. For more information, see Publication immediately before the cancellation that is notNational Health Service Corps Loan Repayment4492-B. QPRI.Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or
a state education loan repayment program eligi-Student loans. Certain student loans contain Example. Your principal residence is se-ble for funds under the Public Health Service Acta provision that all or part of the debt incurred to cured by a debt of $1 million, of which $800,000are not taxable if you agree to provide primaryattend the qualified educational institution will be is QPRI. Your residence is sold for $700,000health services in health professional shortagecanceled if you work for a certain period of time and $300,000 of debt is canceled. Onlyareas.in certain professions for any of a broad class of $100,000 of the canceled debt may be excluded
employers. from income (the $300,000 that was dischargedDeductible debt. You do not have incomeYou do not have income if your student loan minus the $200,000 of nonqualified debt).from the cancellation of a debt if your payment ofis canceled after you agreed to this provision
the debt would be deductible. This exceptionand then performed the services required. To Host or Hostessapplies only if you use the cash method of ac-qualify, the loan must have been made by:
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of If you host a party at which sales are made, any1. The Federal Government, a state or local Publication 334. gift you receive for giving the party is a paymentgovernment, or an instrumentality, agency,
for helping a direct seller make sales. You mustor subdivision thereof, Price reduced after purchase. Generally, if report it as income at its fair market value.the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-for property you purchased, you do not havethat has assumed control of a state, ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainmentincome from the reduction. The reduction of thecounty, or municipal hospital, and whose expenses. These expenses are deductible asdebt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentemployees are considered public employ- miscellaneous itemized deductions subject toand reduces your basis in the property.ees under state law, or the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),
but only up to the amount of income you receive3. An educational institution: Excluded debt. Do not include a canceled
for giving the party.debt in your gross income in the following situa-a. Under an agreement with an entity de- For more information about the 50% limit fortions.scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the meal and entertainment expenses, see 50%funds to the institution to make the loan, • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case Limit in Publication 463.or under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-
cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. b. As part of a program of the institution Life Insurance Proceeds
designed to encourage students to • The debt is canceled when you are insol-
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because ofserve in occupations or areas with un- vent. However, you cannot exclude any
the death of the insured person are not taxablemet needs and under which the serv- amount of canceled debt that is more than
unless the policy was turned over to you for aices provided are for or under the the amount by which you are insolvent.
direction of a governmental unit or a See Publication 908. price. This is true even if the proceeds were paid
Page 20 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 21 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
under an accident or health insurance policy or b. The amount is paid to the family or des- payment that is more than your cost in your
an endowment contract. ignated beneficiary of the employee. income.
Endowment proceeds that you choose to
Proceeds not received in installments. If receive in installments instead of a lump-sum
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or Interest option on insurance. If an insurance payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed
other than at regular intervals, include in your company pays you interest only on proceeds as an annuity. This is explained in Publication
income only the benefits that are more than the from life insurance left on deposit, the interest 575. For this treatment to apply, you must
amount payable to you at the time of the insured you are paid is taxable. choose to receive the proceeds in installments
person's death. If the benefit payable at death is before receiving any part of the lump sum. ThisIf your spouse died before October 23, 1986,
not specified, you include in your income the election must be made within 60 days after theand you chose to receive only the interest from
benefit payments that are more than the present lump-sum payment first becomes payable toyour insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interest
value of the payments at the time of death. exclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply. you.
If you later decide to receive the proceeds from
Proceeds received in installments. If you re- the policy in installments, you can take the inter-
ceive life insurance proceeds in installments, Accelerated Death Benefitsest exclusion from the time you begin to receive
you can exclude part of each installment from the installments.
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-your income.
efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalTo determine the excluded part, divide the Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren- settlement before the insured's death are ex-amount held by the insurance company (gener- der a life insurance policy for cash, you must cluded from income if the insured is terminally orally the total lump sum payable at the death of include in income any proceeds that are more chronically ill.the insured person) by the number of install- than the cost of the life insurance policy. In
ments to be paid. Include anything over this general, your cost (or investment in the contract)
excluded part in your income as interest. Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-is the total of premiums that you paid for the life
ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeinsurance policy, less any refunded premiums,Example. The face amount of the policy is insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were$75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re- vider. A viatical settlement provider is a personnot included in your income.ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each. who regularly engages in the business of buyingYou should receive a Form 1099-R showingThe excluded part of each installment is $625 or taking assignment of life insurance contractsthe total proceeds and the taxable part. Report($75,000 ÷  120), or $7,500 for an entire year. on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of FormThe rest of each payment, $375 a month (or nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.$4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internal
you. For information on when the proceeds Revenue Code.
are excluded from income, see Accel-Installments for life. If, as the beneficiary erated Death Benefits, later.
TIP Exclusion for terminal illness. Acceleratedunder an insurance contract, you are entitled to
death benefits are fully excludable if the insuredreceive the proceeds in installments for the rest
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person whoof your life without a refund or period-certain Split-dollar life insurance. Generally, a
has been certified by a physician as having anguarantee, you figure the excluded part of each split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar-
illness or physical condition that can reasonablyinstallment by dividing the amount held by the rangement between an owner and a non-owner
be expected to result in death within 24 monthsinsurance company by your life expectancy. If of a life insurance contract under which either
from the date of the certification.there is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the party to the arrangement pays all or part of the
amount held by the insurance company for this premiums, and one of the parties paying the
Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insuredpurpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the premiums is entitled to recover all or part of
is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallyguarantee. those premiums from the proceeds of the con-
ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basistract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesSurviving spouse. If your spouse died of costs incurred for qualified long-term careto tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathceeds paid to you because of the death of your 1. Under the economic benefit regime, the benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodicspouse are received in installments, you can owner of the life insurance contract is basis are excludable up to a limit. This limitexclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in- treated as providing current life insurance applies to the total of the accelerated deathcluded in the installments. If you remarry, you protection and other taxable economic benefits and any periodic payments receivedcan continue to take the exclusion. benefits to the non-owner of the contract. from long-term care insurance contracts. For
information on the limit and the definitions of2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner ofEmployer-owned life insurance contract. If chronically ill individual, qualified long-term carethe life insurance contract is treated asyou are the policyholder of an employer-owned services, and long-term care insurance con-loaning premium payments to the owner oflife insurance contract, you must include in in- tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-the contract.come any life insurance proceeds received that tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,are more than the premiums and any other Only one of these regimes applies to any one earlier.amounts you paid on the policy. You are subject policy. For more information, see sectionsto this rule if you have a trade or business, you 1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations. Exception. The exclusion does not apply toown a life insurance contract on the life of your any amount paid to a person (other than theemployee, and you (or a related person) are a insured) who has an insurable interest in the lifebeneficiary under the contract. Endowment Contract Proceeds of the insured because the insured:However, you may exclude the full amount of
An endowment contract is a policy under which • Is a director, officer, or employee of thethe life insurance proceeds if the following apply.
you are paid a specified amount of money on a person, or
1. You provided written notice about the in- certain date unless you die before that date, in • Has a financial interest in the person'ssurance to the employee and the em- which case, the money is paid to your desig- business.ployee agreed to be insured. nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in
a lump-sum to you at maturity are taxable only if2. Either:
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-the proceeds are more than the cost of the
ated death benefits made on a per diem or othera. The employee was your employee policy. To determine your cost, subtract any
periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 withwithin the 12-month period before amount that you previously received under the
your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 todeath, or, at the time the contract was contract and excluded from your income from
exclude accelerated death benefits paid on theissued, was a director or highly com- the total premiums (or other consideration) paid
basis of actual expenses incurred.pensated employee, or for the contract. Include the part of the lump-sum
Publication 525 (2008) Page 21

Page 22 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in an earlier year, the amount should be shown must include the recovery (either in full or in part)Recoveries
in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest in your income in the year you receive it. A
Statement. Do not subtract the refund amountA recovery is a return of an amount you de- special rule applies if you claimed a deduction in
from the interest you paid in 2008. You mayducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The any tax year for a casualty loss to your main
have to include it in your income under the rulesmost common recoveries are refunds, reim- home due to Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma. If
explained in the following discussions.bursements, and rebates of itemized deduc- you receive a grant as reimbursement for that
tions. You also may have recoveries of loss, you can report the grant as income in theInterest on recovery. Interest on any of thenon-itemized deductions (such as payments on year you receive it (using the rules discussed inamounts you recover must be reported as inter-previously deducted bad debts) and recoveries the following sections of this publication) or youest income in the year received. For example,of items for which you previously claimed a tax can choose to file an amended tax return for thereport any interest you received on state or localcredit. year you claimed the deduction. To make thisincome tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a or choice, you must file an amended return (FormTax benefit rule. You must include a recovery Form 1040NR, line 9a. 1040X) by the later of:in your income in the year you receive it up to the
Recovery and expense in same year. If theamount by which the deduction or credit you • The due date for filing the tax return for
refund or other recovery and the expense occurtook for the recovered amount reduced your tax the tax year in which the grant was re-in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in- ceived, orduction or credit and is not reported as income.crease to an amount carried over to the current
• July 30, 2009.year that resulted from the deduction or credit is
Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receiveconsidered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
a refund or other recovery that is for amountslier year. See the Instructions for Form 1040X for how toyou paid in 2 or more separate years, you must make this choice.Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed- allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered
eral income taxes are not included in your in- amount between the years in which you paid it.
Itemized Deduction Recoveriescome because they are never allowed as a This allocation is necessary to determine the
deduction from income. amount of recovery from any earlier years and to The following discussion explains how to deter-determine the amount, if any, of your allowableState tax refund. If you received a state or mine the amount to include in your income fromdeduction for this item for the current year.local income tax refund (or credit or offset) in a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier
2008, you generally must include it in income if year as an itemized deduction. However, youExample. You paid 2007 estimated stateyou deducted the tax in an earlier year. The generally do not need to use this discussion ifincome tax of $4,000 in four equal payments.payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov- you file Form 1040 and the recovery is for stateYou made your fourth payment in January 2008.ernment Payments, to you by February 2, 2009. or local income taxes paid in 2007. Instead, useYou had no state income tax withheld duringThe IRS also will receive a copy of the Form the worksheet in the 2008 Form 1040 instruc-2007. In 2008, you received a $400 tax refund1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the work- tions for line 10 to figure the amount (if any) tobased on your 2007 state income tax return. Yousheet in the 2008 Form 1040 instructions for line include in your income.claimed itemized deductions each year on10 to figure the amount (if any) to include in your Schedule A (Form 1040). You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheetincome. See Itemized Deduction Recoveries, You must allocate the $400 refund between and must use this discussion if you are a nonres-later, for when you must use Worksheet 2 on 2007 and 2008, the years in which you paid the ident alien (discussed later) or any of the follow-page 24 of this publication. tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75% ing statements are true.If you could choose to deduct for a tax year ($3,000 ÷  $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2007,either: 1. The recovery is for a tax year other thanso 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for
2007.• State and local income taxes, or amounts you paid in 2007 and is a recovery
item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item, 2. The recovery is for a deducted item other• State and local general sales taxes, then you will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, for than state or local income taxes, such as athe maximum refund that you may have to in- 2008, and attach a copy of your computation general sales tax or real property tax re-clude in income is limited to the excess of the tax showing why that amount is less than the fund.you chose to deduct for that year over the tax amount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-
you did not choose to deduct for that year. ceived from the state. 3. On your 2007 Form 1040, line 42 was
The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for more than line 41.Example 1. For 2007 you can choose an your January 2008 estimated tax payment.$11,000 state income tax deduction or a 4. You received a refund of state and localWhen you figure your deduction for state and$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You income taxes in 2008 that was more thanlocal income taxes paid during 2008, you willchoose to deduct the state income tax. In 2008 the excess of your 2007 state and localreduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Youryou receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. income tax deduction over the amount youdeduction for state and local income taxes paidThe maximum refund that you may have to in- could have deducted for your 2007 stateduring 2008 will include the January net amountclude in income is $1,000, since you could have and local general sales tax.of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimateddeducted $10,000 in state general sales tax. state income taxes paid in 2008 for 2008, and 5. You made your last payment of 2007 state
Example 2. For 2007 you can choose an any state income tax withheld during 2008. or local estimated tax in 2008.
$11,500 state general sales tax deduction
6. You owed alternative minimum tax forDeductions not itemized. If you did not item-based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state
2007.ize deductions for the year for which you re-income tax deduction. You choose to deduct the
ceived the recovery of an expense that wasgeneral sales tax deduction. In 2008 you return 7. You could not deduct all your tax creditsdeductible only if you itemized, do not includean item you had purchased and receive a $500 for 2007 because their total was more thanany of the recovery amount in your income.sales tax refund. In 2008 you also receive a the amount of tax shown on your 2007$1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum Form 1040, line 46.Example. You claimed the standard deduc-refund that you may have to include in income is
tion on your 2007 federal income tax return. In 8. You could be claimed as a dependent by$500, since it is less than the excess of the tax
2008 you received a refund of your 2007 state someone else in 2007.deducted ($11,500) over the tax you did not
income tax. Do not report any of the refund aschoose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = $9,700). 9. You had to use the Itemized Deductionsincome because you did not itemize deductionsSince you did not choose to deduct the state Worksheet in the 2007 Schedule A instruc-for 2007.income tax, you do not include the state income tions because your 2007 adjusted grosstax refund in income. income was over $156,400 ($78,200 ifCasualty loss caused by Hurricane Katrina,
married filing separately) and both of theMortgage interest refund. If you received a Rita, or Wilma. Generally, if you recover an
following apply.refund or credit in 2008 of mortgage interest paid amount that you deducted in an earlier year, you
Page 22 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 23 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. You could not deduct all of the amount 6. You were not subject to alternative mini- your recovery to include in your income. You
on the 2007 Itemized Deductions Work- mum tax. (If you were subject to alternative also can use Worksheet 2 to determine the part
sheet, line 1. minimum tax, see Subject to alternative of a state tax refund (discussed earlier) to in-
minimum tax, later.) clude in income.b. The amount on line 8 of that 2007 work-
sheet would be more than the amount If any of the above statements is not true, Allocating the included part. If you are not
on line 4 of that worksheet if the amount see Total recovery not included in income, later. required to include all of your recoveries in youron line 4 were reduced by 80% of the income, and you have both a state income taxState tax refund. In addition to the previousrefund you received in 2008. refund and other itemized deduction recoveries,six items, you must include in your income the
you must allocate the taxable recoveries be-full amount of a refund of state or local income
If you also recovered an amount de- tax or general sales tax if the excess of the tax tween the state income tax refund you report on
ducted as a non-itemized deduction, you deducted over the tax you did not deduct is Form 1040, line 10 (Form 1040NR, line 11), andfigure the amount of that recovery to
CAUTION
! more than the refund of the tax deducted. the amount you report as other income on Forminclude in your income and add it to your ad- 1040, line 21 (Form 1040NR, line 21). If you doIf the refund is more than the excess, seejusted gross income before applying the rules Total recovery not included in income, later. not use Worksheet 2, make the allocation asexplained here. See Non-Itemized Deduction
follows.Recoveries, later. Where to report. Enter your state or local
income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and 1. Divide your state income tax refund by theNonresident aliens. If you are a nonresident the total of all other recoveries as other income total of all your itemized deduction recov-alien and file Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you on Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form eries.cannot claim the standard deduction. If you re- 1040A or Form 1040EZ.cover an itemized deduction that you claimed in 2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveriesIf you file Form 1040NR, enter your state oran earlier year, you generally must include the by the percentage in (1). This is thelocal income tax refund on line 11 and the totalfull amount of the recovery in your income in the amount you report as a state income taxof all other recoveries on line 21. If you file Formyear you receive it. However, if you had no refund.1040NR-EZ, enter your state or local income taxtaxable income in that earlier year (see Negative
refund on line 4.taxable income , later), you should complete 3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the
Worksheet 2 to determine the amount you must amount of taxable recoveries. This is theExample. For 2007, you filed a joint returninclude in income. If any other statement under amount you report as other income.on Form 1040. Your taxable income wasTotal recovery included in income  is not true,
$60,000 and you were not entitled to any taxsee the discussion referenced in the statement
Example. In 2008 you recovered $2,500 ofcredits. Your standard deduction was $10,700,to determine the amount to include in income.
your 2007 itemized deductions claimed onand you had itemized deductions of $12,000. InTotal recovery included in income. If you Schedule A (Form 1040), but the recoveries you2008, you received the following recoveries forrecover any itemized deduction that you claimed amounts deducted on your 2007 return: must include in your 2008 income are onlyin an earlier year, you generally must include the $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 wasfull amount of the recovery in your income in the Medical expenses ............. . $200 due to your state income tax refund. Your stateyear you receive it. This rule applies if, for the State and local income tax refund ... . 400 income tax was more than your state generalearlier year, all of the following statements are Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325 sales tax by $600. The amount you report as atrue. Total recoveries ............... . $925 state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is $300
1. Your itemized deductions exceeded the [($500 ÷  $2,500) ×  $1,500]. The balance of theNone of the recoveries were more than thestandard deduction by at least the amount taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported as otherdeductions taken for 2007. The difference be-of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc- income on Form 1040, line 21.tween the state and local income tax you de-tions did not exceed the standard deduc-
ducted and your local general sales tax wastion by at least the amount of the recovery,
more than $400.see Standard deduction limit, later.) Standard deduction limit. You generally are
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you doYour total recoveries are less than the2. You had taxable income. (If you had no amount by which your itemized deductions ex- not itemize your deductions. Only your itemizedtaxable income, see Negative taxable in-
ceeded the standard deduction ($12,000 − deductions that are more than your standardcome, later.)
$10,700 = $1,300), so you must include your deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-3. Your deduction for the item recovered total recoveries in your income for 2008. Report less you are required to itemize your deduc-equals or exceeds the amount recovered. the state and local income tax refund of $400 on tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year(If your deduction was less than the Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your return were not more than your income for thatamount recovered, see Recovery limited to recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. year, include in your income this year the lesserdeduction, later.)
of:
4. Your itemized deductions were not subject Total recovery not included in income. If • Your recoveries, orto the limit on itemized deductions. (If your one or more of the six statements listed in thedeductions were limited, see Itemized de- • The amount by which your itemized de-preceding discussion is not true, you may beductions limited, later.) ductions exceeded the standard deduc-able to exclude at least part of the recovery from
your income. See the discussion referenced to tion.5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you had
in the statement. You may be able to use Work-unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-
sheet 2 on the next page to determine the part ofits, later.)
Publication 525 (2008) Page 23

Page 24 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions Keep for Your Records
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in income on your
2008 tax return, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income
tax refund from 2007 and a casualty loss reimbursement from 2006, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use
information from your tax return for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year (year of the
deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to zero, see Unused tax credits
and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your recovery was for an itemized deduction that
was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit1 ........................................... . 1.
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements 
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 ...................................... . 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ........................................................... . 3.
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year. For 2007, 
Form 1040, Schedule A, line 29
Form 1040NR, Schedule A, line 17
Form 1040NR-EZ, line 11 ................................... . 4.
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you 
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) ..................... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ................................... . 6.
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (If you filed Form 1040, the standard
deduction amounts for 2007, 2006, and 2005 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and
4. If you filed Form 1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, enter -0-.) .............. . 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here. 
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable ...................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 .............................................. . 9.
10. Taxable income for prior year3 (2007 Form 1040, line 43; 2007 Form
1040NR, line 40; 2007 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14) ................. . 10.
11. Amount to include in income for 2008:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result 
(but not less than zero).4 .................................................. . 11.
If line 11 equals line 3Ð
Enter the amount from line 1 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11; Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
Enter the amount from line 2 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero Ð
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11;
 Form 1040NR-EZ, line 4.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage ........................................... . A.
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 10; Form 1040NR, line 11 .................. . B.
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11. 
Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 21; Form 1040NR, line 21 .................. . C.
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount, enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. See Negative taxable
income. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see Publication 536, Net Operating Losses
(NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Page 24 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 25 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2007 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1943, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1943, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1943  M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1943  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,350
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,700
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,850
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1943, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1943, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,350January 2, 1943 M Blind M • Married filing jointly Ð$10,700Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,850spouse's exemption January 2, 1943  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1943, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1943, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 6,650
2 7,950 $1,300 ($1,050 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,750 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,800
deduction for 2007.dependent child 3 13,850
4 14,900 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,400
2 7,450 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,500 include in your income.
4 9,550
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 9,150 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,450
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
Publication 525 (2008) Page 25

Page 26 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2006 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1942, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1942, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1942 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1942 M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,150
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,300
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,550
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1942, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $300
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1942, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,150January 2, 1942  M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,300Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,550spouse's exemption January 2, 1942  M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked ____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
IF your AND the number on THEN your January 1, 1942, and not blind, stop here. This
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
is . . . line 7b.
b.If born before January 2, 1942, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,400
2 7,650 $1,250 ($1,000 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,300 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,300
deduction for 2006.dependent child 3 13,300
4 14,300 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,150
2 7,150 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,150 include in your income.
4 9,150
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 8,800 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 10,050
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
Page 26 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 27 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2005 Standard Deduction Tables Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you If you were born before January 2, 1941, or you were blind, check the
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
January 2, 1941, or you are blind.
You Born before
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People* January 2, 1941 M Blind M
Your spouse, ifTHEN your standard claiming spouse's Born beforeIF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
exemption January 2, 1941  M Blind M
Single or Married filing separately $5,000
Total number of boxes you checked ____Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,000
widow(er) with dependent child 1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Head of household 7,300
* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are 2.  Additional amount 2. $250
blind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $800Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who
Were Born Before January 2, 1941, or Were Blind* 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart. 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
status.
You Born before • Single or Married filing separatelyÐ$5,000January 2, 1941 M Blind M • Married filing jointlyÐ$10,000Your spouse, if claiming Born before
• Head of householdÐ$7,300spouse's exemption January 2, 1941 M Blind M
7. Standard deduction.Total number of boxes you checked _____
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.
THEN your January 1, 1941, and not blind, stop here. This
IF your AND the number on standard deduction is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . . line 7b.
b. If born before January 2, 1941, or blind, multiply 7b.Single 1 $ 6,250
2 7,500 $1,250 ($1,000 if married) by the number in the
box above.Married filing joint return or 1 11,000 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,000
deduction for 2005.dependent child 3 13,000
4 14,000 Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. ItMarried filing separate return 1 6,000
2 7,000 also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
3 8,000 include in your income.
4 9,000
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
Head of household 1 8,550 your spouse if married filing jointly).
2 9,800
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead.
Standard deduction for earlier years. To Negative taxable income. If your taxable in- include in your income is limited to the smaller
of:come for the prior year (Worksheet 2, line 10)determine if amounts recovered in 2008 must
was a negative amount, the recovery you mustbe included in your income, you must know the • The amount deducted, orinclude in income is reduced by that amount.standard deduction for your filing status for the
• The amount recovered.You have a negative taxable income for 2007 ifyear the deduction was claimed. If you filed
your:Form 1040, the standard deduction tables for
2007, 2006, and 2005 are shown in Tables 2, 3, Example. During 2007, you paid $1,700• Form 1040, line 42 was more than lineand 4. If you need the standard deduction for medical expenses. From this amount you41,amounts for years before 2005, see the copy of subtracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your
• Form 1040NR, line 39 was more than adjusted gross income. Your actual medicalyour return for that year. If you filed Form
line 38, or expense deduction was $200. In 2008, you1040NR or 1040NR-EZ, you could not claim
received a $500 reimbursement from yourthe standard deduction.    • Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more than medical insurance for your 2007 expenses.line 12. The only amount of the $500 reimbursementExample. You filed a joint return on Form
that must be included in your income for 20081040 for 2007 with taxable income of $45,000.
Example. The facts are the same as in the is $200Ðthe amount actually deducted.Your itemized deductions were $11,550. The previous example except line 42 was $200standard deduction that you could have Itemized deductions limited. You weremore than line 41 on your 2007 Form 1040claimed was $10,700. In 2008, you recovered subject to the limit on itemized deductions ingiving you a negative taxable income of $200.$2,100 of your 2007 itemized deductions. None the earlier year if your adjusted gross incomeYou must include $650 in your 2008 income,of the recoveries were more than the actual (AGI) was more than a base amount. Thisrather than $850.deductions for 2007. Include $850 of the recov- amount was:
eries in your 2008 income. This is the smaller of • For 2007, $156,400 ($78,200 if marriedyour recoveries ($2,100) or the amount by Recovery limited to deduction. You do not filing separately),which your itemized deductions were more include in your income any amount of your
than the standard deduction ($11,550 − recovery that is more than the amount you • For 2006, $150,500 ($75,250 if married
deducted in the earlier year. The amount you$10,700 = $850). filing separately), and
Publication 525 (2008) Page 27

Page 28 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• For 2005, $145,950 ($72,975 if married she received a $5,000 refund of her state in- Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized deduc-
tions. She reduces her 2007 itemized deduc-filing separately). come taxes for 2007.
tions by $1,000 and recomputes that year's taxThe following shows how Eileen figured theIf the limit applied, your itemized deductions on taxable income of $6,260. However, the$20,000 reduction and other amounts from thewere reduced by the smaller of the following child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax ofItemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2007amounts. $628. Jean's tax liability for 2007 is notSchedule A (Form 1040) instructions. These
changed by reducing her deductions by the• 3% of the amount by which your AGI amounts are needed to figure the part of the
recovery. She did not have a tax benefit fromexceeded the base amount. $5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her the recovered deduction and does not includeincome for 2008.• 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc- any of the recovery in her income for 2008.tions other than medical and dental ex- AGI for 2007 .............. . $1,156,400 Subject to alternative minimum tax. If youpenses, investment interest expense, State income taxes paid in 2007 . . $40,000 were subject to the alternative minimum tax innonbusiness casualty and theft losses, 3% reduction (amount on the year of the deduction, you will have toand gambling losses. 2007 Itemized Deduction 
recompute your tax for the earlier year to deter-Worksheet, line 8) In 2006 and 2007, your itemized deductions mine if the recovery must be included in your [($1,156,400 − $156,400) ×  3%] . . $30,000were reduced by only 2/3 of the smaller amount. 80% reduction (amount on income. This will require a recomputation of
2007 Itemized Deduction your regular tax, as shown in the precedingIf the amount you recovered was deducted in
Worksheet, line 4) example, and a recomputation of your alterna-a year in which your itemized deductions were ($40,000 ×  80%) ........... . $32,000 tive minimum tax. If inclusion of the recoverylimited, you must include it in income up to the Lesser of 3% reduction or does not change your total tax, you do notdifference between the amount of itemized de- 80% reduction ...... . $30,000 include the recovery in your income. However,ductions actually allowed that year and the Limit reduced (1/3) ..... . −$10,000 if your total tax increases by any amount, youamount you would have been allowed (the 2007 deduction (amount on 
received a tax benefit from the deduction andgreater of your itemized deductions or your 2007 Itemized Deduction 
you must include the recovery in your incomeWorksheet, line 12)standard deduction) if you had figured your
($40,000 − $20,000) ........ . $20,000 up to the amount of the deduction that reduceddeductions using only the net amount of the
Refund received in 2008 of 2007 your tax in the earlier year.recovery item. state income tax ........... . $ 5,000To determine the part of the recovery you Net amount of 2007 state income
must include in income, follow the two steps tax ($40,000 − $5,000) ....... . $35,000 Non-Itemized Deductionbelow. RecoveriesIf Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount
1. Figure the greater of: of state income tax to figure her itemized de- This section discusses recovery of deductionsductions for 2007, the deduction allowed would other than itemized deductions.a. The standard deduction for the earlier have been $16,333. This is her otherwise al-year, or Total recovery included in income. If youlowable deduction of $35,000 reduced by
recover an amount that you deducted in anb. The amount of itemized deductions $18,667 (($35,000 ×  80% = $28,000) −
earlier year in figuring your adjusted gross in-you would have been allowed for the ($28,000 ÷  3.0)). By deducting the full $20,000
come, you generally must include the fullearlier year (after taking into account paid in 2007, she derived a tax benefit of
amount of the recovery in your income in thethe limit on itemized deductions) if you $3,667 ($20,000 − $16,333). Therefore, only
year received.had figured them using only the net $3,667 of the $5,000 refund is included in her
amount of the recovery item. The net income for 2008. Total recovery not included in income. Ifamount is the amount you actually any part of the deduction you took for the re-paid reduced by the recovery amount. Unused tax credits. If you recover an item covered amount did not reduce your tax, you
deducted in an earlier year in which you hadNote. If you were required to itemize your may be able to exclude at least part of the
unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear- recovery from your income. You must includedeductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)
lier year's tax to determine if you must include the recovery in your income only up to theand not step 1(a).
the recovery in your income. To do this, add the amount of the deduction that reduced your tax2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from the amount of the recovery to your earlier year's in the year of the deduction. (See Tax benefitamount of itemized deductions actually taxable income and refigure the tax and the rule, earlier.)allowed in the earlier year after applying credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-the limit on itemized deductions. Negative taxable income. If your taxable in-computed tax, after application of the credits, is come for the prior year was a negative amount,more than the actual tax in the earlier year,The result of step 2 is the amount of the the recovery you must include in income isinclude the recovery in your income up to therecovery to include in your income for the reduced by that amount. You have a negativeamount of the deduction that reduced the tax inyear you receive the recovery. If your taxable taxable income for 2007 if your:the earlier year. For this purpose, any increaseincome for the earlier year was a negative
to a credit carried over to the current year thatamount, reduce your recovery by the negative • Form 1040, line 42 was more than line
resulted from deducting the recovered amount 41,amount.
in the earlier year is considered to have re-If you had unused tax credits in the earlier • Form 1040NR, line 39 was more thanduced your tax in the earlier year. If the recov-year, see Unused tax credits, later. line 38, orery is for an itemized deduction claimed in aFor more information on this computation, • Form 1040NR-EZ, line 13 was more thanyear in which the deductions were limited, seesee Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in line 12.Itemized deductions limited, earlier.Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2.
If your tax, after application of the credits,
does not change, you did not have a tax benefitExample. Eileen Martin is single. She had Unused tax credits. If you recover an item
from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryan AGI of $1,156,400 and itemized her deduc- deducted in an earlier year in which you had
in your income.tions on Schedule A (Form 1040) for 2007. She unused tax credits, you must refigure the ear-
was not subject to alternative minimum tax and lier year's tax to determine if you must include
Example. In 2007, Jean Black filed aswas not entitled to any credit against income the recovery in your income. To do this, add the
head of household and itemized her deduc-tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000 amount of the recovery to your earlier year's
tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Her taxableof state income taxes. Her state general sales taxable income and refigure the tax and the
income was $5,260 and her tax was $528. Shetax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only credits on the recomputed amount. If the re-
claimed a child care credit of $1,200. The credit$20,000 of her state income taxes in 2007 computed tax, after application of the credits, is
reduced her tax to zero and she had an unusedbecause her otherwise allowable deductions of more than the actual tax in the earlier year,
tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In 2008,$40,000 were reduced by $20,000. In 2008, include the recovery in your income up to the
Page 28 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 29 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Supplemental unemployment benefits.amount of the deduction that reduced the tax in Unemployment compensation. You must
Benefits received from an employer-financedinclude in your income all unemployment com-the earlier year. For this purpose, any increase
fund (to which the employees did not contrib-pensation you receive. You should receive ato a credit carried over to the current year that
ute) are not unemployment compensation.Form 1099-G showing the amount paid to you.resulted from deducting the recovered amount
They are taxable as wages and are subject toGenerally, you enter unemployment compen-in the earlier year is considered to have re-
withholding for income tax. They may be sub-sation on line 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Formduced your tax in the earlier year.
ject to social security and Medicare taxes. For1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.If your tax, after application of the credits,
more information, see Supplemental Unem-does not change, you did not have a tax benefit Types of unemployment compensation. ployment Benefits in Publication 15-A, sectionfrom the deduction. Do not include the recovery Unemployment compensation generally in- 5, Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide. Re-in your income. cludes any amount received under an unem- port these payments on line 7 of Form 1040 orployment compensation law of the United Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.States or of a state. It includes the following
Amounts Recovered for Credits benefits. Repayment of benefits. You may have to
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-• Benefits paid by a state or the District ofIf you received a recovery in 2008 for an item ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustmentColumbia from the Federal Unemploy-for which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youment Trust Fund.year, you must increase your 2008 tax by the repay supplemental unemployment benefits inamount of the recovery, up to the amount by • State unemployment insurance benefits. the same year you receive them, reduce thewhich the credit reduced your tax in the earlier total benefits by the amount you repay. If you• Railroad unemployment compensationyear. You had a recovery if there was a down- repay the benefits in a later year, you mustbenefits.ward price adjustment or similar adjustment on include the full amount of the benefits in yourthe item for which you claimed a credit. • Disability payments from a government income for the year you received them.
This rule does not apply to the investment program paid as a substitute for unem- Deduct the repayment in the later year as
credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries of ployment compensation. (Amounts re- an adjustment to gross income on Form 1040.
these credits are covered by other provisions of ceived as workers' compensation for (You cannot use Form 1040A or Form
the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax injuries or illness are not unemployment 1040EZ.) Include the repayment on Form
Credit for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture compensation. See Workers' Compensa- 1040, line 36, and enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and
of Investment Credit, for details. tion under Sickness and Injury Benefits, the amount on the dotted line next to line 36. If
earlier.) the amount you repay in a later year is more
than $3,000, you may be able to take a creditSurvivor Benefits • Trade readjustment allowances under the against your tax for the later year instead ofTrade Act of 1974.Generally, payments made by or for an em- deducting the amount repaid. For information
ployer because of an employee's death must • Unemployment assistance under the Dis- on this, see Repayments, later.
be included in income. The following discus- aster Relief and Emergency Assistance Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-sions explain the tax treatment of certain pay- Act of 1974. ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-ments made to survivors. For additional ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute areinformation, see Publication 559. Governmental program. If you contribute taxable only if the amounts you receive areto a governmental unemployment compensa- more than your total payments into the fund.tion program and your contributions are notLump-sum payments. Lump-sum pay- Report the taxable amount on Form 1040, linedeductible, amounts you receive under the pro-ments you receive from a decedent's employer 21.gram are not included as unemployment com-as the surviving spouse or beneficiary may be
pensation until you recover your contributions. Payments by a union. Benefits paid to youaccrued salary payments; distributions from
If you deducted all of your contributions to the as an unemployed member of a union fromemployee profit-sharing, pension, annuity, or
program, the entire amount you receive under regular union dues are included in your incomestock bonus plans; or other items that should
the program is included in your income. on Form 1040, line 21. However, if you contrib-be treated separately for tax purposes. The tax
ute to a special union fund and your paymentstreatment of these lump-sum payments de- Repayment of unemployment compensa- to the fund are not deductible, the unemploy-pends on the type of payment. tion. If you repaid in 2008 unemployment ment benefits you receive from the fund arecompensation you received in 2008, subtractSalary or wages. Salary or wages re- includible in your income only to the extent theythe amount you repaid from the total amountceived after the death of the employee are are more than your contributions.you received and enter the difference on line 19usually ordinary income to you.
of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 Guaranteed annual wage. Payments youQualified employee retirement plans. of Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your receive from your employer during periods ofLump-sum distributions from qualified em- entry, enter ªRepaidº and the amount you re- unemployment, under a union agreement thatployee retirement plans are subject to special paid. If you repaid unemployment compensa- guarantees you full pay during the year, aretax treatment. For information on these distri- tion in 2008 that you included in your income in taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofbutions, see Publication 575 (or Publication an earlier year, you can deduct the amount Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form721, if you are the survivor of a federal em- repaid on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if 1040EZ.ployee or retiree). you itemize deductions. If the amount is more State employees. Payments similar to athan $3,000, see Repayments, later. state's unemployment compensation may bePublic safety officer killed in the line of
Tax withholding. You can choose to have made by the state to its employees who are notduty. If you are a survivor of a public safety federal income tax withheld from your unem- covered by the state's unemployment compen-officer who was killed in the line of duty, you ployment compensation. To make this choice, sation law. Although the payments are fullymay be able to exclude from income certain complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding taxable, do not report them as unemploymentamounts you receive. For this purpose, the Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax compensation. Report these payments onterm public safety officer includes law enforce- will be withheld at 10% of your payment. Form 1040, line 21.ment officers, firefighters, chaplains, and res-
cue squad and ambulance crew members. For If you do not choose to have tax with-
more information, see Publication 559. Welfare and Other held from your unemployment com-
pensation, you may be liable for Public Assistance Benefits
CAUTION
!
estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax,Unemployment Benefits
either through withholding or estimated tax, or Do not include in your income governmental
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits a combination of both, you may have to pay a benefit payments from a public welfare fund
you receive depends on the type of program penalty. For more information, see Publication based upon need, such as payments due to
paying the benefits. 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax. blindness. Payments from a state fund for the
Publication 525 (2008) Page 29

Page 30 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
victims of crime should not be included in the rehabilitation of your home or repair or is not includible in gross income. Home rehabil-
victims' incomes if they are in the nature of replacement of its contents to the extent it itation grants received by low-income home-
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- is due to a qualified disaster; owners in a defined area under the same act
penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. are also not includible in gross income.3. By a person engaged in the furnishing orYou must include in your income any welfare sale of transportation as a common car- Indian financing grants. Nonreimbursablepayments that are compensation for services rier because of the death or personal grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Actor that are obtained fraudulently. physical injuries incurred as a result of a of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-
qualified disaster; orWork-training program. Payments you re- dian-owned economic enterprises on or near
ceive from a state welfare agency for taking reservations are not includible in gross income.4. By a federal, state, or local government,part in a work-training program are not included or agency or instrumentality in connection Medicare. Medicare benefits received underin your income, as long as the payments (ex- with a qualified disaster in order to pro- title XVIII of the Social Security Act are notclusive of extra allowances for transportation or mote the general welfare. includible in the gross income of the individualsother costs) do not total more than the public
You can exclude this amount only to the extent for whom they are paid. This includes basicwelfare benefits you would have received oth-
any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur- (part A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for theerwise. If the payments are more than the wel-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not ap- Aged)) and supplementary (part B (Supple-fare benefits you would have received, the
ply if you were a participant or conspirator in a mentary Medical Insurance Benefits for theentire amount must be included in your income
terrorist action or his or her representative. Aged)).as wages.
A qualified disaster is:Alternative trade adjustment assistance Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance
• A disaster which results from a terrorist(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
or military action;from a state agency under the Demonstration section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act
Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis- are not includible in the gross income of the• A federally declared disaster; ortance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in- individuals to whom they are paid. This applies
• A disaster which results from an accidentcluded in your income. The state must send to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance
involving a common carrier, or from anyyou Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,
other event, which is determined to beyou should include in income. The amount widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents,
catastrophic by the Secretary of the Trea-should be reported on Form 1040, line 21. as well as the lump-sum death payment.
sury or his or her delegate.Persons with disabilities. If you have a dis- Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Foodability, you must include in income compensa- For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-tion you receive for services you perform is qualified if it is determined by an applicable gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If youunless the compensation is otherwise ex- federal, state, or local authority to warrant as- prepare and serve free meals for the program,cluded. However, you do not include in income sistance from the federal, state, or local gov- include in your income as wages the cash paythe value of goods, services, and cash that you ernment, agency, or instrumentality. you receive, even if you are also eligible forreceive, not in return for your services, but for food benefits.Disaster mitigation payments. You alsoyour training and rehabilitation because you
can exclude from income any amount you re-have a disability. Excludable amounts include Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.
ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay-payments for transportation and attendant Payments made by a state to qualified people
ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments,care, such as interpreter services for the deaf, to reduce their cost of winter energy use are not
qualified disaster mitigation payments are alsoreader services for the blind, and services to taxable.
most commonly paid to you in the period imme-help mentally retarded persons do their work.
diately following damage to property as a result Other IncomeDisaster relief grants. Do not include of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga-
post-disaster grants received under the Disas- tion payments are grants you use to mitigate The following brief discussions are arranged inter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in (reduce the severity of) potential damage from alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-your income if the grant payments are made to future natural disasters. They are paid to you cussed in greater detail in another publicationhelp you meet necessary expenses or serious through state and local governments based on include a reference to that publication.needs for medical, dental, housing, personal the provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disas-
property, transportation, or funeral expenses. ter Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or the Activity not for profit. You must include on
Do not deduct casualty losses or medical ex- National Flood Insurance Act. your return income from an activity from which
penses that are specifically reimbursed by You cannot increase the basis or adjusted you do not expect to make a profit. An example
these disaster relief grants. If you have de- basis of your property for improvements made of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you
ducted a casualty loss for the loss of your with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.
personal residence and you later receive a Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. De-
disaster relief grant for the loss of the same Mortgage assistance payments. Payments ductions for expenses related to the activity are
residence, you may have to include part or all made under section 235 of the National Hous- limited. They cannot total more than the in-
of the grant in your taxable income. See Recov- ing Act for mortgage assistance are not in- come you report and can be taken only if you
eries, earlier. Unemployment assistance pay- cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form
ments under the Act are taxable paid for the homeowner under the mortgage 1040). See Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1
unemployment compensation. See Unemploy- assistance program cannot be deducted. of Publication 535 for information on whether
ment compensation under Unemployment an activity is considered carried on for a profit.
Replacement housing payments. Replace-Benefits, earlier.
ment housing payments made under the Uni- Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If youDisaster relief payments. You can exclude form Relocation Assistance and Real Property received a payment from Alaska's mineral in-from income any amount you receive that is a Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder- come fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend),qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified ally Assisted Programs are not includible in report it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, linedisaster relief payment is an amount paid to gross income, but are includible in the basis of 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ.you: the newly acquired property. The state of Alaska sends each recipient a
document that shows the amount of the pay-1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Relocation payments and home rehabilita- ment with the check. The amount also is re-essary personal, family, living, or funeral tion grants. A relocation payment under sec- ported to the IRS.expenses that result from a qualified dis- tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Communityaster; Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to Alimony. Include in your income on Form
2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- a displaced individual moving from a 1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-
essary expenses incurred for the repair or flood-damaged residence to another residence ceive. Amounts you receive for child support
Page 30 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 31 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are not income to you. For complete informa- These amounts are considered reimbursement physical sickness (whether received in a lump
tion, see Publication 504, Divorced or Sepa- for your expenses. However, this rule does not sum or installments).
rated Individuals. apply if you have developed car pool arrange- Emotional distress. Emotional distress it-ments into a profit-making business of trans- self is not a physical injury or physical sickness,Below-market loans. A below-market loan porting workers for hire. but damages you receive for emotional distressis a loan on which no interest is charged or on
due to a physical injury or sickness are treatedCash rebates. A cash rebate you receivewhich the interest is charged at a rate below the
as received for the physical injury or sickness.from a dealer or manufacturer of an item youapplicable federal rate. If you make a be-
Do not include them in your income.buy is not income, but you must reduce yourlow-market gift or demand loan, you must in-
If the emotional distress is due to a personalbasis by the amount of the rebate.clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate)
injury that is not due to a physical injury oras interest income on your return. These loans
Example. You buy a new car for $9,000 sickness (for example, unlawful discriminationare considered a transaction in which you, the
cash and receive a $400 rebate check from the or injury to reputation), you must include thelender, are treated as having made:
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you. damages in your income, except for any dam-• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is the basis ages you receive for medical care due to thatnote that requires the payment of interest on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the emotional distress. Emotional distress includesat the applicable federal rate, and car and depreciation if you use it for business. physical symptoms that result from emotional
distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and• An additional payment to the borrower, Casualty insurance and other reimburse- stomach disorders.which the borrower transfers back to you ments. You generally should not report theseas interest. Deduction for costs involved in unlawfulreimbursements on your return unless you are
discrimination suits. You may be able tofiguring gain or loss from the casualty or theft.Depending on the transaction, the additional
deduct attorney fees and court costs paid toSee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters,payment to the borrower is treated as a:
recover a judgment or settlement for a claim ofand Thefts, for more information.• Gift, unlawful discrimination under various provi-Charitable gift annuities. If you are the ben- sions of federal, state, and local law listed in• Dividend, eficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must Internal Revenue Code section 62(e), a claiminclude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage• Contribution to capital, against the United States government, or apayment in your income. claim under section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social• Payment of compensation, or The payer will report the types of income Security Act. You can claim this deduction asyou received on Form 1099-R. Report the• Another type of payment. an adjustment to income on Form 1040, linegross distribution from box 1 on Form 1040, 36. The following rules apply.The borrower may have to report this payment line 16a, or on Form 1040A, line 12a, and theas income, depending on its classification. • The attorney fees and court costs may bepart taxed as ordinary income (box 2a minus
paid by you or on your behalf in connec-box 3) on Form 1040, line 16b, or on FormFor more information on below-market
tion with the claim for unlawful discrimi-1040A, line 12b. Report the portion taxed asloans, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.
nation, the claim against the Unitedcapital gain (box 3) on Schedule D, line 8.Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in States government, or the claim underChild support payments. You should notyour income. section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Se-report these payments on your return. See curity Act.Campaign contributions. These contribu- Publication 504 for more information.
tions are not income to a candidate unless they • The deduction you are claiming cannot
Court awards and damages. To determineare diverted to his or her personal use. To be be more than the amount of the judgment
if settlement amounts you receive by compro-exempt from tax, the contributions must be or settlement you are including in income
mise or judgment must be included in yourspent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund for the tax year.
income, you must consider the item that thefor use in future campaigns. However, interest • The judgment or settlement to which yoursettlement replaces. The character of the in-earned on bank deposits, dividends received attorney fees and court costs apply mustcome as ordinary income or capital gain de-on contributed securities, and net gains real- occur after October 22, 2004.pends on the nature of the underlying claim.ized on sales of contributed securities are tax-
Include the following as ordinary income.able and must be reported on Form 1120-POL, Pre-existing agreement. If you receiveU.S. Income Tax Return for Certain Political 1. Interest on any award. damages under a written binding agreement,Organizations. Excess campaign funds trans- court decree, or mediation award that was inferred to an office account must be included in 2. Compensation for lost wages or lost prof- effect (or issued on or before) September 13,the officeholder's income on Form 1040, line its in most cases. 1995, do not include in income any of those21, in the year transferred. 3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does damages received on account of personal inju-
not matter if they relate to a physical in- ries or sickness.Canceled sales contract. If you sell prop-
jury or physical sickness.erty (such as land or a residence) under a
Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re-contract, but the contract is canceled and you 4. Amounts received in settlement of pen- ceive benefits under a credit card disability orreturn the buyer's money in the same tax year sion rights (if you did not contribute to the unemployment insurance plan, the benefits areas the original sale, you have no income from plan). taxable to you. These plans make the minimumthe sale. If the contract is canceled and you
monthly payment on your credit card account if5. Damages for:return the buyer's money in a later tax year, you
you cannot make the payment due to injury,must include your gain in your income for the a. Patent or copyright infringement, illness, disability, or unemployment. Report onyear of the sale. When you return the money
Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youand take back the property in the later year, you b. Breach of contract, or received during the year that is more than thetreat the transaction as a purchase that gives c. Interference with business operations. amount of the premiums you paid during theyou a new basis in the property equal to the
year.funds you return to the buyer. 6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-Special rules apply to the reacquisition of Down payment assistance. If you purchasetress received to satisfy a claim underreal property where a secured indebtedness a home and receive assistance from a non-Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. For profit corporation to make the down payment,further information, see Repossession in Publi- 7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- that assistance is not included in your income.cation 537, Installment Sales. gent fees) where the underlying recovery If the corporation qualifies as a tax-exemptis included in gross income.Car pools. Do not include in your income charitable organization, the assistance is
amounts you receive from the passengers for  Do not include in your income compensa- treated as a gift and is included in your basis of
driving a car in a car pool to and from work. tory damages for personal physical injury or the house. If the corporation does not qualify,
Publication 525 (2008) Page 31

Page 32 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the assistance is treated as a rebate or reduc- Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantor line 23, or Form 1040NR (Schedule A), line 11.
tion of the purchase price and is not included in trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi- For example, an employee or the surviving
your basis. ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over spouse or beneficiary of a deceased plaintiff
the trust. (The grantor is the one who trans- would claim the expenses as a miscellaneous
Employment agency fees. If you get a job ferred property to the trust.) This rule applies if itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. See
through an employment agency, and the fee is the property (or income from the property) put Statement, next.
paid by your employer, the fee is not includible into the trust will or may revert (be returned) to
Statement. If you report on Form 1040,in your income if you are not liable for it. How- the grantor or the grantor's spouse.
line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21, qualifiedever, if you pay it and your employer reim- Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the
settlement income that is less than the grossburses you for it, it is includible in your income. grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at
amount shown on the Form 1099-MISC, youthe date of transfer) at more than 5% of the
Energy conservation subsidies. You can must attach a statement to your tax return. Thevalue of the transferred property.
exclude from gross income any subsidy pro- statement must identify and show the grossExpenses paid by another. If your personalvided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili- amount of the qualified settlement income, theexpenses are paid for by another person, suchties for the purchase or installation of an energy reductions for the amount contributed to anas a corporation, the payment may be taxableconservation measure for a dwelling unit. eligible retirement plan or allowable as legalto you depending upon your relationship with expenses not reported as a miscellaneousEnergy conservation measure. This in- that person and the nature of the payment. But itemized deduction, and the net amount.cludes installations or modifications that are if the payment makes up for a loss caused by
primarily designed to reduce consumption of that person, and only restores you to the posi- Income averaging. For purposes of theelectricity or natural gas, or improve the man- tion you were in before the loss, the payment is income averaging rules that apply to an individ-agement of energy demand. not includible in your income. ual engaged in a farming or fishing business,
qualified settlement income is treated as attrib-Dwelling unit. This includes a house, Exxon Valdez settlement income. Includeapartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, utable to a fishing business for the tax year inin your income on Form 1040, line 21, or Formor similar property. If a building or structure which it is received. See Schedule J (Form1040NR, line 21, any qualified settlement in-contains both dwelling and other units, any 1040) and its instructions for more information.come you receive as a qualified taxpayer. Seesubsidy must be properly allocated. Statement, later. Qualified settlement income
Fees for services. Include all fees for youris any interest and punitive damage awardsEstate and trust income.  An estate or trust, services in your income. Examples of thesethat are:unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal fees are amounts you receive for services you• Otherwise includible in taxable income,income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estate perform as:andor trust, you may be taxed on your share of its
• A corporate director,income distributed or required to be distributed • Received in connection with the civil ac-to you. However, there is never a double tax. • An executor, administrator, or personaltion In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CVEstates and trusts file their returns on Form (HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska). representative of an estate,1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates and
• A manager of a trade or business youTrusts, and your share of the income is re- You are a qualified taxpayer if you were aported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), operated before declaring Chapter 11plaintiff in the above mentioned civil action orBeneficiary's Share of Income, Deductions, bankruptcy,you were a beneficiary of the estate of yourCredits, etc. spouse or a close relative who was such a • A notary public, or
Current income required to be distrib- plaintiff and from whom you acquired the right • An election precinct official.uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or to receive qualified settlement income.
trust that must distribute all of its current in- The income can be received as a lump sum
come, you must report your share of the distrib- or as periodic payments. You will receive a If you are not an employee and the
utable net income, whether or not you actually Form 1099-MISC showing the gross amount of fees for your services from the same
received it. the settlement income paid to you in the tax payor total $600 or more for the year,
TIP
year. you may receive a Form 1099-MISC.Current income not required to be distrib-
uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or Contributions to eligible retirement plan. Corporate director. Corporate directortrust and the fiduciary has the choice of If you are a qualified taxpayer you can contrib- fees are self-employment income. Reportwhether to distribute all or part of the current ute all or part of your qualified settlement in- these payments on Schedule C or Scheduleincome, you must report: come, up to $100,000, to an eligible retirement C-EZ (Form 1040).plan, including an IRA. Contributions to eligible• All income that is required to be distrib- Personal representatives. All personalretirement plans, other than a Roth IRA or auted to you, whether or not it is actually designated Roth contribution, reduce the quali- representatives must include in their gross in-distributed, plus fied settlement income that you must include in come fees paid to them from an estate. If you
• All other amounts actually paid or income. See Statement, later. For more infor- are not in the trade or business of being an
credited to you, mation on these contributions, see Publication executor (for instance, you are the executor of
560, Publication 575, and Publication 590. a friend's or relative's estate), report these feesup to the amount of your share of distributable
on Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade ornet income. Legal expenses. You may be able to de-
business of being an executor, report theseduct attorney fees and court costs paid in con-How to report. Treat each item of income fees as self-employment income on Schedulenection with the civil action. Depending on thethe same way that the estate or trust would C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee isfacts and circumstances, these expenses aretreat it. For example, if a trust's dividend in- not includible in income if it is waived.either claimed on Schedule A (Form 1040) orcome is distributed to you, you report the distri- Form 1040NR (Schedule A), or deducted in Manager of trade or business for bank-bution as dividend income on your return. The figuring the income you report on Form 1040, ruptcy estate. Include in your income allsame rule applies to distributions of tax-exempt line 21, or Form 1040NR, line 21. If the quali- payments received from your bankruptcy es-interest and capital gains. fied settlement income was received in con- tate for managing or operating a trade or busi-The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell nection with your trade or business (other than ness that you operated before you filed foryou the type of items making up your share of as an employee), you can reduce the taxable bankruptcy. Report this income on Form 1040,the estate or trust income and any credits you amount of qualified settlement income by these line 21.are allowed on your individual income tax re- expenses. In all other situations, you can onlyturn. Notary public. Report payments for theseclaim these expenses as a miscellaneous item-
services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZLosses. Losses of estates and trusts gen- ized deduction subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-
(Form 1040). These payments are not subjecterally are not deductible by the beneficiaries. gross-income limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),
Page 32 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 33 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to self-employment tax. (See the separate in- Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare person, include the entire amount you receive
structions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for Providers), to help you determine the amount in gross income on Form 1040, line 21.
details.) you can deduct for the use of your home. Bequest for services. If you receive cash
Election precinct official. You should re- or other property as a bequest for services youFound property. If you find and keep prop-
ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv- performed while the decedent was alive, theerty that does not belong to you that has been
ices performed as an election official or value is taxable compensation.lost or abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable
election worker. Report these payments on line to you at its fair market value in the first year it is Historic preservation grants. Do not in-7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of your undisputed possession. clude in your income any payment you receiveForm 1040EZ. under the National Historic Preservation Act toFree tour. If you received a free tour from a
preserve a historically significant property.Food program payments to daycare provid- travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,
ers. If you operate a daycare service and you must include its value in your income. Re- Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notreceive payments under the Child and Adult port the fair market value of the tour on Form deductible from other income. A hobby is anCare Food Program administered by the De- 1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or activity from which you do not expect to make apartment of Agriculture that are not for your business of organizing tours. You cannot de- profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier, underservices, the payments generally are not in- duct your expenses in serving as the voluntary Other Income.cluded in your income. However, you must leader of the group at the group's request. If
If you collect stamps, coins, or otherinclude in your income any part of the pay- you organize tours as a trade or business,
items as a hobby for recreation andments you do not use to provide food to individ- report the tour's value on Schedule C or Sched-
pleasure, and you sell any of theuals eligible for help under the program. ule C-EZ (Form 1040).
CAUTION
!
items, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.
Foreign currency transactions. If you have Gambling winnings. You must include your However, if you sell items from your collection
a gain on a personal foreign currency transac- gambling winnings in your income on Form at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.
tion because of changes in exchange rates, 1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions on
you do not have to include that gain in your Holocaust victims restitution. RestitutionSchedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-
income unless it is more than $200. If the gain payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (orbling losses you had during the year, but only
is more than $200, report it as a capital gain. the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interestup to the amount of your winnings.
earned on the payments, including interestLotteries and raffles. Winnings from lot-Foster care providers. Payments you re- earned on amounts held in certain escrow ac-teries and raffles are gambling winnings. Inceive from a state, political subdivision, or a counts or funds, are not taxable. You also doaddition to cash winnings, you must include inqualified foster care placement agency for pro- not include them in any computations in whichyour income the fair market value of bonds,viding care to qualified foster individuals in your you ordinarily would add excludable income tocars, houses, and other noncash prizes. How-home generally are not included in your in- your adjusted gross income, such as the com-ever, the difference between the fair marketcome. However, you must include in your in- putation to determine the taxable part of socialvalue and the cost of an oil and gas leasecome payments received for the care of more security benefits. If the payments are made inobtained from the government through a lotterythan 5 individuals age 19 or older and certain property, your basis in the property is its fairis not includible in income.difficulty-of-care payments. market value when you receive it.
A qualified foster individual is a person who: Excludable restitution payments are pay-Installment payments. Generally, if you
ments or distributions made by any country orwin a state lottery prize payable in installments,1. Is living in a foster family home, and any other entity because of persecution of anyou must include in your gross income the
2. Was placed there by: individual on the basis of race, religion, physi-annual payments and any amounts you receive
cal or mental disability, or sexual orientation bydesignated as interest on the unpaid install-a. An agency of a state or one of its polit- Nazi Germany, any other Axis regime, or anyments. If you sell future lottery payments for aical subdivisions, or other Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country,lump sum, you must report the amount you
whether the payments are made under a law orreceive from the sale as ordinary income (Formb. A qualified foster care placement
as a result of a legal action. They include com-1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.agency.
pensation or reparation for property losses re-Form W-2G. You may have received a sulting from Nazi persecution, includingForm W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings,Difficulty-of-care payments. These are proceeds under insurance policies issuedshowing the amount of your gambling winningsadditional payments that are designated by the before and during World War II by Europeanand any tax taken out of them. Include thepayer as compensation for providing the addi- insurance companies.amount from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21.tional care that is required for physically, men-
Include the amount shown in box 2 on Form Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi-tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified
1040, line 62, as federal income tax withheld. ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs,foster individuals. A state must determine that
must be included in your income on Form 1040,the additional compensation is needed, and the Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZcare for which the payments are made must be you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is (Form 1040) if from your self-employment ac-provided in your home. not included in your income. However, if prop- tivity.You must include in your income diffi- erty you receive this way later produces in-culty-of-care payments received for more than: Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofcome such as interest, dividends, or rents, that
a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsincome is taxable to you. If property is given to• 10 qualified foster individuals under age
secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofa trust and the income from it is paid, credited,19, or
Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeor distributed to you, that income is also taxable• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or in your income amounts you receive from activ-to you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is theolder. ities related to those fishing rights. The incomeincome from the property, that income is tax-
is not subject to income tax, self-employmentable to you.Maintaining space in home. If you are tax, or employment taxes.paid to maintain space in your home for emer- Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited
gency foster care, you must include the pay- a pension or an individual retirement arrange- Interest on frozen deposits. In general, you
ment in your income. ment (IRA), you may have to include part of the exclude from your income the amount of inter-
inherited amount in your income. See Survi- est earned on a frozen deposit. A deposit isReporting taxable payments.  If you re- vors and Beneficiaries in Publication 575, if you frozen if, at the end of the calendar year, youceive payments that you must include in your inherited a pension. See What If You Inherit an cannot withdraw any part of the deposit be-income, you are in business as a foster-care IRA? in Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA. cause:provider and you are self-employed. Report the
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ Expected inheritance. If you sell an inter- • The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business est in an expected inheritance from a living solvent, or
Publication 525 (2008) Page 33

Page 34 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The state where the institution is located Manufacturer incentive payments. You 3. The prize or award is transferred by the
has placed limits on withdrawals because must include as other income on Form 1040, payer directly to a governmental unit or
other financial institutions in the state are line 21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form tax-exempt charitable organization as
bankrupt or insolvent. 1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay- designated by you. The following condi-
ments from a manufacturer that you receive as tions apply to the transfer.
Excludable amount. The amount of inter- a salesperson. This is true whether you receive
a. You cannot use the prize or awardest you exclude from income for the year is the the payment directly from the manufacturer or
before it is transferred.interest that was credited on the frozen deposit through your employer.
for that tax year minus the sum of: b. You should provide the designationExample. You sell cars for an automobile before the prize or award is presented1. The net amount withdrawn from the de- dealership and receive incentive payments to prevent a disqualifying use. Theposit during that year, and from the automobile manufacturer every time designation should contain:you sell a particular model of car. You report2. The amount that could have been with-
the incentive payments on Form 1040, line 21. i. The purpose of the designation bydrawn at the end of that tax year (not
making a reference to sectionreduced by any penalty for premature
Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs 74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenuewithdrawals of a time deposit).
and Medicare Advantage MSAs). You gen- Code,The excluded part of the interest is included in erally do not include in income amounts you ii. A description of the prize or award,your income in the tax year it becomes with- withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare
drawable. Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for iii. The name and address of the or-
qualified medical expenses. Generally, quali- ganization to receive the prize orInterest on qualified savings bonds. You fied medical expenses are those you can de- award,may be able to exclude from income the inter- duct on Schedule A (Form 1040). For moreest from qualified U.S. savings bonds you re- iv. Your name, address, and taxpayerinformation about Archer MSAs or Medicaredeem if you pay qualified higher educational identification number, andAdvantage MSAs, see Publication 969.expenses in the same year. Qualified higher
v. Your signature and the dateeducational expenses are those you pay for
Moving expense reimbursements. You signed.tuition and required fees at an eligible educa-
generally should not report these benefits ontional institution for you, your spouse, or your
your return. See Publication 521 for more infor- c. In the case of an unexpected presen-dependent. A qualified U.S. savings bond is a
mation. tation, you must return the prize orseries EE bond issued after 1989 or a series I
award before using it (or spending, de-bond. The bond must have been issued to you
Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a positing, investing it, etc., in the casewhen you were 24 years of age or older. For
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz of money) and then prepare the state-more information on this exclusion, see Educa-
program, beauty contest, or other event, you ment as described in (b).tion Savings Bond Program in chapter 1 of
must include it in your income. For example, ifPublication 550. d. After the transfer, you should receiveyou win a $50 prize in a photography contest, from the payer a written response stat-Interest on state and local government obli- you must report this income on Form 1040, line ing when and to whom the designatedgations. This interest is usually exempt from 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not amounts were transferred.federal tax. However, you must show the include its value in your income.
amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed- Prizes and awards in goods or services These rules do not apply to scholarship oreral income tax return. For more information, must be included in your income at their fair fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fel-see State or Local Government Obligations in market value. lowships, later.chapter 1 of Publication 550.
Employee awards or bonuses. Cash
Job interview expenses. If a prospective awards or bonuses given to you by your em- Qualified tuition program (QTP). A quali-
employer asks you to appear for an interview ployer for good work or suggestions generally fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro-
and either pays you an allowance or reim- must be included in your income as wages. gram) is a program set up to allow you to either
burses you for your transportation and other However, certain noncash employee achieve- prepay or contribute to an account established
travel expenses, the amount you receive gen- ment awards can be excluded from income. for paying a student's qualified higher educa-
erally is not taxable. You include in income only See Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous tion expenses at an eligible educational institu-
the amount you receive that is more than your Compensation, earlier. tion. A program can be established and
actual expenses. maintained by a state, an agency or instrumen-Prize points. If you are a salesperson and tality of a state, or an eligible educational insti-receive prize points redeemable for merchan-Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be tution.dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-included in your income on Form 1040, line 21.
The part of a distribution representing thefacturer to employees of dealers, you mustIf you must give the pay to your employer
amount paid or contributed to a QTP is notinclude their fair market value in your income.because your employer continues to pay your
included in income. This is a return of the in-The prize points are taxable in the year they aresalary while you serve on the jury, you can
vestment in the program.paid or made available to you, rather than in thededuct the amount turned over to your em-
year you redeem them for merchandise. The beneficiary generally does not includeployer as an adjustment to income. Enter the
in income any earnings distributed from a QTPamount you repay your employer on Form Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you if the total distribution is less than or equal to1040, line 36. Enter ªJury Payº and the amount were awarded a prize in recognition of accom- adjusted qualified higher education expenses.on the dotted line next to line 36. plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, See Publication 970 for more information.artistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, youKickbacks. You must include kickbacks,
generally must include the value of the prize inside commissions, push money, or similar pay- Railroad retirement annuities. The follow-your income. However, you do not include thisments you receive in your income on Form ing types of payments are treated as pension orprize in your income if you meet all of the1040, line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule annuity income and are taxable under the rulesfollowing requirements.C-EZ (Form 1040) if from your explained in Publication 575.self-employment activity. 1. You were selected without any action on • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that areyour part to enter the contest or proceed- more than the social security equivalentExample. You sell cars and help arrange ing. benefit.car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers
pay back part of their commissions to you for 2. You are not required to perform substan- • Tier 2 benefits.referring customers to them. You must include tial future services as a condition for re-
• Vested dual benefits.the kickbacks in your income. ceiving the prize or award.
Page 34 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 35 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Benefits may affect your IRA deduction.Rewards. If you receive a reward for provid- covered countermeasure, you can exclude the
You must use the special worksheets in appen-ing information, include it in your income. payment from your income (to the extent it is
dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxablenot allowed as a medical and dental expenseSale of home. You may be able to exclude benefits and your IRA deduction if all of thededuction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligi-from income all or part of any gain from the sale following conditions apply.ble individuals include health care workers,or exchange of a personal residence. See Pub- emergency personnel, and first responders in a • You receive social security or equivalentlication 523. smallpox emergency, who have received a railroad retirement benefits.smallpox vaccination.Sale of personal items. If you sold an item • You have taxable compensation.you owned for personal use, such as a car, Social security and equivalent railroad re-refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or • You contribute to your IRA.tirement benefits. Social security orsilverware, your gain is taxable as a capital equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax- • You or your spouse is covered by a re-gain. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). able, must be included in the income of the tirement plan at work.You cannot deduct a loss. person who has the legal right to receive theHowever, if you sold an item you held for benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax- How to report. If any of your benefits areinvestment, such as gold or silver bullion, able, and the amount that is taxable, depends taxable, you must use either Form 1040 orcoins, or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital on the amount of the benefits and your other Form 1040A to report the taxable part. Yougain and any loss is deductible as a capital income. cannot use Form 1040EZ. Report your net ben-loss. efits (the amount in box 5 of your FormsSocial security benefits include any monthly
Example. You sold a painting on an online SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) on line 20a of Formbenefit under Title II of the Social Security Act
auction website for $100. You bought the paint- 1040 or line 14a of Form 1040A. Report theand any part of a tier I railroad retirement bene-
ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report taxable part (from the last line of the worksheet)fit treated as a social security benefit. Social
your $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule D on line 20b of Form 1040 or on line 14b of Formsecurity benefits do not include any supple-
(Form 1040). 1040A.mental security income (SSI) payments.
Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate Form SSA-1099. If you received social se- Stolen property. If you steal property, you
for a degree can exclude amounts received as curity benefits during the year, you will receive must report its fair market value in your income
a qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State- in the year you steal it unless in the same year,
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed with you return it to its rightful owner.
receive that is for: your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a
Transporting school children. Do not in-worksheet you can use to figure whether any of• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an clude in your income a school board mileageyour benefits are taxable.educational institution, or allowance for taking children to and fromFor an explanation of the information found school if you are not in the business of taking• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re- on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915. children to school. You cannot deduct ex-quired for courses at the educational in-
Form RRB-1099. If you received penses for providing this transportation.stitution.
equivalent railroad retirement or special guar-
Amounts used for room and board do not qual- Union benefits and dues. Amounts de-anty benefits during the year, you will receive
ify for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for ducted from your pay for union dues, assess-Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad
more information on qualified scholarships and ments, contributions, or other payments to aRetirement Board.
fellowship grants. union cannot be excluded from your income.For an explanation of the information found You may be able to deduct some of theseon your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915.Payment for services. Generally, you payments as a miscellaneous deduction sub-must include in income the part of any scholar- If you received other railroad retirement ject to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related toship or fellowship that represents payment for benefits, see Railroad retirement annuities, your job and if you itemize deductions onpast, present, or future teaching, research, or earlier. Schedule A (Form 1040). For more informa-other services. This applies even if all candi- tion, get Publication 529, Miscellaneous De-Joint return. If you are married and file adates for a degree must perform the services to ductions.joint return, you and your spouse must com-receive the degree. bine your incomes and your social security andDo not include in income the part of any Strike and lockout benefits. Benefitsequivalent railroad retirement benefits whenscholarship or fellowship representing pay- paid to you by a union as strike or lockoutfiguring whether any of your combined benefitsment for teaching, research, or other services if benefits, including both cash and the fair mar-are taxable. Even if your spouse did not receiveyou receive the amount under the National ket value of other property, usually are includedany benefits, you must add your spouse's in-Health Service Corps Scholarship Program or in your income as compensation. You can ex-come to yours when figuring if any of yourthe Armed Forces Health Professions Scholar- clude these benefits from your income onlybenefits are taxable.ship and Financial Assistance program. when the facts clearly show that the union
For information about the rules that apply to intended them as gifts to you.Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction pack- Reimbursed union convention expenses.employees and their families by an educational age to determine the amount of your benefits to If you are a delegate of your local union chapterinstitution, see Publication 970. include in your income. Publication 915 also and you attend the annual convention of thehas worksheets you can use. However, you international union, do not include in your in-VA payments. Allowances paid by the De- must use the worksheets in Publication 915 if come amounts you receive from the interna-partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in any of the following situations apply. tional union to reimburse you for expenses ofyour income. These allowances are not consid-
traveling away from home to attend the con-ered scholarship or fellowship grants. • You received a lump-sum benefit pay-
vention. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-ment during the year that is for one orPrizes. Scholarship prizes won in a con- penses, even if you are reimbursed in a latermore earlier years.test are not scholarships or fellowships if you year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, youdo not have to use the prizes for educational • You exclude employer-provided adoption must include that reimbursement in your in-purposes. You must include these amounts in benefits or interest from qualified U.S. come.your income on Form 1040, line 21, whether or savings bonds.
not you use the amounts for educational pur- Utility rebates. If you are a customer of an• You take the foreign earned income ex-poses. electric utility company and you participate inclusion, the foreign housing exclusion or the utility's energy conservation program, youdeduction, the exclusion of income fromSmallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eli- may receive on your monthly electric bill either:American Samoa, or the exclusion of in-gible individual who receives benefits under the
come from Puerto Rico by bona fide re-Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Act • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
sidents of Puerto Rico.of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
Publication 525 (2008) Page 35

Page 36 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A nonrefundable credit against the 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown questions, and get information from the IRS in
purchase price of the electricity. on your return for the earlier year. This is several ways. By selecting the method that is
the credit. best for you, you will have quick and easyThe amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund- access to tax help.able credit is not included in your income. 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for
2008 figured without the deduction (step Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The1). Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the pendent organization within the IRS whose em-Repayments amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form economic harm, who are seeking help inIf you had to repay an amount that you included 1040, line 68, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in the resolving tax problems that have not been re-in your income in an earlier year, you may be column to the right of line 68. solved through normal channels, or who be-able to deduct the amount repaid from your
lieve that an IRS system or procedure is notincome for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if Example. For 2007 you filed a return and working as it should.the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, reported your income on the cash method. In You can contact the TAS by calling the TASyou may be able to take a credit against your 2008 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2007tax for the year in which you repaid it. Gener- toll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 orincome under a claim of right. Your filing statusally, you can claim a deduction or credit only if TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you arein 2008 and 2007 is single. Your income andthe repayment qualifies as an expense or loss eligible for assistance. You can also call ortax for both years are as follows:incurred in your trade or business or in a write your local taxpayer advocate, whose
for-profit transaction. 2007 phone number and address are listed in your
 With Income  Without Income local telephone directory and in PublicationType of deduction. The type of deduction Taxable 1546, Taxpayer Advocate Service Ð Youryou are allowed in the year of repayment de- Income $15,000 $10,000 Voice at the IRS. You can file Form 911, Re-pends on the type of income you included in the quest for Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis-Tax $ 1,863 $ 1,113earlier year. You generally deduct the repay- tance (And Application for Taxpayerment on the same form or schedule on which 2008 Assistance Order), or ask an IRS employee toyou previously reported it as income. For ex- Without Deduction With Deduction complete it on your behalf. For more informa-ample, if you reported it as self-employment Taxable tion, go to www.irs.gov/advocateincome, deduct it as a business expense on Income $49,950 $44,950Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).
Tax $ 8,838 $ 7,588Schedule F (Form 1040). If you reported it as a LITCs are independent organizations that pro-
capital gain, deduct it as a capital loss on vide low income taxpayers with representationYour tax under method 1 is $7,588. Your taxSchedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as in federal tax controversies with the IRS for freeunder method 2 is $8,088, figured as follows:wages, unemployment compensation, or other or for a nominal charge. The clinics also pro-
nonbusiness income, deduct it as a miscellane- vide tax education and outreach for taxpayersTax previously determined for 2007 $1,863ous itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form who speak English as a second language.Less: Tax as refigured ........ . − 1,1131040). Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer ClinicDecrease in 2007 tax $ 750If you repaid social security or equivalent List, provides information on clinics in yourrailroad retirement benefits, see Publication Regular tax liability for 2008 ..... . $8,838 area. It is available at www.irs.gov or your local915. Less: Decrease in 2007 tax ..... . − 750 IRS office.
Refigured tax for 2008 $8,088Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount
Free tax services. To find out what servicesyou repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from You pay less tax using method 1, so you should are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide toyour income in the year you repaid it. If you take a deduction for the repayment in 2008. Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free taxmust deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized
information sources, including publications,deduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), Repayment rules do not apply. This dis- services, and free tax education and assis-line 23. cussion does not apply to: tance programs. It also has an index of over
Repayment over $3,000. If the amount you 100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)• Deductions for bad debts;
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct you can listen to on your telephone.• Deductions from sales to customers,the repayment (as explained earlier under Accessible versions of IRS published prod-such as returns and allowances, and sim-Type of deduction). However, you can choose ucts are available on request in a variety ofilar items; orinstead to take a tax credit for the year of alternative formats for people with disabilities.repayment if you included the income under a • Deductions for legal and other expenses
claim of right. This means that at the time you of contesting the repayment. Free help with your return. Free help inincluded the income, it appeared that you had preparing your return is available nationwidean unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for this from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer In-Year of deduction (or credit). If you use thechoice, figure your tax under both methods and come Tax Assistance (VITA) program is de-cash method, you can take the deduction (orcompare the results. Use the method (deduc- signed to help low-income taxpayers and thecredit, if applicable) for the tax year in whichtion or credit) that results in less tax. Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) programyou actually make the repayment. If you use
Method 1. Figure your tax for 2008 claim- is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 andany other accounting method, you can deduct
ing a deduction for the repaid amount. If you older with their tax returns. Many VITA sitesthe repayment or claim a credit for it only for the
must deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized offer free electronic filing and all volunteers willtax year in which it is a proper deduction underdeduction, enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), let you know about credits and deductions youyour accounting method. For example, if youline 28. may be entitled to claim. To find the nearestuse an accrual method, you are entitled to the
VITA or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040.deduction or credit in the tax year in which theMethod 2. Figure your tax for 2008 claim-
obligation for the repayment accrues. As part of the TCE program, AARP offersing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
the Tax-Aide counseling program. To find thesteps.
nearest AARP Tax-Aide site, call
1. Figure your tax for 2008 without deduct- 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website at
ing the repaid amount. www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.How To Get Tax Help
For more information on these programs,2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, go to www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº inwithout including in income the amount
order free publications and forms, ask tax the upper right-hand corner.you repaid in 2008.
Page 36 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 37 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to appointment at your convenience. If you
website at www.irs.gov 24 hours a listen to pre-recorded messages covering have an ongoing, complex tax account
day, 7 days a week to: various tax topics. problem or a special need, such as a
disability, an appointment can be re-• E-file your return. Find out about com- • Refund information. To check the status quested. All other issues will be handledof your 2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954mercial tax preparation and e-file serv- without an appointment. To find the num-during business hours or 1-800-829-4477ices available free to eligible taxpayers. ber of your local office, go to www.irs.(automated refund information 24 hours a• Check the status of your 2008 refund. Go gov/localcontacts or look in the phoneday, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72to www.irs.gov and click on Where's My book under United States Government,hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt
Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after the Internal Revenue Service.of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks
IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed after mailing a paper return. If you filed
return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a Form 8379 with your return, wait 14 Mail. You can send your order for
paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with weeks (11 weeks if you filed electroni- forms, instructions, and publications
your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if cally). Have your 2008 tax return avail- to the address below. You should re-
you filed electronically). Have your 2008 able so you can provide your social ceive a response within 10 days after your
security number, your filing status, andtax return available so you can provide request is received.
the exact whole dollar amount of youryour social security number, your filing
refund. Refunds are sent out weekly onstatus, and the exact whole dollar Internal Revenue Service
Fridays. If you check the status of youramount of your refund. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
refund and are not given the date it will Bloomington, IL 61705-6613• Download forms, instructions, and publi- be issued, please wait until the next week
cations. before checking back. DVD for tax products. You can order
Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products• Order IRS products online. • Other refund information. To check the DVD, and obtain:
status of a prior year refund or amended• Research your tax questions online.
return refund, call 1-800-829-1954. • Current-year forms, instructions, and• Search publications online by topic or publications.
keyword. Evaluating the quality of our telephone • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publi-services. To ensure IRS representatives give• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) cations.accurate, courteous, and professional an-published in the last few years. swers, we use several methods to evaluate the • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
• Figure your withholding allowances using quality of our telephone services. One method finding aid.
the withholding calculator online at is for a second IRS representative to listen in • Tax law frequently asked questions.www.irs.gov/individuals. on or record random telephone calls. Another
is to ask some callers to complete a short • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by survey at the end of the call. sponse system.using our Alternative Minimum Tax
(AMT) Assistant. • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of theWalk-in. Many products and services
U.S. Code.are available on a walk-in basis.• Sign up to receive local and national tax
news by email. • Fill-in, print, and save features for most
tax forms.• Products. You can walk in to many post• Get information on starting and operating offices, libraries, and IRS offices to picka small business. • Internal Revenue Bulletins.up certain forms, instructions, and publi-
• Toll-free and email technical support.cations. Some IRS offices, libraries, gro-
cery stores, copy centers, city and county • Two releases during the year.Phone. Many services are available government offices, credit unions, and of- ± The first release will ship the beginningby phone. fice supply stores have a collection of of January 2009.
products available to print from a CD or ± The final release will ship the begin-photocopy from reproducible proofs.• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica- ning of March 2009.Also, some IRS offices and libraries havetions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-
the Internal Revenue Code, regulations,rent-year forms, instructions, and Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalInternal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-publications, and prior-year forms and in- Information Service (NTIS) at tive Bulletins available for research pur-structions. You should receive your order www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)poses.within 10 days. or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD
• Services. You can walk in to your local for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee). The price is• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- discounted to $25 for orders placed prior toyour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. ness day for personal, face-to-face tax December 1, 2008.
• Solving problems. You can get help. An employee can explain IRS let-
Small Business Resource Guideface-to-face help solving tax problems ters, request adjustments to your tax ac-
2009. This online guide is a must forevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As- count, or help you set up a payment plan.
every small business owner or anyIf you need to resolve a tax problem,sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
taxpayer about to start a business. This year'shave questions about how the tax lawplain IRS letters, request adjustments to
guide includes:applies to your individual tax return, oryour account, or help you set up a pay-
you are more comfortable talking withment plan. Call your local Taxpayer As- • Helpful information, such as how to pre-someone in person, visit your local Tax-sistance Center for an appointment. To pare a business plan, find financing forpayer Assistance Center where you canfind the number, go to your business, and much more.spread out your records and talk with anwww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the • All the business tax forms, instructions,IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-phone book under United States Govern- and publications needed to successfullypointment is necessaryÐjust walk in. Ifment, Internal Revenue Service. manage a business.you prefer, you can call your local Center
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access and leave a message requesting an ap- • Tax law changes for 2009.to TTY/TDD equipment, call pointment to resolve a tax account issue.
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andA representative will call you back within
finding aid.to order forms and publications. 2 business days to schedule an in-person
Publication 525 (2008) Page 37

Page 38 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Web links to various government agen- • A site map of the guide to help you navi- The information is updated during the year.
cies, business associations, and IRS or- gate the pages with ease. Visit www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº in
ganizations. the upper right-hand corner for more informa-• An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module that tion.• ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour oppor- gives practical tips for teens about start-
tunity to suggest changes for future edi- ing their own business, creating a busi-
tions. ness plan, and filing taxes.
Page 38 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 39 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Wage payments ............ . 2 Chronic illness ............. . 18 Excluded debt ............. . 20
Accelerated death benefits paid Nonrecourse debts ........ . 19Assistance  (See Tax help)83(b) election ............... . 13
to ...................... . 21 Recourse ................. . 19Astronauts .................. . 2401(k) plans ................. . 9
Citizens outside U.S.: Stockholder's ............. . 19Excess contributions ....... . 10 Athletic facilities,
Exclusion of foreign Deduction:employer-provided ........ . 5403(b) plans ................. . 9
income .................. . 2 Costs of discriminationLimit for .................... . 9 Automobile  (See Vehicle,
Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title suits .................... . 31employer-provided)457 plans .................... . 9
VII: Deferred compensation:Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 Awards  (See Damages from
Back pay and damages for Nonqualified plans ........ . 2, 4lawsuits)501(c)(18)(D) plans .......... . 9 emotional distress Dependent care benefits .... . 5Contributions .............. . 10 under ................... . 31 Depletion allowance ........ . 16501(c)(3) organizations ..... . 20 Clergy ...................... . 14B Directors' fees ............. . 32529 program ............... . 34 Coal ........................ . 16Babysitting .................. . 3 Disability:1231 property sale ......... . 16 Colleges and universities:Back pay, award for ......... . 3 Military ................... . 15
Faculty lodging ............. . 7Backup withholding: Pensions ................. . 17
Scholarships andA Barter exchange Workers'fellowships .............. . 35transactions ............ . 19Academic health centers: compensation ......... . 18
Comments on publication ... . 3Meals and lodging when Bankruptcy: Person with ............... . 30
teaching and research Commissions:Canceled debt not deemed to Unemployment compensation,
organization ............. . 7 Advance ................... . 3be income .............. . 20 paid as substitute for .... . 29
Accelerated death Commuter highwayBarter income .............. . 19 Disaster relief:
benefits .................. . 21 vehicles ................... . 8Below-market loans ........ . 31 Disaster mitigation
Accident insurance .......... . 5 Compensation: payments ............... . 30Bequest for services ....... . 33
Employee .................. . 3Accidental death benefits ... . 6 Disaster Relief and EmergencyBlack lung benefit
Miscellaneous .............. . 3Accrual method taxpayers .. . 3 Assistance Act:payments ................ . 18
Unemployment ............ . 29 Grants .................. . 30Accrued leave payment: Bonuses ................. . 3, 34
Workers' .................. . 18 UnemploymentAt time of retirement or Breach of contract:
Compensatory damages .. . 18, benefits .............. . 29resignation ............... . 4 Damages as income ....... . 31 31Disability retirement ....... . 17 Hurricane Katrina ........ . 2, 22Bribes ...................... . 31 Constructive receipt of Hurricane Rita .......... . 2, 22Activity not for profit ....... . 30 Business expenses: income .................... . 2 Hurricane Wilma ........ . 2, 22Adoption: Reimbursements ........... . 3 Copyrights: Midwestern disasterEmployer assistance ....... . 5 Business income ........ . 16-17 Infringement damages ..... . 31 areas ........... . 2, 7, 15, 20Advance commissions ...... . 3
Royalties ................. . 16 Mitigation payments ........ . 2Aircraft ...................... . 8
Payments ................. . 30Corporate directors ........ . 32CAirlines:
Discounts:Cost-of-living allowances ... . 4No-additional-cost Cafeteria plans ............. . 17
Employee discounts ........ . 6Court awards  (See alsoservices ................. . 7 Campaign contributions .... . 31
Employee stock purchaseDamages from lawsuits) ... . 31Valuation of flights on Campus lodging ............. . 7 plans ................... . 12employer-provided Credit card Insurance ...... . 31Cancellation of debt ........ . 19 Mortgage loan for earlyaircraft ................... . 8 Credits:Cancellation of sales payment ................ . 19Alaska Permanent Fund Recoveries, refiguring ofcontracts ................. . 31 Dividends:dividend ................. . 30 unused credits .......... . 28Capital gains or losses: Restricted stock ........... . 13Alien status, waiver of ...... . 15 Currency transactions,Employee stock option plans Divorced taxpayers:foreign ................... . 33Aliens: (ESOPs) ................ . 12 Stock options exercised incidentNonresident ............... . 23 Incentive stock options to divorce ............... . 11Alimony .................... . 30 (ISOs) .................. . 12 D Down paymentAlternative minimum tax (AMT): Sale of personal assistance ............... . 31Damages from lawsuits .... . 31Recoveries, refiguring of ... . 28 property ................ . 35 Back pay awards ........... . 3Stock options ............. . 12 Car  (See Vehicle, Breach of contract ......... . 31Annuities: employer-provided) ECompensatoryCharitable gift ............. . 31 Car pools .................. . 31 Economic stimulusdamages ........... . 18, 31Railroad retirement ........ . 34 Cash or deferred arrangements payment .................. . 1Emotional distress under TitleTax-sheltered .............. . 9 (CODAs) .................. . 9 VII, Civil Rights Act of Educational assistance:Archer MSAs ............. . 5, 34 Cash rebates ............... . 31 1964 ................... . 31 Employer-provided ......... . 6Armed forces ............... . 15 Casualty insurance: Punitive damages ......... . 31 Scholarships andCombat zone bonus ..... . 2, 15 Reimbursements from ..... . 31 fellowships .............. . 35Daycare providers  (See alsoDisability .................. . 15 Catch-up contributions ...... . 9, Childcare providers) ........ . 3 Educational institutions:Disability pensions ........ . 17 10 Food program payments Faculty lodging ............. . 7Health professions Charitable gift annuities .... . 31 to ...................... . 33 Elderly persons:scholarship .............. . 8
Child and Adult Care Food De minimis benefits ....... . 5, 7 Nutrition Program for theMilitary action as cause of
Program: Death benefits  (See also Life Elderly .................. . 30disability injuries ........ . 17
Payments to daycare insurance) ................ . 21 Tax Counseling for theRehabilitative program
providers ............... . 33 Accelerated ............... . 21 Elderly .................. . 15payments ............... . 15
Child support payments .... . 31 Debts:Retirement pay ............ . 15 Election precinct
Childcare providers ...... . 3, 33 Canceled ................. . 19Veterans benefits ......... . 15 officials .................. . 33
Publication 525 (2008) Page 39

Page 40 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Elective deferrals ............ . 9 Federal employees: Form 1040, Schedule E: Form 6251:
Accrued leave payment ..... . 4 Alternative minimum tax ... . 12Partner's return ........... . 16Catch-up contributions ...... . 9,
Compensation Act (FECA)10 Royalties ................. . 16 Form 8839:
payments ............... . 18Excess annual additions ... . 11 Adoption assistance ........ . 5Form 1040A:
Cost-of-living allowances ... . 4Excess contributions ....... . 10 Recoveries ............... . 23 Form 8853:
Disability pensions ........ . 17Excess deferrals .......... . 10 Unemployment Accelerated death
Thrift Savings Plan for ...... . 9 compensation ........... . 29 benefits ................. . 21Increased limit for last 3 years
Federal income tax: Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 Archer MSAs and long-termprior to retirement age .... . 9
Refunds .................. . 22 care insuranceLimit on .................... . 9 Form 1040A, Schedule 1:
contracts ................ . 5Fees for services ........... . 32Reporting by employer ..... . 10 Restricted stock
Financial counseling fees ... . 6 Form 8919:dividends ............... . 13Emotional distress
Uncollected social security andFellowships ................ . 35damages ................. . 31 Form 1040A, Schedule 2:
Medicare tax on wages ... . 3FICA withholding: Child and dependent careEmployee achievement
Form RRB-1099:Foreign employers, U.S. expenses ................ . 5awards .................... . 3
Railroad retirement boardcitizens working for in Form 1040EZ:Employee awards or
payments ............... . 35U.S. .................... . 14 Recoveries ............... . 23bonuses ................. . 34
Paid by employer ........... . 4 Form SSA-1099:UnemploymentEmployee
Social security benefitFiduciaries: compensation ........... . 29compensation .......... . 3-14
statement ............... . 35Fees for services .......... . 32 Wages from Form W-2 ..... . 3Fringe benefits ........... . 4-9
Form W-2:Financial counseling fees  (See Form 1041:Restricted property ..... . 13-14
501(c)(18)(D)also Retirement planning Estates and trusts ......... . 32Retirement plan
contributions ............ . 10services) ................... . 6 Form 1041, Schedule K-1:contributions ............. . 9
Accrued leave payment at timeFitness programs: Beneficiary's share of income,Stock options .......... . 11-13
of retirement orEmployer-provided ......... . 5 deductions, credits,Employee discounts ........ . 6 resignation ............... . 4etc. ..................... . 32Flights:Employee stock purchase Back pay awards ........... . 3Employer-provided Form 1065:plans ..................... . 12 Bonuses or awards ......... . 3aircraft ................... . 8 Partnership return ......... . 16Employer, foreign .......... . 14 Elective deferrals, reporting byNo-additional-cost Form 1065, Schedule K-1:Employer-owned life employer ............... . 10services ................. . 7 Partner's share ofinsurance ................ . 21 Failure to receive fromFood benefits: income ................. . 16Employer-provided: employer ................ . 3Daycare providers, food Form 1098:Educational assistance ..... . 6 Fringe benefits reportedprogram payments to .... . 33 Mortgage interestVehicles ................... . 8 on ....................... . 5Nutrition Program for the statement ............... . 22Employment: Stock options fromElderly .................. . 30 Form 1099-B: employers .............. . 11Abroad ................... . 15 Foreign: Barter exchange Wage and tax statement .... . 3Agency fees .............. . 32 Currency transactions ..... . 33 transactions ............ . 19Contracts: Form W-2G:Employment .............. . 14 Form 1099-C: Gambling winnings ........ . 33Severance pay for Governments, employees Cancellation of debt ....... . 19cancellation of ......... . 4 Form W-4V:of ...................... . 14 Form 1099-DIV: Unemployment compensation,Endowment proceeds ...... . 21 Income .................... . 2 Restricted stock voluntary withholdingEnergy: Service ................... . 17 dividends ............... . 13 request ................. . 29Assistance ................ . 30 Form 1040: Form 1099-G: Form W-9:Conservation: Excess contributions to elective State tax refunds .......... . 22 Request for taxpayerdeferrals ................ . 10Subsidies ............... . 32 Unemployment identification number .... . 19Recoveries ............... . 23Utility rebates ........... . 35 compensation ........... . 29 Foster care ................. . 33UnemploymentEstate income .............. . 32 Form 1099-MISC:compensation ........... . 29 Foster GrandparentEstimated tax: Services totaling $600 orWages from Form W-2 ..... . 3 Program ................. . 15Unemployment more ................... . 32Form 1040, Schedule A: Found property ............ . 33compensation ........... . 29 Stock options exercised incidentOutplacement services, Free tax services ........... . 36Excess: to divorce ............... . 11deduction for ............. . 4 Fringe benefits ............ . 4-9Annual additions .......... . 11 Form 1099-R:Repayment of commissions Accident and healthContributions .............. . 10 Charitable gift annuities .... . 31paid in advance .......... . 3 insurance ................ . 5Deferrals .................. . 10 Excess annual additions ... . 11Form 1040, Schedule B: Adoption, employerExcess contributions ........ . 2 Excess contributionRestricted stock assistance ............... . 5Expected inheritance ....... . 33 amounts ................ . 10dividends ............... . 13 Athletic facilities ............ . 5Excess deferralExpenses paid by Form 1040, Schedule C: Bicycle commuters ......... . 2amounts ................ . 10another .................. . 32 Bartering .................. . 19 Commuter highwaySurrender of life insuranceExxon Valdez settlement .... . 2, Childcare providers to vehicles ................. . 8policy for cash .......... . 2132 use ...................... . 3 De minimis benefits ...... . 5, 7Form 1120-POL:Eligible retirement plan .... . 32 Personal property rental, Dependent care benefits .... . 5Political organizations ..... . 31Income averaging ......... . 32 reporting income from ... . 16 Educational assistance ..... . 6Form 1120S:Legal expenses ........... . 32 Royalties ................. . 16 Employee discounts ........ . 6S corporation return ....... . 16Reporting Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ: Faculty lodging ............. . 7
requirement-statement........................ . 32 Form 1120S, Schedule K-1:Bartering .................. . 19 Financial counseling fees ... . 6
Shareholder's share of income,Childcare providers to Holiday gifts ................ . 5
credits, deductions,use ...................... . 3 Meals and lodging .......... . 7F etc. ..................... . 16Personal property rental, Moving expenses (See Moving
Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Form 2441:reporting income from ... . 16 expenses)
Fair market value (FMV) ..... . 8 Child and dependent careRoyalties ................. . 16 No-additional-cost
Stock options ............. . 11 expenses ................ . 5Form 1040, Schedule D: services ................. . 7
Farming: Form 4255:Stock options ............. . 12 Parking .................... . 8
Qualified farm debt, cancellation Stock options reported Recapture of investment Retirement planning (See
of ...................... . 20 on ...................... . 12 credit ................... . 29 Retirement planning services)
Page 40 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 41 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fringe benefits (Cont.) Individual retirement Loans  (See also No-fault car insurance:
Transit pass ................ . 8 arrangements (IRAs): Mortgage) ................ . 19 Disability benefits under ... . 18
Tuition reduction ........... . 8 Deduction ................. . 35 Below-market ............. . 31 Nonrecourse debt .......... . 19
Valuation of .............. . 8-9 Inherited IRA .............. . 33 Student ................... . 20 Nonstatutory stock
Vehicle .................... . 8 Inheritance ................. . 33 Lockout benefits ........... . 35 options .................. . 11
Working condition IRA ....................... . 33 Lodging: Nontaxable income .......... . 2benefits .................. . 8 Property not substantially Campus lodging ............ . 7 Notary fees ................. . 32Frozen deposits: vested .................. . 14 Clergy .................... . 14 Notes received forInterest on ................ . 33 Injury benefits ........... . 17-19 Employer-paid or services ................... . 4
Insurance: reimbursed .............. . 7 Not-for-profit activities ..... . 30Credit card ................ . 31 Faculty lodging ............. . 7 Nutrition Program for theG Health ..................... . 5 Replacement housing Elderly ................... . 30Gambling winnings and Life (See Life insurance) payments ............... . 30losses .................... . 33 Long-term care (See Long-term Long-term careGas: care insurance) insurance .............. . 5, 18 ORoyalties from ............ . 16 Interest: Lotteries and raffles ........ . 33 Oil:Gifts ....................... . 33 Canceled debt including ... . 19 Lump-sum distributions: Royalties from ............ . 16Holiday gifts from Frozen deposits ........... . 33 Survivor benefits .......... . 29 Old-age, survivors, andemployer ................ . 5 Mortgage refunds ......... . 22 disability insurance benefitsGovernment employees  (See Option on insurance ....... . 21 (OASDI) .................. . 30Federal employees; State Recovery amounts ........ . 22 M Options, stock ......... . 11, 13employees) Savings bond ............. . 34 Manufacturer incentive Outplacement services ...... . 4State and local governmentGrantor trusts .............. . 32 payments ................ . 34 Overseas work .............. . 2obligations .............. . 34Group-term life insurance: Meals:
Interference with businessWorksheets .............. . 6, 7 Employer-paid or
operations: reimbursed .............. . 7 PDamages as income ....... . 31 Nutrition Program for the Parking fees:H International organizations, Elderly .................. . 30 Employer-paid orHealth: employees of ............ . 14 Medical: reimbursed .............. . 8Flexible spending Interview expenses ......... . 34 Care reimbursements ...... . 18 Partner and partnershiparrangement ............. . 5 Investment counseling fees Responders, emergency ... . 15 income ................... . 16Insurance .................. . 5 (See also Retirement planning Savings accounts ......... . 34 Patents:Reimbursement services) ................... . 6 Medicare: Infringement damages ..... . 31arrangement ............. . 5 Investment income ..... . 16, 17 Advantage MSAs .......... . 34 Royalties ................. . 16Savings account ......... . 2, 5 IRAs  (See Individual retirement Benefits .................. . 30 Peace Corps ............... . 15Help  (See Tax help) arrangements (IRAs)) Tax paid by employer ....... . 4 Pensions:Highly compensated Iron ore .................... . 16 Medicare tax  (See Social Clergy .................... . 14employees: Itemized deductions: security and Medicare taxes) Disability pensions ........ . 17Excess contributions to elective Limited ................... . 27 Military  (See Armed forces) Inherited pensions ......... . 33deferrals ................ . 10 Recoveries ............... . 22 Minerals: Military ................... . 15Historic preservation
Royalties from ............ . 16 Personal property:grants .................... . 33
Rental income andMiscellaneous:Hobby losses .............. . 33 J expense ................ . 16Compensation ............. . 3Holding period Job interview expenses .... . 34 Sale of .................... . 35Income ................... . 19requirement .............. . 12 Joint returns: Personal representatives  (SeeMissing children, photographsHoliday gifts ................ . 5 Social security benefits or Fiduciaries)of ......................... . 2Holocaust victims railroad retirement Prepaid income ............. . 3More information  (See Tax help)restitution ................ . 33 payments ............... . 35 Price reduced afterMortgage:Home, sale of .............. . 35 Jury duty pay .............. . 34 purchase ................. . 20Assistance payment ....... . 30Host or hostess ............ . 20 Discounted loan ........... . 19 Prizes and awards ........ . 3, 34Hotels: Achievement awards ....... . 3Interest refund ............ . 22KNo-additional-cost Employee awards orQualified principal residenceKickbacks .................. . 34services ................. . 7 bonuses ................ . 34indebtedness ........... . 20Housing  (See Lodging) Length-of-service awards ... . 4Relief ..................... . 19
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarMotor vehicle,L
prizes .................. . 34employer-provided ........ . 8I Labor unions: Safety achievement ........ . 4Moving expenses:Convention expenses,Illegal activities ............ . 33 Scholarship prizes ......... . 35Reimbursements ........ . 3, 34reimbursed ............. . 35Incentive stock options Profit-sharing plan ......... . 17Dues ..................... . 35 MSAs (Medical savings(ISOs) .................... . 12 Public assistanceStrike and lockout accounts) ................ . 34Income: benefits .................. . 29benefits ................. . 35Assigned .................. . 2 Public Health Service ....... . 17Unemployment benefits paidBusiness and Nfrom .................... . 29 Public safety officers killed ininvestment .......... . 16, 17 National Health Service Corps line of duty ............... . 29Last day of tax year, incomeConstructive receipt of ...... . 2 Scholarship Program ..... . 8received on ............... . 2 Public transportation passes,Estate and trust ........... . 32
National Oceanic and employer-provided ........ . 8Leave  (See Accrued leaveForeign employers ........ . 14
Atmosphericpayment) Publications  (See Tax help)Illegal ..................... . 33
Administration ........... . 17Miscellaneous ............. . 19 Length-of-service awards ... . 4 Pulitzer prize ............... . 34
National Senior ServiceOther ..................... . 30 Life insurance: Punitive damages .......... . 31
Corps .................... . 15Partnership ............... . 16 Employer-owned .......... . 21
Prepaid .................... . 3 No-additional-costProceeds ................. . 20
S corporation ............. . 16 services ................... . 7 QSurrender of policy for
Indian fishing rights ........ . 33 cash .................... . 21 Nobel prize ................. . 34 Qualified Joint Venture ...... . 2
Publication 525 (2008) Page 41

Page 42 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified tuition program Sale ...................... . 12 Trusts:S
(QTP) .................... . 34 Grantor trusts ............. . 32Stockholder debts .......... . 19S corporations ............. . 16
Income ................... . 32Stolen property ............ . 35Safety achievement
TTY/TDD information ....... . 36awards .................... . 4 Strike benefits .............. . 35R
Tuition program, qualifiedSalary reduction simplified Student loans:Raffles ..................... . 33 (QTP) .................... . 34employee pension plans  (See Cancellation of debt ....... . 20Railroad: Tuition reduction ............ . 8SARSEPs) Substantial risk ofRetirement annuities ....... . 34
Sale of home ............... . 35 forfeiture ................. . 13Retirement benefits ........ . 35
Sales contracts: Substantially vestedSick pay .................. . 18 U
Cancellation of ............ . 31 property .................. . 13Unemployment compensation Unemployment
benefits ................. . 29 SARSEPs ................... . 9 Suggestions for compensation ............ . 29
Excess contributions ....... . 10 publication ................ . 3Real estate: Unions  (See Labor unions)
Qualified real property business Savings bonds ............. . 34 Supplemental security income Unlawful discrimination suits:debt, cancellation of ..... . 20 (SSI) payments ........... . 35Savings incentive match plans Deduction for costs ........ . 31
Rebates: for employees  (See SIMPLE Supplemental unemployment
Cash ..................... . 31 plans) benefits .................. . 29 VUtility ..................... . 35 Scholarships and Surviving spouse: VA payments ............... . 35Recovery of amounts fellowships ............... . 35 Life insurance proceeds paid Valuation:previously deducted .... . 22, to ...................... . 21Self-employed persons: Fringe benefits ............. . 827 U.S. citizens working for foreign Survivor benefits ........... . 29 Stock options ............. . 11Itemized deductions ....... . 22 employers in U.S. treated
Vehicle:Non-itemized as ...................... . 14 T Commuter highway ......... . 8deductions .............. . 28 Senior Companion Tables and figures: Employer-provided ......... . 8Unused tax credits, refiguring Program ................. . 15 Group-term life insurance Veterans benefits .......... . 15of ...................... . 28 Service Corps of Retired (Table 1) ................ . 6 Disability compensation .... . 17Worksheet of itemized Executives (SCORE) ..... . 15 Standard deduction (Tables Retroactive VAdeductions (Worksheet Severance pay .............. . 4 2-4) ............. . 25, 26, 27 determination ......... . 2, 172) ...................... . 24 Outplacement services ..... . 4 Tax benefit rule ............ . 22 Special statute ofRefunds: Sick pay ..................... . 4 Tax Counseling for the limitations. .............. . 17Federal income tax ........ . 22 Sickness and injury Elderly ................... . 15 Viatical settlements ........ . 21Mortgage interest ......... . 22 benefits .............. . 17, 19 Tax help .................... . 36State tax .................. . 22 Volunteer work ............. . 15SIMPLE plans ............... . 9 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 36 Emergency medicalRehabilitative program Limit for deferrals under ..... . 9 responders ............. . 15payments ................ . 15 Tax-sheltered annuity plansSmallpox vaccine Firefighters ............... . 15(403(b) plans) ............. . 9Reimbursements: injuries ................... . 35 Tax counseling (VolunteerLimit for .................... . 9Business expenses ......... . 3 Social security and Medicare Income Tax AssistanceCasualty losses ........... . 31 Terminal illness ............ . 21taxes: Program) ............... . 15Meals and lodging .......... . 7 Terrorist attacks:Foreign employers, U.S. Volunteers in Service toMedical expenses ......... . 18 Disability payments for injuriescitizens working for in America (VISTA) ......... . 15Moving expenses ....... . 3, 34 from .................... . 17U.S. .................... . 14Related party transactions: Victims of, tax relief ......... . 2Paid by employer ........... . 4Stock option transfer ....... . 11 Thrift Savings Plan .......... . 9 WSocial security benefits .... . 35Religious order Title VII, Civil Rights Act of W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Standard deduction:members ................. . 14 1964: Welfare benefits ............ . 29Recoveries ........... . 23, 27Rental income and expenses: Back pay and damages for Winter energy payments ... . 30Tables (2007-2005) ... . 25, 26,Personal property rental ... . 16 emotional distress Withholding:27Reporting of ............... . 16 under ................... . 31 Barter exchangeState employees:Repayments ................ . 36 Tour guides, free tours transactions ............ . 19Unemployment benefits paid for ....................... . 33Repossession .............. . 31 Unemploymentto ...................... . 29 Trade Act of 1974:Restricted property ..... . 13, 14 compensation ........... . 29State or local governments: Trade readjustment allowancesRetired Senior Volunteer Workers' compensation .... . 18Interest on obligations of ... . 34 under ................... . 29Program (RSVP) .......... . 15 Working conditionState or local taxes: Transferable property ...... . 13Retirement planning benefits ................... . 8Refunds .................. . 22 Transit passes .............. . 8services ................. . 6, 8 Worksheets:Statutory stock option holding Travel agencies:Retirement plans  (See also Group-term life insuranceperiod .................... . 12 Free tour to organizer of groupPensions) ................. . 15 (Worksheet 1) .......... . 6, 7Stock appreciation rights .... . 4 of tourists ............... . 33Automatic contribution Recoveries of itemizedStock options .......... . 11, 13arrangements .......... . 1, 9 Travel and transportation deductions (WorksheetStock options, nonstatutory:Contributions ............ . 9, 11 expenses: 2) ...................... . 24Exercise or transfer ........ . 11Elective deferrals (See Elective Free tours from travel Work-training programs .... . 30Grant ..................... . 11deferrals) agencies ............... . 33Sale ...................... . 11 ■Fringe benefits ............. . 8Rewards ................... . 35 Stock options, statutory: Reimbursements ........... . 3Roth contributions ......... . 10 Exercise .................. . 12 School children, transportingRoyalties ................... . 16 Grant ..................... . 12 of ...................... . 35
Page 42 Publication 525 (2008)

Page 43 of 43 of Publication 525 9:01 - 20-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2009
Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2009
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
(Para Personas Fisicas)
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Publication 525 (2008) Page 43