Userid: SD_885NB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...b 550\final package\2011p550_ok_to_print_01042011_revised_rp2.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminders ..................... . 2
Treasury Investment
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue Chapter 1. Investment Income ....... . 3
Income andService General Information ............. . 3
Interest Income ................ . 5
Discount on Debt Instruments ..... . 13
Expenses When To Report Interest Income ... . 17
How To Report Interest Income .... . 17
Dividends and Other Distributions ... . 20
How To Report Dividend Income ... . 23(Including Capital Stripped Preferred Stock ......... . 25
REMICs, FASITs, and OtherGains and Losses) CDOs ................... . 25
S Corporations ............... . 27
Investment Clubs .............. . 27For use in preparing
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions ........ . 282010 Returns
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ..... . 31
Limits on Deductions ........... . 31
Interest Expenses ............. . 32
Bond Premium Amortization ....... . 34
Expenses of Producing Income .... . 35
Nondeductible Expenses ......... . 36
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 37
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................ . 37
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ........... . 38
What Is a Sale or Trade? ......... . 38
Basis of Investment Property ...... . 41
How To Figure Gain or Loss ...... . 45
Nontaxable Trades ............. . 48
Transfers Between Spouses ...... . 50
Related Party Transactions ....... . 50
Capital Gains and Losses ........ . 51
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ................. . 51
Holding Period ............. . 55
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ...... . 56
Short Sales ............... . 57
Wash Sales ............... . 58
Options ................. . 59
Straddles ................ . 61
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ...... . 64
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded
Securities ............. . 65
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ......... . 65
Rollover of Gain From Sale
of Empowerment Zone
Assets ............... . 67
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses .................. . 67
Comprehensive Example ......... . 70
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities ................ . 76
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ..... . 77Get forms and other information
Glossary ...................... . 79faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 81
Internet IRS.gov
Jun 21, 2011

Page 2 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Taxable and Nontaxable Income, for the special Investment income. This generally includesWhat's New interest, dividends, capital gains, and othertax rules that apply.
types of distributions including mutual fund dis-
Alien's individual taxpayer identificationMutual fund distributions. Publication 564, tributions.
number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident orMutual Fund Distributions, has been incorpo-
Investment expenses. These include interestresident alien and do not have and are not eligi-rated into this publication.
paid or incurred to acquire investment propertyble to get a social security number (SSN) and
New penalties for certain abusive tax shel- and expenses to manage or collect income fromyou are required for U.S. tax purposes to have a
ters. Underpayments of tax due to an undis- investment property.U.S. taxpayer identification number, you must
closed foreign financial asset are now subject to apply for an ITIN. For details on how to do so, Qualified retirement plans and IRAs. Thea 40% penalty for tax years beginning after see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual rules in this publication do not apply to mutualMarch 18, 2010. Underpayments due to a trans- Taxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc- fund shares held in individual retirement ar-action lacking economic substance after March tions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher- rangements (IRAs), section 401(k) plans, and30, 2010, are now subject to a 20% penalty but ever an SSN is requested on your tax return. other qualified retirement plans. The value of themay be subject to a 40% penalty in some cases. An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle mutual fund shares and earnings allocated toSee Accuracy-related penalties in chapter 2. you to social security benefits or change your you are included in your retirement plan assets
employment or immigration status under U.S. and stay tax free generally until the plan distrib-Nontaxable trades of life insurance con-
law. utes them to you. The tax rules that apply totracts. Beginning in 2010, you will not be
retirement plan distributions are explained in thetaxed for certain trades involving life insurance Foreign accounts and trusts. You must following publications.contracts. See Insurance Policies and Annuities complete Part III of Schedule B (Form 1040A or
under Nontaxable Trades in chapter 4. • Publication 560, Retirement Plans for1040) if you:
Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Quali-1256 contracts. For tax years beginning after • Had a foreign account, or fied Plans).July 21, 2010, a section 1256 contract does not • Received a distribution from, or were a • Publication 571, Tax-Sheltered Annuityinclude certain swaps. See Exceptions under grantor of, or a transferor to, a foreign Plans (403(b) Plans).Section 1256 Contract  in chapter 4 for more trust.information. • Publication 575, Pension and Annuity In-
come.100% exclusion of gain on qualified small Sale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis-
trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone) • Publication 590, Individual Retirement Ar-business stock. You may be able to exclude
rangements (IRAs).assets acquired after 1997 and before 2012 andfrom income up to 100% of your gain from the
held more than 5 years will qualify for a specialsale or trade of qualified small business stock • Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civiltax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone assetacquired from September 27 to December 31, Service Retirement Benefits.at a gain, you may be able to exclude the quali-2010, if you hold the stock for more than 5 years.
fied capital gain from your gross income. ThisSee Section 1202 Exclusion in chapter 4.
exclusion applies to an interest in, or property of,
Changes in penalty for failure to disclose a certain businesses operating in the District of Comments and suggestions. We welcomereportable transaction. Penalties for failure Columbia. For more information about the exclu- your comments about this publication and yourto disclose a reportable transaction on a tax sion, see the Schedule D instructions. For more suggestions for future editions.return have changed. See Penalty for failure to information about DC Zone assets, see section You can write to us at the following address:disclose a reportable transaction in chapter 2. 1400B of the Internal Revenue Code.
Internal Revenue Service
Photographs of missing children. The Inter- Individual Forms and Publications Branch
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526Reminders
dren. Photographs of missing children selected Washington, DC 20224
by the Center may appear in this publication onU.S. property acquired from a foreign per- pages that would otherwise be blank. You can We respond to many letters by telephone.son. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter- help bring these children home by looking at the Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-est from a foreign person or firm, you may have photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST clude your daytime phone number, including theto withhold income tax on the amount you pay (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. area code, in your correspondence.for the property (including cash, the fair market You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thevalue of other property, and any assumed liabil- asterisk must be included in the address.)ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner- Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-ships, trusts, and estates may also have to ject line. You can also send us comments fromIntroductionwithhold on certain distributions and other trans- www.irs.gov/formspubs, select ªComment onactions involving U.S. real property interests. If This publication provides information on the tax Tax Forms and Publicationsº under ªInformationyou fail to withhold, you may be held liable for treatment of investment income and expenses. about.ºthe tax, penalties that apply, and interest. For It includes information on the tax treatment of Although we cannot respond individually to
more information, see Publication 515, With- investment income and expenses for individual each comment received, we do appreciate your
holding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For- shareholders of mutual funds or other regulated feedback and will consider your comments as
eign Entities. investment companies, such as money market we revise our tax products.
funds. It explains what investment income isForeign source income. If you are a U.S. Ordering forms and publications. Visittaxable and what investment expenses are de- www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andcitizen with investment income from sources ductible. It explains when and how to show publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theoutside the United States (foreign income), you these items on your tax return. It also explains address below and receive a response within 10must report that income on your tax return un- how to determine and report gains and losses on days after your request is received.less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether the disposition of investment property and pro-
you reside inside or outside the United States vides information on property trades and tax Internal Revenue Service
and whether or not you receive a Form 1099 shelters. 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
from the foreign payer. Bloomington, IL 61705-6613The glossary at the end of this publica-
Employee stock options. If you received an tion defines many of the terms used. A
option to buy or sell stock or other property as comprehensive example, with filled-in Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
TIP
payment for your services, see Publication 525, forms, appears at the end of this publication. check the information available on IRS.gov or
Page 2 Publication 550 (2010)

Page 3 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax ❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series generally taxable income. You should receive a
questions sent to either of the addresses listed EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share
earlier. Issued After 1989 of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the
fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record instructions will tell you where to report the in-Redemption of Series EE and I come on your Form 1040.U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After
1989 Social security number (SSN). You must
give your name and SSN to any person requiredSee Ordering forms and publications  earlier by federal tax law to make a return, statement,1. for information about getting these publications or other document that relates to you. This in-and forms. cludes payers of interest and dividends.
SSN for joint account. If the funds in a jointInvestment account belong to one person, list that person's
name first on the account and give that person'sGeneral Information
SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsIncome
the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,A few items of general interest are covered here.
later.) If the joint account contains combined
Recordkeeping.You should keep a list funds, give the SSN of the person whose nameTopics showing sources and investment in- is listed first on the account. This is because onlyThis chapter discusses: come amounts you receive during the
RECORDS one name and SSN can be shown on Form
year. Also keep the forms you receive showing 1099.• Interest income, your investment income (Forms 1099-INT, Inter- These rules apply both to joint ownership byest Income, and 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distri-• Dividends and other distributions, a married couple and to joint ownership by otherbutions, for example) as an important part of individuals. For example, if you open a joint• Real estate mortgage investment conduits your records. savings account with your child using funds be-(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- longing to the child, list the child's name first onvestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat- Tax on investment income of certain chil- the account and give the child's SSN.eralized debt obligations (CDOs), dren. Part of a child's 2010 investment income
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. This may Custodian account for your child. If your• S corporations, and happen if all of the following are true. child is the actual owner of an account that is
• Investment clubs. recorded in your name as custodian for the child,1. The child had more than $1,900 of invest- give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,ment income. you must give your child's SSN to the payer ofUseful Items dividends on stock owned by your child, even2. The child is required to file a tax return.You may want to see: though the dividends are paid to you as custo-3. The child was: dian.Publication
a. Under age 18 at the end of 2010, Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You will
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income be subject to a penalty if, when required, you failb. Age 18 at the end of 2010 and did not to:❏ 537 Installment Sales have earned income that was more
than half of the child's support, or • Include your SSN on any return, state-❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
ment, or other document,(IRAs) c. A full-time student over age 18 and
under age 24 at the end of 2010 and • Give your SSN to another person who❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules did not have earned income that was must include it on any return, statement,
❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount more than half of the child's support. or other document, or
(OID) Instruments
• Include the SSN of another person on any4. At least one of the child's parents was return, statement, or other document.Form (and Instructions) alive at the end of 2010.
The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-5. The child does not file a joint return for❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.2010.Interest and Ordinary Dividends
You will not be subject to this penalty if youA child born on January 1, 1993, is considered❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains can show that your failure to provide the SSNto be age 18 at the end of 2010; a child bornand Losses was due to reasonable cause and not to willfulon January 1, 1992, is considered to be age 19 neglect.❏ 1099 General Instructions for Certain at the end of 2010; a child born on January 1,
Information Returns (Forms 1098, If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be1987, is considered to be age 24 at the end of
1099, 3921, 3922, 5498, and subject to backup withholding.2010.
W-2G) If all of these statements are true, Form 8615
Backup withholding. Your investment in-must be completed and attached to the child's❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder of come is generally not subject to regular with-tax return. If any of these statements is not true,Undistributed Long-Term Capital holding. However, it may be subject to backupForm 8615 is not required and the child's incomeGains withholding to ensure that income tax is col-is taxed at his or her own tax rate.
❏ 3115 Application for Change in lected on the income. Under backup withhold-However, the parent can choose to include
Accounting Method ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,the child's interest and dividends on the parent's
original issue discount (OID), dividends, cashreturn if certain requirements are met. Use Form❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax Ð patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,8814 for this purpose.Individuals as income tax, on the amount you are paid,For more information about the tax on invest-❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations applying the appropriate withholding rate.ment income of children and the parents' elec-
Backup withholding applies if:tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have
and Dependents.Investment Income of More Than 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-$1,900 Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest, tion number (either a social security num-
❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's dividends, and other investment income you re- ber or an employer identification number)
Interest and Dividends ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is in the required manner,
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. The IRS notifies the payer that you gave 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you are or dividends because you have underre-
an incorrect identification number, subject to backup withholding on interest ported interest or dividends on your in-
come tax return, or
Table 1-1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income 4. You are required, but fail, to certify that
(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this publication, you are not subject to backup withholding
especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend Income in chapter 1.) for the reason described in (3).
Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form Certification. For new accounts paying in-
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ... terest or dividends, you must certify under pen-
alties of perjury that your SSN is correct and thatTax-exempt interest Line 8b Line 8b Space to the left of line 2 you are not subject to backup withholding. Yourdividends (Form (enter ªTEIº and the
payer will give you a Form W-9, Request for1099-INT, box 8) amount)
Taxpayer Identification Number and Certifica-
tion, or similar form, to make this certification. IfTaxable interest that Line 8a (You may need to Line 8a (You may need to Line 2
totals $1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) file Schedule B as well.) you fail to make this certification, backup with-
holding may begin immediately on your new
Taxable interest that Line 8a; also use Schedule Line 8a; also use Schedule account or investment.
totals more than $1,500 B, line 1 B, line 1
Underreported interest and dividends.
You will be considered to have underreportedSavings bond interest Schedule B; also use Form Schedule B; also use Form
you will exclude 8815 8815 your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter-
because of higher mined for a tax year that:education expenses
• You failed to include any part of a reporta-
Ordinary dividends that Line 9a (You may need to Line 9a (You may need to ble interest or dividend payment required
total $1,500 or less file Schedule B as well.) file Schedule B as well.) to be shown on your return, or
• You were required to file a return and toOrdinary dividends that Line 9a; also use Schedule Line 9a; also use Schedule
include a reportable interest or dividendtotal more than $1,500 B, line 5 B, line 5
payment on that return, but you failed to
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the file the return.
you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax How to stop backup withholding due toWorksheet, line 2 Worksheet, line 2 underreporting. If you have been notified that
you underreported interest or dividends, you canQualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form
request a determination from the IRS to preventyou have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A.
backup withholding from starting or to stopSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax
Worksheet or the Schedule You cannot use Form backup withholding once it has begun. You must
D Tax Worksheet, line 2 1040EZ show that at least one of the following situations
applies.Capital gain distributions Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
(if you do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and • No underreporting occurred.
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
• You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSWorksheet, line 3 Worksheet, line 3
about whether underreporting occurred.
Capital gain distributions Schedule D, line 13; also • Backup withholding will cause or is caus-(if you have to file use the Qualified Dividends
ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelySchedule D) and Capital Gain Tax
that you will underreport interest and divi-Worksheet or the Schedule
D Tax Worksheet dends in the future.
• You have corrected the underreporting bySection 1250, 1202, or Schedule D (Form 1040)
filing a return if you did not previously filecollectibles gain (Form
1099-DIV, box 2b, 2c, or one and by paying all taxes, penalties, and
2d) interest due for any underreported interest
or dividend payments.
Nondividend generally not reported*
distributions (Form If the IRS determines that backup withholding1099-DIV, box 3) should stop, it will provide you with a certification
and will notify the payers who were sent noticesUndistributed capital Schedule D (Form 1040)
earlier.gains (Form 2439,
boxes 1a - 1d) How to stop backup withholding due to an
incorrect identification number. If you haveGain or loss from sales Line 13; also use Schedule been notified by a payer that you are subject toof stocks or bonds D and the Qualified You cannot use Form backup withholding because you have providedDividends and Capital Gain 1040ATax Worksheet or the an incorrect SSN or employer identification
Schedule D Tax Worksheet number, you can stop it by following the instruc-
tions the payer gives you.
Gain or loss from Line 13; also use Schedule
Reporting backup withholding. If backupexchanges of like-kind D, Form 8824, and the
investment property Qualified Dividends and withholding is deducted from your interest or
Capital Gain Tax dividend income or other reportable payment,Worksheet or the Schedule the bank or other business must give you anD Tax Worksheet information return for the year (for example, a
Form 1099-INT) indicating the amount withheld.*Report any amounts in excess of your basis in your mutual fund shares on Schedule D (Form 1040). Use line 8 if you held the
shares more than 1 year. Use line 1 if you held your mutual funds shares 1 year or less. The information return will show any backup
withholding as ªFederal income tax withheld.º
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident aliens. Generally, payments underpayments of tax due to negligence or dis- Issue Discount. For more information about
made to nonresident aliens are not subject to regard of rules or regulations or substantial un- amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue
backup withholding. You can use Form derstatement of tax. For information on the Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi- penalty and any interest that applies, see Penal- Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interestcial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, to ties in chapter 2. dividends you receive from a mutual fund orcertify exempt status. However, this does not other regulated investment company are not in-exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with- cluded in your taxable income. (However, seeholding rate that may apply to your investment Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex-income. For information on the 30% rate, see Interest Income empt-interest dividends should be shown in boxPublication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. 8 of Form 1099-INT. You do not reduce yourTerms you may need to knowPenalties. There are civil and criminal pen- basis for distributions that are exempt-interest(see Glossary):alties for giving false information to avoid dividends.
backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500. Accrual method Information-reporting requirement. Al-The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-Below-market loanup to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or able, you must show them on your tax return ifboth. Cash method you have to file. This is an information-reporting
requirement and does not change the ex-Where to report investment income. Table Demand loan
empt-interest dividends into taxable income.1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched- Forgone interest See How To Report Interest Income, later.ules to use to report some common types of
investment income. But see the rest of this publi- Gift loan
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid fromcation for detailed information about reporting Interest specified private activity bonds may be subjectinvestment income.
to the alternative minimum tax. The ex-Mutual fundJoint accounts. If two or more persons hold empt-interest dividends subject to the alterna-
Nomineeproperty (such as a savings account, bond, or tive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of Form
stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or 1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructionsOriginal issue discounttenants in common, each person's share of any for more information about this tax. Private activ-
Private activity bondinterest or dividends from the property is deter- ity bonds  are discussed later under State or
mined by local law. Local Government Obligations.Term loan
Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-Community property states. If you are mar-
ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart-ried and receive a distribution that is community This section discusses the tax treatment of dif- ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) is not taxable. Thisincome, one-half of the distribution is generally ferent types of interest income. includes interest paid on dividends on convertedconsidered to be received by each spouse. If In general, any interest that you receive or United States Government Life Insurance poli-you file separate returns, you must each report that is credited to your account and can be cies and on National Service Life Insurance poli-one-half of any taxable distribution. See Publica- withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to cies.tion 555, Community Property, for more informa- be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to thistion on community income. Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).rule are discussed later.If the distribution is not considered commu- Interest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.nity property under state law and you and your Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youspouse file separate returns, each of you must reported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar generally do not include it in your income untilreport your separate taxable distributions. statement, by banks, savings and loans, and you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-
other payers of interest. This form shows you the cation 590 for more information.Example. You and your husband have a interest you received during the year. Keep this
joint money market account. Under state law, form for your records. You do not have to attach Taxable Interest Ð Generalhalf the income from the account belongs to you, it to your tax return.
and half belongs to your husband. If you file Report on your tax return the total interest Taxable interest includes interest you receiveseparate returns, you each report half the in- income you receive for the tax year. from bank accounts, loans you make to others,come. and other sources. The following are someInterest not reported on Form 1099-INT.
sources of taxable interest.Income from property given to a child. Even if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you
Property you give as a parent to your child under must still report all of your taxable interest in- Dividends that are actually interest. Certainthe Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the come. For example, you may receive distributive distributions commonly called dividends are ac-Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law, shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo- tually interest. You must report as interestbecomes the child's property. rations. This interest is reported to you on so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on shareIncome from the property is taxable to the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 accounts in:child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal (Form 1120S).
• Cooperative banks,obligation to support the child is taxable to the Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesparent or guardian having that legal obligation. • Credit unions,interest as a nominee for you, that person will
Savings account with parent as trustee. give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest • Domestic building and loan associations,Interest income from a savings account opened received on your behalf.
for a minor child, but placed in the name and • Domestic savings and loan associations,If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes
subject to the order of the parents as trustees, is amounts belonging to another person, see the • Federal savings and loan associations,taxable to the child if, under the law of the state discussion on Nominee distributions , later, andin which the child resides, both of the following under How To Report Interest Income.
• Mutual savings banks.are true. Incorrect amount. If you receive a Form
• The savings account legally belongs to the 1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or
The ªdividendsº will be shown as interest incomechild. other incorrect information), you should ask the
on Form 1099-INT.issuer for a corrected form. The new Form• The parents are not legally permitted to 1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor-use any of the funds to support the child. Money market funds. Money market fundsrected.º
are offered by nonbank financial institutions
Accuracy-related penalty. An accu- Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income such as mutual funds and stock brokerage
racy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for also may be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original houses, and pay dividends. Generally, amounts
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you receive from money market funds should be Interest on insurance dividends. Interest on The interest you exclude is treated as credited
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in- to your account in the following year. You mustreported as dividends, not as interest.
surance company that can be withdrawn annu- include it in income in the year you can withdraw
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to it.Certificates of deposit and other deferred
your account. However, if you can withdraw itinterest accounts. If you open any of these
Example. $100 of interest was credited ononly on the anniversary date of the policy (oraccounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervals
your frozen deposit during the year. You with-other specified date), the interest is taxable inof 1 year or less during the term of the account.
drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofthe year that date occurs.You generally must include this interest in your
the end of the year. You must include $80 inincome when you actually receive it or are enti- Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increase your income and exclude $20 from your incometled to receive it without paying a substantial in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, for the year. You must include the $20 in yourpenalty. The same is true for accounts that ma- advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is income for the year you can withdraw it.ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for ums due on insurance policies or made avail- Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at amore than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount able for you to withdraw. discount when interest has been defaulted or(OID), later. when the interest has accrued but has not beenU.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations,Interest subject to penalty for early with- paid, the transaction is described as trading asuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds,drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is notissued by any agency or instrumentality of theinterest account before maturity, you may have income and is not taxable as interest if paid later.United States is taxable for federal income taxto pay a penalty. You must report the total When you receive a payment of that interest, it ispurposes. a return of capital that reduces the remainingamount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
Interest on tax refunds. Interest you receive cost basis of your bond. Interest that accruescount during the year, without subtracting the
on tax refunds is taxable income. after the date of purchase, however, is taxablepenalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-
interest income for the year received or accrued.ings under How To Report Interest Income , Interest on condemnation award. If the con- See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later inlater, for more information on how to report the demning authority pays you interest to compen- this chapter.interest and deduct the penalty. sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the
interest is taxable.Money borrowed to invest in certificate of
Below-Market Loansdeposit. The interest you pay on money bor- Installment sale payments. If a contract forrowed from a bank or savings institution to meet the sale or exchange of property provides for If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,the minimum deposit required for a certificate of deferred payments, it also usually provides for you must report as interest income any forgonedeposit from the institution and the interest you interest payable with the deferred payments. interest (defined later) from that loan. The be-earn on the certificate are two separate items. That interest is taxable when you receive it. If low-market loan rules and exceptions are de-You must report the total interest you earn on little or no interest is provided for in a deferred scribed in this section. For more information,the certificate in your income. If you itemize payment contract, part of each payment may be see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Codedeductions, you can deduct the interest you pay treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and and its regulations.as investment interest, up to the amount of your Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537. If you receive a below-market loan, you maynet investment income. See Interest Expenses be able to deduct the forgone interest as well asInterest on annuity contract. Accumulatedin chapter 3. any interest you actually paid, but not if it isinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its personal interest.maturity date is taxable.Example. You deposited $5,000 with a
bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank to Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter-make up the $10,000 minimum deposit required low-market loans apply to:est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable asto buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer- interest unless state law automatically changes • Gift loans,tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2010, but you it to a payment on the principal.received only $265, which represented the $575 • Pay-related loans,
you earned minus $310 interest charged on your Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex- • Corporation-shareholder loans,$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a Form clude from your gross income interest on frozen
1099-INT for 2010 showing the $575 interest deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the • Tax avoidance loans, and
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-you earned. The bank also gives you a state- • Certain loans made to qualified continuingposit because:ment showing that you paid $310 interest for care facilities under a continuing care con-2010. You must include the $575 in your in- • The financial institution is bankrupt or in- tract.come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched- solvent, orule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject A pay-related loan is any below-market loan• The state in which the institution is locatedto the net investment income limit. between an employer and an employee or be-has placed limits on withdrawals because tween an independent contractor and a personother financial institutions in the state areGift for opening account. If you receive non- for whom the contractor provides services.bankrupt or insolvent.cash gifts or services for making deposits or for A tax avoidance loan is any below-marketopening an account in a savings institution, you loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofThe amount of interest you must exclude ismay have to report the value as interest. the main purposes of the interest arrangement.the interest that was credited on the frozen de-For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or posits minus the sum of:services valued at more than $10 must be re- Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or • The net amount you withdrew from these terest is:
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 deposits during the year, and • The amount of interest that would be pay-must be reported as interest. The value is deter- • The amount you could have withdrawn as able for that period if interest accrued onmined by the cost to the financial institution. of the end of the year (not reduced by any the loan at the applicable federal rate and
penalty for premature withdrawals of a was payable annually on December 31,Example. You open a savings account at time deposit). minusyour local bank and deposit $800. The account
earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- If you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- • Any interest actually payable on the loan
culator. If no other interest is credited to your come on deposits that were frozen at the end of for the period.
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you 2010, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-
receive will show $35 interest for the year. You port Interest Income  for information about re- Applicable federal rate. Applicable federal
must report $35 interest income on your tax porting this interest income exclusion on your rates are published by the IRS each month in the
return. tax return. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS offices
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have these bulletins available for research. See This exception does not apply to a term loan forgone interest to be included in income by the
chapter 5 for other ways to get this information. described in (2) earlier that previously has been lender and deducted by the borrower is limited to
subject to the below-market loan rules. Those the amount of the borrower's net investment
Rules for below-market loans. The rules that rules will continue to apply even if the outstand- income for the year. If the borrower's net invest-
apply to a below-market loan depend on ing balance is reduced to $10,000 or less. ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as
whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, or zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if theException for loans to continuing care fa-term loan. avoidance of federal tax is one of the maincilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa- purposes of the interest arrangement.Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is any cilities under continuing care contracts are not
below-market loan where the forgone interest is subject to the rules for below-market loans for Effective dates.  These rules apply to termin the nature of a gift. the calendar year if the lender or the lender's loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demandA demand loan is a loan payable in full at any spouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year. loans outstanding after that date.time upon demand by the lender. A demand loan For the definitions of qualified continuing care
is a below-market loan if no interest is charged facility and continuing care contract, see Internal U.S. Savings Bondsor if interest is charged at a rate below the Revenue Code section 7872(h).
applicable federal rate. This section provides tax information on U.S.Exception for loans without significant taxA demand loan or gift loan that is a be- savings bonds. It explains how to report theeffect. Loans are excluded from the be-low-market loan is generally treated as an interest income on these bonds and how to treatlow-market loan rules if their interest arrange-arm's-length transaction in which the lender is transfers of these bonds.ments do not have a significant effect on thetreated as having made: U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender.
viduals include Series EE bonds and Series I• A loan to the borrower in exchange for a These loans include:
bonds.note that requires the payment of interest
1. Loans made available by the lender to theat the applicable federal rate, and For other information on U.S. savingsgeneral public on the same terms and con- bonds, write to:• An additional payment to the borrower in ditions that are consistent with the lender'san amount equal to the forgone interest.
 customary business practice; For Series HH/H:The borrower is generally treated as transferring Bureau of the Public Debt2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orthe additional payment back to the lender as Division of Customer Assistancemunicipal government that are made avail-interest. The lender must report that amount as P.O. Box 2186able under a program of general applica-interest income. Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186.tion to the public;
The lender's additional payment to the bor- 3. Certain employee-relocation loans;rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution
4. Certain loans from a foreign person, un-to capital, pay for services, or other payment,
less the interest income would be effec- For Series EE and I:depending on the substance of the transaction.
tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.The borrower may have to report this payment Bureau of the Public Debttrade or business and would not be ex-as taxable income, depending on its classifica- Division of Customer Assistanceempt from U.S. tax under an income taxtion. P.O. Box 7012treaty;These transfers are considered to occur an- Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012.nually, generally on December 31. 5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con-
Or, on the Internet, visit: www.tributions to which are deductible, if theTerm loans. A term loan is any loan that is
treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/total outstanding amount of loans betweennot a demand loan. A term loan is a be-
products.htm/.the organization and lender is $250,000 or
low-market loan if the amount of the loan is more
less at all times during the tax year; andthan the present value of all payments due
Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-under the loan. 6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- crual method of accounting, you must reportA lender who makes a below-market term ment can be shown to have no significant interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itloan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer- effect on the federal tax liability of the accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestring an additional lump-sum cash payment to lender or the borrower. until you receive it or until the bonds mature.the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-
For a loan described in (6) above, all thetal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. The Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashfacts and circumstances are used to determine ifamount of this payment is the amount of the loan method of accounting, as most individual tax-the interest arrangement has a significant effectminus the present value, at the applicable fed- payers do, you generally report the interest onon the federal tax liability of the lender or bor-eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. An U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But seerower. Some factors to be considered are:equal amount is treated as original issue dis- Reporting options for cash method taxpayers,
count (OID). The lender must report the annual later.• Whether items of income and deductionpart of the OID as interest income. The borrower generated by the loan offset each other; Series HH bonds. These bonds were issuedmay be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-
at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by• The amount of these items;pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a• The cost to you of complying with the be-Exceptions to the below-market loan rules. cash method taxpayer, you must report interestlow-market loan rules, if they were to ap-Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are on these bonds as income in the year you re-ply; anddiscussed here. ceive it.
Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980• Any reasons other than taxes for structur-Exception for loans of $10,000 or less.
and last offered in August 2004. Before 1980,ing the transaction as a below-marketThe rules for below-market loans do not apply to
series H bonds were issued. Series H bonds areloan.any day on which the total outstanding amount
treated the same as series HH bonds. If you areof loans between the borrower and lender is
a cash method taxpayer, you must report theIf you structure a transaction to meet this$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to:
interest when you receive it.exception and one of the principal purposes of
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 301. Gift loans between individuals if the gift that structure is the avoidance of federal tax, the
years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.loan is not directly used to buy or carry loan will be considered a tax-avoidance loan,
income-producing assets, and and this exception will not apply. Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on
2. Pay-related loans or corpora- Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of these bonds is payable when you redeem the
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- bonds. The difference between the purchase
federal tax is not a principal purpose of the viduals, if the outstanding loans between the price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
interest arrangement. lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, the est.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have filed your original return for the year of theTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
change by the due date (including extensions).
By the date you file the original state-IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
ment with your return, you must alsoyou buy a bond in your name and the name of you. send a signed copy to the address be-
another person as co-owners, using only your low.own funds
Internal Revenue Service
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings
who is the sole owner of the bond Branch)
P.O. Box 7604you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion Benjamin Franklin Stationco-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond.
Washington, DC 20044purchase price
If you use a private delivery service, send theyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate signed copy to the address below.property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
property report one-half of the interest. Internal Revenue Service
Attention: CC:IT&A 
(Automatic Rulings Branch) Room 5336
1111 Constitution Avenue, NWSeries EE bonds. Series EE bonds were Change from method 1. If you want to
Washington, DC 20224first offered in January 1980 and have a maturity change your method of reporting the interest
period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series E from method 1 to method 2, you can do so
bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur- without permission from the IRS. In the year of Instead of filing this statement, you can re-ity period of series E bonds has been extended change, you must report all interest accrued to quest permission to change from method 2 toto 40 years for bonds issued before December method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case,date and not previously reported for all your1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No- follow the form instructions for an automaticbonds.vember 1965. Paper series EE and series E change. No user fee is required. Once you choose to report the interest eachbonds are issued at a discount. The face value is
payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EE year, you must continue to do so for all series Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued inbonds are issued at their face value. The face EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for the names of co-owners, such as you and yourvalue plus accrued interest is payable to you at any you get later, unless you request permission child or you and your spouse, interest on thematurity. to change, as explained next. bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who
 Owners of paper series E and EE bonds can bought the bond.Change from method 2. To change fromconvert them to electronic bonds. These con- method 2 to method 1, you must request permis- One co-owner's funds used. If you usedverted bonds do not retain the denomination your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the taxsion from the IRS. Permission for the change islisted on the paper certificate but are posted at on the interest. This is true even if you let theautomatically granted if you send the IRS atheir purchase price (with accrued interest). other co-owner redeem the bond and keep allstatement that meets all the following require-Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first the proceeds. Under these circumstances, thements. offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a
bonds issued at their face amount with a matur- Form 1099-INT at the time of redemption and1. You have typed or printed the following
ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all must provide you with another Form 1099-INTnumber at the top: ª131.ºaccrued interest is payable to you at maturity. showing the amount of interest from the bond2. It includes your name and social security taxable to you. The co-owner who redeemed theReporting options for cash method tax- number under ª131.º bond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee distributionspayers. If you use the cash method of report-
under How To Report Interest Income, later, for3. It includes the year of change (both theing income, you can report the interest on series
more information about how a person who is aEE, series E, and series I bonds in either of the beginning and ending dates). nominee reports interest income belonging tofollowing ways. 4. It identifies the savings bonds for which another person.
you are requesting this change.1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest Both co-owners' funds used. If you anduntil the earlier of the year you cash or 5. It includes your agreement to: the other co-owner each contribute part of thedispose of the bonds or the year in which bond's purchase price, the interest is generallythey mature. (However, see Savings a. Report all interest on any bonds ac- taxable to each of you, in proportion to thebonds traded, later.) quired during or after the year of amount each of you paid.Note. Series E and EE bonds issued in change when the interest is realized Community property. If you and your1980 matured in 2010. If you have used upon disposition, redemption, or final spouse live in a community property state andmethod 1, you generally must report the maturity, whichever is earliest, and hold bonds as community property, one-half ofinterest on these bonds on your 2010 re-
the interest is considered received by each ofturn. b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
you. If you file separate returns, each of youquired before the year of change when2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase generally must report one-half of the bond inter-the interest is realized upon disposition,in redemption value as interest each year. est. For more information about communityredemption, or final maturity, whichever property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-is earliest, with the exception of the in-You must use the same method for all series EE, erty.terest reported in prior tax years.series E, and series I bonds you own. If you do Table 1-2. These rules are also shown innot choose method 2 by reporting the increase Table 1-2.You must attach this statement to your taxin redemption value as interest each year, you return for the year of change, which you must filemust use method 1. Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savingsby the due date (including extensions).
If you plan to cash your bonds in the bonds bought for and registered only in theYou can have an automatic extension of 6same year you will pay for higher edu- name of your child is income to your child, evenmonths from the due date of your return for thecational expenses, you may want to if you paid for the bonds and are named as
TIP
year of change (excluding extensions) to file theuse method 1 because you may be able to beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,
statement with an amended return. On the state-exclude the interest from your income. To learn or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds is
ment, type or print ªFiled pursuant to sectionhow, see Education Savings Bond Program , income to your child in the earlier of the year the
later. 301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you must bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year the
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re- Example 1. You and your spouse each respect of the decedent and should not be
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesport the interest income each year. included in the decedent's final return. All
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you interest earned both before and after theChoice to report interest each year. The and your spouse as co-owners. You both post- decedent's death (except any part reportedchoice to report the accrued interest each year pone reporting interest on the bond. You later by the estate on its income tax return) iscan be made either by your child or by you for have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one income to the person who acquires theyour child. This choice is made by filing an in- in your name and one in your spouse's name. At bonds. If that person uses the cashcome tax return that shows all the interest that time neither you nor your spouse has to method and does not choose to report theearned to date, and by stating on the return that report the interest earned to the date of reissue. interest each year, he or she can postponeyour child chooses to report the interest each reporting it until the year the bonds areyear. Either you or your child should keep a copy Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE cashed or disposed of or the year theyof this return. savings bond entirely with your own funds. The mature, whichever is earlier. In the yearUnless your child is otherwise required to file bond was issued to you and your spouse as that person reports the interest, he or shea tax return for any year after making this choice, co-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- can claim a deduction for any federal es-your child does not have to file a return only to est on the bond. You later have the bond reis- tate tax paid on the part of the interestreport the annual accrual of U.S. savings bond sued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and included in the decedent's estate.interest under this choice. However, see Tax on one in your spouse's name. You must report half
For more information on income in respect of ainvestment income of certain children , earlier, the interest earned to the date of reissue.
decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-under General Information. Neither you nor your Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series utors, and Administrators.child can change the way you report the interest EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to aunless you request permission from the IRS, as trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must Example 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-discussed earlier under Change from method 2. include in your income for that year the interest payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EE
earned to the date of transfer if you have not bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadOwnership transferred. If you bought series already reported it. However, if you are consid- not chosen to report the interest each year. AtE, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in the date of death, interest of $200 had accruedown funds and had them reissued in your value both before and after the transfer contin- on the bond, and its value of $700 was includedco-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone, ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to in your uncle's estate. Your uncle's executoryou must include in your gross income for the defer reporting the interest earned each year. chose not to include the $200 accrued interest inyear of reissue all interest that you earned on You must include the total interest in your in- your uncle's final income tax return. The $200 isthese bonds and have not previously reported. come in the year you cash or dispose of the income in respect of the decedent.But, if the bonds were reissued in your name bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, You are a cash method taxpayer and do notalone, you do not have to report the interest whichever is earlier. choose to report the interest each year as it isaccrued at that time. The same rules apply to previously unre- earned. If you cash the bond when it reachesThis same rule applies when bonds (other ported interest on series EE or series E bonds if maturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-than bonds held as community property) are the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or est income Ðthe difference between maturitytransferred between spouses or incident to di- series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the value of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.vorce. series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds For that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-traded, later. ous itemized deduction not subject to theExample. You bought series EE bonds en-
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federalDecedents. The manner of reporting interesttirely with your own funds. You did not choose to
estate tax paid because the $200 interest wasincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,report the accrued interest each year. Later, you
included in your uncle's estate.after the death of the owner, depends on thetransfer the bonds to your former spouse under
accounting and income-reporting methods pre-a divorce agreement. You must include the de-
Example 2. If, in Example 1, the executorviously used by the decedent.ferred accrued interest, from the date of the
had chosen to include the $200 accrued interestoriginal issue of the bonds to the date of transfer, Decedent who reported interest each year. in your uncle's final return, you would report onlyin your income in the year of transfer. Your If the bonds transferred because of death were $300 as interest when you cashed the bond atformer spouse includes in income the interest on owned by a person who used an accrual maturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourthe bonds from the date of transfer to the date of method, or who used the cash method and had uncle's death.redemption. chosen to report the interest each year, the
interest earned in the year of death up to thePurchased jointly. If you and a co-owner Example 3. If, in Example 1, you make ordate of death must be reported on that person'seach contributed funds to buy series E, series have made the choice to report the increase infinal return. The person who acquires the bondsEE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the redemption value as interest each year, youincludes in income only interest earned after thebonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone, include in gross income for the year you acquiredate of death.you must include in your gross income for the the bond all of the unreported increase in value
year of reissue your share of all the interest Decedent who postponed reporting inter- of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you
earned on the bonds that you have not previ- est. If the transferred bonds were owned by a hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-
ously reported. The former co-owner does not decedent who had used the cash method and ited from your uncle.
have to include in gross income at the time of had not chosen to report the interest each year,
reissue his or her share of the interest earned and who had bought the bonds entirely with his Example 4. When your aunt died, she
that was not reported before the transfer. This or her own funds, all interest earned before owned series H bonds that she had acquired in a
interest, however, as well as all interest earned death must be reported in one of the following trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-
after the reissue, is income to the former ways. ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cash
co-owner. method and did not choose to report the interest1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-This income-reporting rule also applies when on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.sentative (executor, administrator, etc.)the bonds are reissued in the name of your Your aunt's executor chose not to include anywho files the final income tax return of theformer co-owner and a new co-owner. But the interest earned before your aunt's death on herdecedent can choose to include on thatnew co-owner will report only his or her share of final return.return all interest earned on the bondsthe interest earned after the transfer. The income in respect of the decedent is thebefore the decedent's death. The personIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought sum of the unreported interest on the series Ewho acquires the bonds then includes injointly are reissued to each of you separately in bonds and the interest, if any, payable on theincome only interest earned after the datethe same proportion as your contribution to the series H bonds but not received as of the date ofof death.purchase price, neither you nor your co-owner your aunt's death. You must report any interest
has to report at that time the interest earned received during the year as income on your2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest
before the bonds were reissued. return. The part of the interest payable but notearned up to the date of death is income in
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
received before your aunt's death is income in example, this may happen if any of the following by a parent and issued in the name of his or her
respect of the decedent and may qualify for the are true. child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-
estate tax deduction. For information on when to sion by the parent or child.• You chose to report the increase in thereport the interest on the series E bonds traded, redemption value of the bond each year. The issue date of a bond may be earliersee Savings bonds traded, below. The interest shown on your Form than the date the bond is purchased
1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts because the issue date assigned to aSavings bonds distributed from a retirement
CAUTION
!
previously included in income. bond is the first day of the month in which it isor profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.
purchased.savings bond in a taxable distribution from a • You received the bond from a decedent.retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income for The interest shown on your Form Beneficiary. You can designate any individ-the year of distribution includes the bond's re- 1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of thedemption value (its cost plus the interest ac- est reported by the decedent before death, bond.crued before the distribution). When you redeem or on the decedent's final return, or by thethe bond (whether in the year of distribution or Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-estate on the estate's income tax return.later), your interest income includes only the sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-
• Ownership of the bond was transferred.interest accrued after the bond was distributed. tion information from the Department of
The interest shown on your FormTo figure the interest reported as a taxable distri- Treasury.
1099-INT will not be reduced by interestbution and your interest income when you re-
that accrued before the transfer.deem the bond, see Worksheet for savings Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa-
bonds distributed from a retirement or tional expenses are tuition and fees required for• You were named as a co-owner, and theprofit-sharing plan under How To Report Interest you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whomother co-owner contributed funds to buyIncome, later. you claim an exemption) to attend an eligiblethe bond. The interest shown on your educational institution.Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by theSavings bonds traded. If you postponed re- Qualified expenses include any contributionamount you received as nominee for theporting the interest on your series EE or series E you make to a qualified tuition program or to aother co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier inbonds, you did not recognize taxable income Coverdell education savings account. For infor-this section, for more information aboutwhen you traded the bonds for series HH or mation about these programs, see Publicationthe reporting requirements.)series H bonds, unless you received cash in the 970, Tax Benefits for Education.trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se- • You received the bond in a taxable distri- Qualified expenses do not include expensesries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can- bution from a retirement or profit-sharing for room and board or for courses involvingnot trade any other series of bonds for series HH plan. The interest shown on your Form sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of abonds.) Any cash you received is income up to 1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- degree or certificate granting program.the amount of the interest earned on the bonds est portion of the amount taxable as atraded. When your series HH or series H bonds Eligible educational institutions. Thesedistribution from the plan and not taxablemature, or if you dispose of them before matur- institutions include most public, private, andas interest. (This amount is generallyity, you report as interest the difference between nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalshown on Form 1099-R, Distributionstheir redemption value and your cost. Your cost schools that are accredited and eligible to par-From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement oris the sum of the amount you paid for the traded ticipate in student aid programs run by the De-Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insuranceseries EE or series E bonds plus any amount partment of Education.Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.)you had to pay at the time of the trade. Reduction for certain benefits. You must
For more information on including the correct reduce your qualified higher educational ex-Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE amount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.bonds (on which you postponed reporting the ings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi-interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 nee distributions under How To Report Interest 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- Income, later. ships.come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex- 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-of the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued
empt from state and local taxes. The tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.interest of $523 and a redemption value of
Form 1099-INT you receive will indi-$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-
TIP 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bondsturity, when you receive $2,500. You must report tion of distributions from a qualified tuitioninterest in box 3. Do not include this income on$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. program.your state or local income tax return.This is the difference between their redemption
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orvalue, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the
inheritances) received as educational as-amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is
sistance, such as:also the difference between the accrued interest Education Savings Bond Program
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 a. Veterans' educational assistance bene-You may be able to exclude from income all orcash received on the trade.) fits,part of the interest you receive on the redemp-Choice to report interest in year of trade. tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the b. Qualified tuition reductions, orYou could have chosen to treat all of the previ- year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-ously unreported accrued interest on series EE c. Employer-provided educational assis-penses during the same year. This exclusion isor series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as tance.known as the Education Savings Bond Program.income in the year of the trade. If you made this You do not qualify for this exclusion if yourchoice, it is treated as a change from method 1. 5. Any expense used in figuring the Americanfiling status is married filing separately.See Change from method 1  under Series EE Opportunity and lifetime learning credits.
Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-and series I bonds, earlier. For information about these benefits, see Pub-terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings BondsForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter- lication 970.Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.payer that redeems it must give you a Form Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-
1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued ings bonds you redeem during the year are not
1099-INT should show the interest as the differ- after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-
ence between the amount you received and the issued either in your name (sole owner) or in tional expenses for the year, you may be able to
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form your and your spouse's names (co-owners). exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds are
1099-INT may show more interest than you You must be at least 24 years old before the more than the expenses, you may be able to
have to include on your income tax return. For bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought exclude only part of the interest.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To determine the excludable amount, multi- 3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents Form 1099-INT showing the interest (in box 3)
of American Samoa, paid to you for the year.ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.
The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the Payments of principal and interest generally4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, will be credited to your designated checking orqualified higher educational expenses you paid
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received savings account by direct deposit through theduring the year. The denominator (bottom part)
under an employer's adoption assistance TreasuryDirect  system.of the fraction is the total proceeds you received program,during the year.
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a6. Deduction for tuition and fees, 4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturityExample. In February 2010, Mark and 7. Deduction for student loan interest, and period. They are issued at a discount in theJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The dif-ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April 8. Deduction for domestic production activi- ference between the discounted price you payties.1996. They received proceeds of $8,124, repre- for the bills and the face value you receive atsenting principal of $5,000 and interest of Use the worksheet in the instructions for line maturity is interest income. Generally, you re-$3,124. In 2010, they paid $4,000 of their daugh- 9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you port this interest income when the bill is paid atter's college tuition. They are not claiming an claim any of the exclusion or deduction items maturity. See Discount on Short-Term Obliga-education credit for that amount, and their listed above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the tions under Discount on Debt Instruments, later.
daughter does not have any tax-free educational amount of the exclusion or deduction (except If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur-assistance. They can exclude $1,538 ($3,124 × any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will
($4,000 ÷  $8,124)) of interest in 2010. They interest or domestic production activities) to the receive payment for the difference between the
amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter themust pay tax on the remaining $1,586 ($3,124 − proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less
total on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.$1,538) interest. any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the
new Treasury security. However, you must re-Royalties included in modified AGI. Be-Figuring the interest part of the proceeds
port the full amount of the interest income oncause the deduction for interest expenses due(Form 8815, line 6). To figure the interest to each of your Treasury bills at the time it reachesto royalties and other investments is limited toreport on Form 8815, line 6, use the Line 6 maturity.your net investment income (see InvestmentWorksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.
Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the
If you previously reported any interest Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notesdeduction for interest expenses until you have
from savings bonds cashed during have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-figured this exclusion of savings bond interest.
2010, use the Alternate Line 6 Work- ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for Treasury
Therefore, if you had interest expenses due to
sheet below instead. bonds are longer than 10 years. Both generallyroyalties and deductible on Schedule E (Form
are issued in denominations of $100 to $1 mil-1040), you must make a special computation of
lion and both generally pay interest every 6Alternate Line 6 Worksheet your deductible interest to figure the net royalty
months. Generally, you report this interest forincome included in your modified AGI. You must1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, the year paid. When the notes or bonds mature,figure deductible interest without regard to thisline 5 ................... . you can redeem these securities for face valueexclusion of bond interest.2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 or use the proceeds from the maturing note orpaper series EE bonds cashed in You can use a ªdummyº Form 4952, Invest- bond to reinvest in another note or bond of the2010 .................... . ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the same type and term. If you do nothing, the pro-3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) special computation. On this form, include in ceeds from the maturing note or bond will be4. Enter the face value of all electronic your net investment income your total interest deposited in your bank account.series EE bonds (including income for the year from series EE and I U.S. Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-post-1989 series EE bonds savings bonds. Use the deductible interestconverted from paper to electronic tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-amount from this form only to figure the netformat) and all series I bonds tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make aroyalty income included in your modified AGI.cashed in 2010 ............. . competitive bid and a determination is made thatDo not attach this form to your tax return.5. Add lines 3 and 4 ........... . the purchase price is less than the face value,After you figure this interest exclusion, use a6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... . you will receive a refund for the difference be-separate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-7. Enter the amount of interest tween the purchase price and the face value.tion for investment interest expenses and attachreported as income in previous This amount is considered original issue dis-that form to your return.years ................... . count. However, the original issue discount rules8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the (discussed later) do not apply if the discount isRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-result here and on Form 8815, line 6 less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the faceest exclusion, you must keep a written
amount, multiplied by the number of full yearsrecord of the qualified U.S. savings
RECORDS
Modified adjusted gross income limit. from the date of original issue to maturity. Seebonds you redeem. Your record must include
The interest exclusion is limited if your modified De minimis OID  under Original Issue Discountthe serial number, issue date, face value, and
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: (OID), later. If the purchase price is determinedtotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
to be more than the face amount, the differenceest) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,• $70,100 to $85,100 for taxpayers filing sin- is a premium. (See Bond Premium AmortizationOptional Form To Record Redemption of Seriesgle or head of household, and in chapter 3.)EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,
• $105,100 to $135,100 for married taxpay- to record this information. You should also keep For other information on these notes orers filing jointly, or for a qualifying bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- bonds, write to:widow(er) with dependent child. mentation that shows you paid qualified higher
educational expenses during the year. Bureau of The Public DebtYou do not qualify for the interest exclusion if
P.O. Box 7015your modified AGI is equal to or more than the
Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015U.S. Treasury Bills,upper limit for your filing status.
Notes, and BondsModified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes Or, on the Internet, visit: http://www.
treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm.of this exclusion, is adjusted gross income Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37)
 (obligations) of the U.S. Government.
figured before the interest exclusion, and modi-
fied by adding back any: Taxation of interest. Interest income from
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to Treasury inflation-protected securities1. Foreign earned income exclusion, federal income tax but is exempt from all state (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a
2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, and local income taxes. You should receive year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla- Tax-Exempt Interest Taxable Interest
tion. For the tax treatment of these securities,
Interest on a bond used to finance government Interest on some state or local obligations issee Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments  under
taxable.operations generally is not taxable if the bond isOriginal Issue Discount (OID), later.
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a
Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor- U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi- Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on
mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of federally guaranteed state or local obligationssions. Political subdivisions include:
U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or- issued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule• Port authorities,dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non- does not apply to interest on obligations guaran-
taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for information • Toll road commissions, teed by the following U.S. Government agen-
about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer- cies.• Utility services authorities,tain other designated issues. • Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-• Community redevelopment agencies, and tee was under the Northwest Power Act asBonds Sold Between Interest • Qualified volunteer fire departments (for in effect on July 18, 1984).
Dates certain obligations issued after 1980). • Department of Veterans Affairs.
There are other requirements for tax-exemptIf you sell a bond between interest payment • Federal home loan banks. (The guaranteebonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern-dates, part of the sales price represents interest must be made after July 30, 2008, in con-ment agency or see sections 103 and 141accrued to the date of sale. You must report that nection with the original bond issue duringthrough 150 of the Internal Revenue Code andpart of the sales price as interest income for the the period beginning on July 30, 2008, andthe related regulations.year of sale. ending on December 31, 2010 (or a re-If you buy a bond between interest payment newal or extension of a guarantee soObligations that are not bonds. Inter-dates, part of the purchase price represents made) and the bank must meet safety andest on a state or local government obli-interest accrued before the date of purchase. soundness requirements.)gation may be tax exempt even if theWhen that interest is paid to you, treat it as a
TIP
obligation is not a bond. For example, interest onreturn of your capital investment, rather than • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-
a debt evidenced only by an ordinary writteninterest income, by reducing your basis in the tion.
agreement of purchase and sale may be taxbond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under • Federal Housing Administration.How To Report Interest Income , later in this exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on
chapter, for information on reporting the pay- default by the state or political subdivision may • Federal National Mortgage Association.
ment. be tax exempt. • Government National Mortgage Corpora-
tion.Insurance Registration requirement. A bond issued af-
• Resolution Funding Corporation.ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis-Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi- tered form for the interest to be tax exempt. • Student Loan Marketing Association.ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-
able. But if you receive the proceeds in Indian tribal government. Bonds issued afterinstallments, you must usually report part of Tax credit bonds. Tax credit bonds generally1982 by an Indian tribal government (includingeach installment payment as interest income. do not pay interest. Instead, the bondholder istribal economic development bonds issued afterFor more information about insurance pro- allowed an annual tax credit. The credit com-February 17, 2009) are treated as issued by aceeds received in installments, see Publication pensates the holder for lending money to thestate. Interest on these bonds is generally tax525. issuer and functions as interest paid on theexempt if the bonds are part of an issue of which bond. Use Form 8912, Credit to Holders of Taxsubstantially all proceeds are to be used in theInterest option on insurance. If you leave life Credit Bonds, to claim the credit for the followingexercise of any essential government function.insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur- tax credit bonds and to figure the amount of the
However, the essential government function re-ance company under an agreement to pay inter- credit to report as interest income.
est only, the interest paid to you is taxable. quirement does not apply to tribal economic
• Clean renewable energy bond.development bonds issued after February 17,
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- 2009, for tax-exempt treatment. Interest on pri- • Gulf tax credit bond.ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for • Midwestern tax credit bond.ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.
from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. • Qualified forestry conservation bond.See Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions Original issue discount. Original issue dis- • New clean renewable energy bond.and Annuities, for information on taxation of count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern-pension and annuity income from nonqualified • Qualified energy conservation bond.ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.plans. For information on the treatment of OID • Qualified zone academy bond.
when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seeState or Local • Qualified school construction bond.Tax-exempt state and local government bonds
Government Obligations under Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapter Build America bonds. A build America4.Interest you receive on an obligation issued by a bond is any bond (other than a private activity
Stripped bonds or coupons. For specialstate or local government is generally not tax- bond) issued after February 17, 2009, and
rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga-able. The issuer should be able to tell you before January 1, 2011, by an issuer who makes
whether the interest is taxable. The issuer tions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  under an irrevocable election to have the rules of Inter-
should also give you a periodic (or year-end) Original Issue Discount (OID), later. nal Revenue Code section 54AA apply; and,
statement showing the tax treatment of the obli- except for that election, the interest on the bond
gation. If you invested in the obligation through a Information reporting requirement. If you would have been excludable from income under
trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi- must file a tax return, you are required to show Internal Revenue Code section 103.
zation should give you this information. any tax-exempt interest you received on your These bonds pay taxable interest. However,
return. This is an information-reporting require- the bondholder is allowed a tax credit equal toEven if interest on the obligation is not
ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- 35% of the interest payable on the interest pay-subject to income tax, you may have to
est to taxable interest. See Reporting ment date of the bond. The credit is treated asreport capital gain or loss when you sell
CAUTION
!
tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter- taxable interest. Use Form 8912 to claim theit. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may
est Income, later in this chapter. credit for a build America bond.apply to other dispositions of the obligation.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds of • Midwestern disaster area bonds. effect, additional interest income. The following
these bonds are used to finance mortgage loans are some types of discounted debt instruments.• Hurricane Ike disaster area bonds.for homebuyers. Generally, interest on state or • U.S. Treasury bonds.• Exempt facility bonds issued after July 30,local government home mortgage bonds issued
2008. • Corporate bonds.after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bonds
are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter- • Qualified mortgage bonds issued after • Municipal bonds.ans' mortgage bonds. July 30, 2008. • Certificates of deposit.
Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds • Qualified veterans' mortgage bonds is- • Notes between individuals.issued by state or local governments after Octo- sued after July 30, 2008.
ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a • Stripped bonds and coupons.
bond any portion of the proceeds of which is Qualified bonds issued in 2009 or 2010. • Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).expected to be used to buy (or to replace funds The interest on any qualified bond issued in
used to buy) higher yielding investments. A 2009 or 2010 is not a tax preference item and is The discount on these instruments (except mu-
bond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuer not subject to the alternative minimum tax. For nicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The
intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of the this purpose, a refunding bond (whether a cur- discount on municipal bonds generally is not
issue in this manner. rent or advanced refunding) is treated as issued taxable (but see State or Local Government
on the date the refunded bond was issued (or on Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See alsoPrivate activity bonds. Interest on a private the date the original bond was issued in the case REMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, foractivity bond that is not a qualified bond (defined of a series of refundings). However, this rule information about applying the rules discussedbelow) is taxable. Generally, a private activity does not apply to any refunding bond issued to in this section to the regular interest holder of abond is part of a state or local government bond refund any qualified bond issued during 2004 real estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi-issue that meets both the following require- through 2008. nancial asset securitization investment trust, orments. other CDO.Enterprise zone facility bonds. Interest on
1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is- certain private activity bonds issued by a state or
Original Issuesue is to be used for a private business local government to finance a facility used in an
use. empowerment zone or enterprise community is Discount (OID)
tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin- OID is a form of interest. You generally includesection 1394 of the Internal Revenue Code.cipal or interest is: OID in your income as it accrues over the term ofNew York Liberty bonds. New York Liberty the debt instrument, whether or not you receivea. Secured by an interest in property to be bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, to any payments from the issuer.used for a private business use (or pay- finance the construction and rehabilitation of A debt instrument generally has OID whenments for this property), or real property in the designated ªLiberty Zoneº of the instrument is issued for a price that is lessNew York City. Interest on these bonds issuedb. Derived from payments for property (or than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDbefore 2012 is tax exempt.borrowed money) used for a private is the difference between the stated redemptionbusiness use. price at maturity and the issue price.Market discount. Market discount on a
All debt instruments that pay no interesttax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youAlso, a bond is generally considered a private before maturity are presumed to be issued at abought the bond after April 30, 1993, you canactivity bond if the proceeds to be used to discount. Zero coupon bonds are one examplechoose to accrue the market discount over themake or finance loans to persons other than of these instruments.period you own the bond and include it in yourgovernment units is more than 5% of the pro- The OID accrual rules generally do not applyincome currently as taxable interest. See Marketceeds or $5 million (whichever is less). to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-Discount Bonds under Discount on Debt Instru-
Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ- turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue).ments, later. If you do not make that choice, or if
ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. A See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later.you bought the bond before May 1, 1993, any
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ- gain from market discount is taxable when you For information about the sale of a debt in-
ing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New York dispose of the bond. strument with OID, see chapter 4.
Liberty bond, a Midwestern disaster area bond, For more information on the treatment of
a Hurricane Ike disaster area bond, a Gulf Op- De minimis OID. You can treat the discountmarket discount when you dispose of a
portunity Zone Bond treated as an exempt facil- as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025)tax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru-
ity bond, or any recovery zone facility bond of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-ments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in
issued after February 17, 2009, and before Jan- plied by the number of full years from the date ofchapter 4.
uary 1, 2012), qualified student loan bond, quali- original issue to maturity. This small discount is
fied small issue bond (including a tribal known as ªde minimisº OID.
manufacturing facility bond), qualified redevel-
opment bond, qualified mortgage bond (includ- Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond withDiscount oning a Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond, a Midwestern a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000,
disaster area bond, or a Hurricane Ike disaster issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth ofDebt Instrumentsarea bond treated as a qualified mortgage 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10
bond), qualified veterans' mortgage bond, or (the number of full years from the date of originalTerms you may need to knowqualified 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20(see Glossary):benefit of certain tax-exempt organizations). discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as
Interest you receive on these tax-exempt zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willMarket discount
bonds, if issued after August 7, 1986, generally recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.)Market discount bondis a ªtax preference itemº and may be subject to
the alternative minimum tax. See Form 6251 Example 2. The facts are the same as inOriginal issue discount (OID)
and its instructions for more information. Example 1, except that the bond was issued atPremiumThe interest on the following bonds is not a $950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount
tax preference item and is not subject to the is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you
alternative minimum tax. must include the OID in income as it accruesA debt instrument, such as a bond, note, deben- over the term of the bond.ture, or other evidence of indebtedness, that• Qualified 501(c)(3) bonds.
bears no interest or bears interest at a lower Debt instrument bought after original is-• New York Liberty bonds. than current market rate will usually be issued at sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de
less than its face amount. This discount is, in• Gulf Opportunity Zone bonds. minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the following entire loss is a capital loss and no reporting of
with de minimis OID at a discount, the discount OID is required.apply.
is reported under the market discount rules. See In general, the amount of gain that is ordinary• You bought the debt instrument after itsMarket Discount Bonds, later in this chapter. interest income equals the following amount:original issue and paid a premium or an
acquisition premium.Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules Number of full months Original
discussed here do not apply to the following debt you held the instrument × Issue• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
instruments. Number of full months from date of Discounta stripped coupon (including certain zero
 original issue to date of maturitycoupon instruments). See Figuring OID1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, laterStripped tax-exempt obligations, later.) Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969in this chapter.
(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru-2. U.S. savings bonds.
ment), and before 1985. If you hold these3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a See Original issue discount (OID) adjustment debt instruments as capital assets, you mustfixed maturity date of not more than 1 year under How To Report Interest Income , later in include a part of the discount in your grossfrom the date of issue). this chapter, for information about reporting the income each year that you own the instruments.
correct amount of OID.4. Obligations issued by an individual before Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-March 2, 1984. Premium. You bought a debt instrument at ment is increased by the amount of OID you
a premium if its adjusted basis immediately after include in your gross income.5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow-
purchase was greater than the total of alling are true. Debt instruments issued after 1984. Foramounts payable on the instrument after the
these debt instruments, you report the total OIDa. The lender is not in the business of purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-
that applies each year regardless of whetherlending money. est.
you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.If you bought an OID debt instrument at ab. The amount of the loan, plus the
premium, you generally do not have to report Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru-amount of any outstanding prior loans
any OID as ordinary income. ment is increased by the amount of OID youbetween the same individuals, is
include in your gross income.$10,000 or less. Qualified stated interest. In general, this is
stated interest unconditionally payable in cashc. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of
or property (other than debt instruments of thethe principal purposes of the loan. Certificates of Deposit (CDs)issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.
If you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1Acquisition premium. You bought a debt
year, you must include in income each year ainstrument at an acquisition premium if both theForm 1099-OID part of the total interest due and report it in thefollowing are true. same manner as other OID.The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro- • You did not pay a premium. This also applies to similar deposit arrange-ker, if you held the instrument through a broker) ments with banks, building and loan associa-• The instrument's adjusted basis immedi-should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issue tions, etc., including:ately after purchase (including purchase atDiscount, or a similar statement, if the total OID
original issue) was greater than its ad- • Time deposits,for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form
justed issue price. This is the issue price1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID • Bonus plans,plus the OID previously accrued, minusfor the part of the year that you held the bond. It
any payment previously made on the in- • Savings certificates,also will show, in box 2, the stated interest you
strument other than qualified stated inter-must include in your income. A copy of Form • Deferred income certificates,est.1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file your
• Bonus savings certificates, andcopy with your return. Keep it for your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID • Growth savings certificates.amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID as includible in your income. For information aboutinterest income. But see Refiguring OID shown figuring the correct amount of OID to include in Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyon Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, and your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDsalso Original issue discount (OID) adjustment Debt Instruments in Publication 1212. not in registered form. They are not issued in theunder How To Report Interest Income , later in
depositor's name and are transferable from onethis chapter, for more information. Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form individual to another.1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentForm 1099-OID not received. If you had OID Banks must provide the IRS and the personor acquired it from another holder during thefor the year but did not receive a Form redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,1099-OID, see the OID tables found at http:// earlier, for information about the treatment of Time deposit open account arrangement.www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity date0,,id=213465,00.html, which list total OID on Form 1099-OID for that instrument. in which you make deposits on a schedule ar-certain debt instruments and has information
ranged between you and your bank. But there isthat will help you figure OID. If your debt instru-
no actual or constructive receipt of interest untilment is not listed, consult the issuer for further Applying the OID Rules the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance,information about the accrued OID for the year.
you and your bank enter into an arrangementThe rules for reporting OID depend on the date under which you agree to deposit $100 eachNominee. If someone else is the holder of the long-term debt instrument was issued. month for a period of 5 years. Interest will berecord (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablement belonging to you and receives a Form Debt instruments issued after 1954 and only at the end of the 5-year period. You must1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a include a part of the interest in your income asyou a Form 1099-OID. government instrument). For these instru- OID each year. Each year the bank must giveIf you receive a Form 1099-OID that includes ments, you do not report the OID until the year you a Form 1099-OID to show you the amountamounts belonging to another person, see Nom- you sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If you must include in your income for the year.inee distributions under How To Report Interest a gain results and the instrument is a capitalIncome, later. asset, the amount of gain equal to the OID is Redemption before maturity. If, before the
ordinary interest income. The rest is capital gain.Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. maturity date, you redeem a deferred interest
If there is a loss on the sale of the instrument, theYou must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or box account for less than its stated redemption price
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
at maturity, you can deduct OID that you previ- before the date of sale, to the extent you did not Market Discount Bonds
ously included in income but did not receive. previously include this interest in your income.
For an obligation acquired after October 22, A market discount bond is any bond having
Renewable certificates. If you renew a CD at 1986, you must also include the market discount market discount except:
maturity, it is treated as a redemption and a that accrued before the date of sale of the • Short-term obligations (those with fixedpurchase of a new certificate. This is true re- stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you did maturity dates of up to 1 year from thegardless of the terms of renewal. not previously include this discount in your in- date of issue),come.
• Tax-exempt obligations you bought beforeAdd the interest and market discount thatFace-Amount Certificates May 1, 1993,you include in income to the basis of the bond
and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be- • U.S. savings bonds, andThese certificates are subject to the OID rules. tween the items you keep and the items you sell,They are a form of endowment contracts issued • Certain installment obligations.based on the fair market value of the items. Theby insurance or investment companies for either difference between the sale price of the bond (ora lump-sum payment or periodic payments, with Market discount arises when the value of acoupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orthe face amount becoming payable on the ma- debt obligation decreases after its issue date.coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.turity date of the certificate. Generally, this is due to an increase in interestTreat any item you keep as an OID bondIn general, the difference between the face rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar-originally issued and bought by you on the saleamount and the amount you paid for the contract ket, it may have market discount.date of the other items. If you keep the bond,is OID. You must include a part of the OID in When you buy a market discount bond, youtreat the amount of the redemption price of theyour income over the term of the certificate. can choose to accrue the market discount overbond that is more than the basis of the bond asThe issuer must give you a statement on the period you own the bond and include it inOID. If you keep the coupons, treat the amountForm 1099-OID indicating the amount you must your income currently as interest income. If youpayable on the coupons that is more than theinclude in your income each year. do not make this choice, the following rulesbasis of the coupons as OID. generally apply.
• You must treat any gain when you disposeBuyer. If you buy a stripped bond or strippedInflation-Indexed
of the bond as ordinary interest income,coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued onDebt Instruments
up to the amount of the accrued marketthe date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,
discount. See Discounted Debt Instru-If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-
ments under Capital Gains and Losses in(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), you tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If
chapter 4.must report as OID any increase in the infla- you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID any
tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrument excess of the amount payable on the due date of • You must treat any partial payment of prin-that occurs while you held the instrument during the coupon over your purchase price. cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in-the year. In general, an inflation-indexed debt come, up to the amount of the accruedinstrument is a debt instrument on which the Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID on market discount. See Partial principal pay-payments are adjusted for inflation and deflation stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend on ments, later in this discussion.(such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi- the date the debt instruments were purchased,
• If you borrow money to buy or carry theties). You should receive Form 1099-OID from not the date issued.
bond, your deduction for interest paid onthe payer showing the amount you must report You must refigure OID shown on the Form the debt is limited. See Limit on interestas OID and any qualified stated interest paid to 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond or deduction for market discount bondsyou during the year. For more information, see coupon. For information about figuring the cor- under When To Deduct Investment Inter-Publication 1212. rect amount of OID on these instruments to est in chapter 3.include in your income, see Figuring OID on
Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in PublicationStripped Bonds and Coupons Market discount. Market discount is the1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
amount of the stated redemption price of a bondcoupons should not rely on the OID shown inIf you strip one or more coupons from a bond
at maturity that is more than your basis in theSection II of The OID tables (available at http://and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and
bond immediately after you acquire it. You treatwww.irs.gov/formspubs/article/coupons are treated as separate debt instru-
market discount as zero if it is less than0,,id=213465,00.html ) because the amountsments issued with OID.
one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-listed in Section II for stripped bonds or couponsThe holder of a stripped bond has the right to tion price of the bond multiplied by the number ofare figured without reference to the date or pricereceive the principal (redemption price) pay- full years to maturity (after you acquire theat which you acquired them.ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has the bond).right to receive interest on the bond. Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru- If a market discount bond also has OID, theStripped bonds and stripped coupons in- ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt market discount is the sum of the bond's issueclude: instruments is figured under the discount bond price and the total OID includible in the grossmethod. This method is described in Regula-• Zero coupon instruments available income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, thetions section 1.1275-7(e).through the Department of the Treasury's total OID that accrued) before you acquired the
Separate Trading of Registered Interest bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi-Stripped tax-exempt obligations. You doand Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro- ately after you acquired it.not have to pay tax on OID on any strippedgram and government-sponsored enter- tax-exempt bond or coupon you bought before Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally,prises such as the Resolution Funding June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired it after a bond you acquired at original issue is not aCorporation and the Financing Corpora-
October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on it to market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in ation, and
determine its basis when you dispose of it. See bond is determined by reference to the adjusted• Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se- Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru- basis of another person who acquired the bondcurities that represent ownership interests ments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter 4. at original issue, you are also considered toin those securities, such as obligations You may have to pay tax on part of the OID have acquired it at original issue.backed by U.S. Treasury bonds offered on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that Exceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-primarily by brokerage firms. you bought after June 10, 1987. For information nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitheron figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt of the following is true.Bonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID onSeller. If you strip coupons from a bond and
Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publicationsell the bond or coupons, include in income the • Your cost basis in the bond is less than
interest that accrued while you held the bond 1212. the bond's issue price.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The bond is issued in exchange for a mar- bond you acquired after October 22, 1986, and • A stripped bond or stripped coupon held
ket discount bond under a plan of reorgan- by the person who stripped the bond oryou did not choose to include the discount in
ization. (This does not apply if the bond is coupon (or by any other person whoseincome currently, you must treat the payment as
issued in exchange for a market discount basis in the obligation is determined byordinary interest income up to the amount of the
bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the reference to the basis in the hands of thebond's accrued market discount. Reduce the
terms and interest rates of both bonds are person who stripped the bond or coupon).amount of accrued market discount reportable
the same.) as interest at disposition by that amount.
There are three methods you can use to Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your
figure accrued market discount for this purpose.Accrued market discount. The accrued mar- obligation by the amount of discount you include
ket discount is figured in one of two ways. in income currently.1. On the basis of the constant yield method,
described earlier.Ratable accrual method. Treat the market Figuring the accrued discount. Figure the
discount as accruing in equal daily installments accrued discount by using either the ratable2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for anyduring the period you hold the bond. Figure the accrual method or the constant yield methodaccrual period, if the debt instrument hasdaily installments by dividing the market dis- discussed previously in Accrued market dis-OID.count by the number of days after the date you count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier.
acquired the bond, up to and including its matur- 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-
Government obligations. For an obligationity date. Multiply the daily installments by the est paid in the accrual period, if the debt
described above that is a short-term govern-number of days you held the bond to figure your instrument has no OID.
ment obligation, the amount you include in youraccrued market discount. Under method (2) above, figure accrued income for the current year is the accrued acqui-
Constant yield method. Instead of using market discount for a period by multiplying the sition discount, if any, plus any other accrued
the ratable accrual method, you can choose to total remaining market discount by a fraction. interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi-
figure the accrued discount using a constant The numerator (top part) of the fraction is the tion discount is the stated redemption price at
interest rate (the constant yield method). Make OID for the period, and the denominator (bottom maturity minus your basis. 
this choice by attaching to your timely filed return part) is the total remaining OID at the beginning If you choose to use the constant yield
a statement identifying the bond and stating that of the period. method to figure accrued acquisition discount,
you are making a constant interest rate election. Under method (3) above, figure accrued treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the
The choice takes effect on the date you acquired market discount for a period by multiplying the issue price. If you choose to use this method,
the bond. If you choose to use this method for total remaining market discount by a fraction. you cannot change your choice.
any bond, you cannot change your choice for The numerator is the stated interest paid in the Nongovernment obligations. For an obliga-that bond. accrual period, and the denominator is the total tion listed above that is not a government obliga-For information about using the constant stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin- tion, the amount you include in your income foryield method, see Constant yield method under ning of the accrual period. the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plusDebt Instruments Issued After 1984  in Publica-
any other accrued interest payable. If yoution 1212. To use this method to figure market Discount on choose the constant yield method to figure ac-discount (instead of OID), treat the bond as
Short-Term Obligations crued OID, apply it by using the obligation'shaving been issued on the date you acquired it.
issue price.Treat the amount of your basis (immediately When you buy a short-term obligation (one withafter you acquired the bond) as the issue price. Choosing to include accrued acquisitiona fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from theThen apply the formula shown in Publication discount instead of OID. You can choose todate of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga-1212. report accrued acquisition discount (definedtion, you can generally choose to include any earlier under Government obligations ) ratherChoosing to include market discount in in- discount and interest payable on the obligation than accrued OID on these short-term obliga-come currently. You can make this choice if in income currently. If you do not make this tions. Your choice will apply to the year for whichyou have not revoked a prior choice to include choice, the following rules generally apply. it is made and to all later years and cannot bemarket discount in income currently within the • You must treat any gain when you sell, changed without the consent of the IRS.last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at- exchange, or redeem the obligation as or- You must make your choice by the due datetaching to your timely filed return a statement in dinary income, up to the amount of the of your return, including extensions, for the firstwhich you: ratable share of the discount. See Dis- year for which you are making the choice. Attach
• State that you have included market dis- counted Debt Instruments under Capital a statement to your return or amended return
count in your gross income for the year Gains and Losses in chapter 4. indicating:
under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev- • If you borrow money to buy or carry the • Your name, address, and social securityenue Code, and obligation, your deduction for interest paid number;
• Describe the method you used to figure on the debt is limited. See Limit on interest • The choice you are making and that it isthe accrued market discount for the year. deduction for short-term obligations under being made under section 1283(c)(2) ofWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in the Internal Revenue Code;Once you make this choice, it will apply to all chapter 3.
market discount bonds you acquire during the • The period for which the choice is being
tax year and in later tax years. You cannot re- made and the obligation to which it ap-Short-term obligations for which no choicevoke your choice without the consent of the IRS. plies; andis available. You must include any discount orFor information on how to revoke your choice, interest in current income as it accrues for any • Any other information necessary to showsee section 32 of the Appendix to Revenue short-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt you are entitled to make this choice.Procedure 2008-52 in Internal Revenue Bulletin obligation) that is:2008-36. You can find this revenue procedure at
www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.html. • Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer; Choosing to include accrued discount and
Also see Election To Report All Interest as other interest in current income. If you ac-• Held primarily for sale to customers in theOID, later. If you make that election, you must quire short-term discount obligations that are notordinary course of your trade or business;use the constant yield method. subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-
• Held by a bank, regulated investment come of the accrued discount or other interest,Effect on basis. You increase the basis of company, or common trust fund; you can choose to have those rules apply. Thisyour bonds by the amount of market discount choice applies to all short-term obligations youyou include in your income. • Held by certain pass-through entities; acquire during the year and in all later years.
• Identified as part of a hedging transaction;Partial principal payments. If you receive a You cannot change this choice without the con-
orpartial payment of principal on a market discount sent of the IRS.
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The procedures to use in making this choice • Make withdrawals in multiples of even 7. You are reporting OID in an amount less
are the same as those described for choosing to amounts, than the amount shown on Form
include acquisition discount instead of OID on 1099-OID.• Give a notice to withdraw before makingnongovernment obligations in current income. the withdrawal, 8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestHowever, you should indicate that you are mak- on a bond you bought between interest• Withdraw all or part of the account to with-ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the payment dates.draw the earnings, orInternal Revenue Code.
9. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987Also see the following discussion. If you • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless and choose to reduce interest income frommake the election to report all interest currently the interest you are to receive on an early the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-as OID, you must use the constant yield method. withdrawal or redemption is substantially mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bondless than the interest payable at maturity. Premium Amortization).Election To Report
List each payer's name and the amount of inter-All Interest as OID Accrual method. If you use an accrual est income received from each payer on line 1. Ifmethod, you report your interest income whenGenerally, you can elect to treat all interest on a you received a Form 1099-INT or Formyou earn it, whether or not you have received it.debt instrument acquired during the tax year as 1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker-Interest is earned over the term of the debtOID and include it in income currently. For pur- age firm as the payer.instrument.poses of this election, interest includes stated You cannot use Form 1040A if you must use
interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis Form 1040, as described next.Example. If, in the previous example, youOID, market discount, de minimis  market dis- use an accrual method, you must include the Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 insteadcount, and unstated interest as adjusted by any interest in your income as you earn it. You would of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if:amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre- report the interest as follows: 2008, $80; 2009,mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3. $249.60; and 2010, $179.20. 1. You forfeited interest income because of
the early withdrawal of a time deposit;
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is
2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987,taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and
you choose to reduce interest income fromWhen To Report payable. It does not matter when you mail the
the bonds by any amortizable bond pre-coupon for payment.
Interest Income mium, and you are deducting the excess of
bond premium amortization for the accrual
Terms you may need to know period over the qualified stated interest for
the period (discussed in chapter 3 under(see Glossary): How To Report Bond Premium Amortization); or
Accrual method Interest Income 3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri-
Cash method vate activity bonds issued after August 7,
Terms you may need to know 1986.
(see Glossary):
When to report your interest income depends on Schedule B. You must complete ScheduleNomineewhether you use the cash method or an accrual B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Formmethod to report income. Original issue discount (OID) 1040 and any of the following apply.
Cash method. Most individual taxpayers use 1. Your taxable interest income is more than
the cash method. If you use this method, you $1,500.Generally, you report all your taxable interest
generally report your interest income in the year income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line 2. You are claiming the interest exclusionin which you actually or constructively receive it. 8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2. under the Education Savings Bond Pro-However, there are special rules for reporting You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest gram (discussed earlier).the discount on certain debt instruments. See income is more than $1,500. Instead, you mustU.S. Savings Bonds  and Discount on Debt In- 3. You received interest from ause Form 1040A or Form 1040.struments, earlier. seller-financed mortgage, and the buyerIn addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if
used the property as a home.you must use Form 1040, as described later, orExample. On September 1, 2008, you if any of the statements listed under Schedule B, 4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com- later, are true. savings bond interest that includespounded annually. You are not in the business
amounts you reported before 2010.of lending money. The note stated that principal Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule B
and interest would be due on August 31, 2010. 5. You received, as a nominee, interest that(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, if you file Form
In 2010, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi- actually belongs to someone else.1040A and any of the following are true. 
pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestmethod, you must include in income on your 1. Your taxable interest income is more than
on frozen deposits.2010 return the $508.80 interest you received in $1,500.
that year. 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
on a bond you bought between interestConstructive receipt. You constructively under the Education Savings Bond Pro-
payment dates.receive income when it is credited to your ac- gram (discussed earlier).
count or made available to you. You do not need 8. You are reporting OID in an amount less3. You received interest from ato have physical possession of it. For example, than the amount shown on Formseller-financed mortgage, and the buyeryou are considered to receive interest, divi- 1099-OID.used the property as a home.dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
9. Statement (2) in the preceding list is true.count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar 4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.
financial institution, or interest on life insurance savings bond interest that includes In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the
policy dividends left to accumulate, when they amounts you reported before 2010. amount received from each. If you received a
are credited to your account and subject to your Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-5. You received, as a nominee, interest thatwithdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.actually belongs to someone else.entered in your passbook.
6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interestYou constructively receive income on the Reporting tax-exempt interest. Total your
on frozen deposits.deposit or account even if you must: tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is being
furnished to the Internal
Revenue Service. If you are
required to file a return, a
negligence penalty or other
sanction may be imposed
on you if this income is
taxable and the IRS
determines that it has not
been reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Interest on U.S. Savings Bonds and Treas. obligations3
$
Federal income tax withheld Investment expenses54
$$
Foreign tax paid6
$
7
Early withdrawal penalty2
$
Interest income1
$ 2010
Specified private activity bond interest9Tax-exempt interest8
$
10 Tax-exempt bond CUSIP no. (see instructions)
$
Foreign country or U.S. possession
OID on certain state and municipal bonds) and Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show
exempt-interest dividends from a mutual fund as 1099-INT will contain an amount if you were interest you do not have to report. See Form
shown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. Add this subject to backup withholding. Report the 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  under
amount to any other tax-exempt interest you amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.
received. Report the total on line 8b of Form Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, line 61. On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,
1040A or Form 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment line 1, report all the interest shown on your Form
enter ªTEIº and the amount in the space to the expenses you may be able to deduct as an 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.
left of line 2. Do not add tax-exempt interest in itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
the total on Form 1040EZ, line 2. ment expenses. 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal
Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subject If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form of all interest listed on line 1.
to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251, 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be 2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. SavingsAlternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al- able to take a credit for the amount shown in box Bond Interest Previously Reportedº andready included in the amount in box 8. Do not 6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this enter amounts previously reported or inter-add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from, amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther est accrued before you received the bond.the amount in box 8. taxes.º To take the credit, you may have to file
Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor- 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotalDo not report interest from an individ- mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit and enter the result on line 2.ual retirement arrangement (IRA) as for Individuals.tax-exempt interest.
CAUTION
!
Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav-Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis-
ings bonds for you when you were a child. TheForm 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income, counted obligation for the part of the year you
bonds were issued in your name, and the inter-except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID.
est on the bonds was reported each year as itTreasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form Include this amount in your total taxable interest
accrued. (See Choice to report interest each1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Form
year under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)interest income you received. You must report 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,
all your taxable interest income even if you do In March 2010, you redeemed one of theearlier.
not receive a Form 1099-INT. Contact your fi- bonds Ð a $1,000 series EE bond. The bondYou must report all taxable OID even if you
nancial institution if you do not receive a Form do not receive a Form 1099-OID. was originally issued in March 1991. When you
1099-INT by February 15. Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable redeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 for
If you forfeited interest income because of interest on the obligation other than OID. Add it.
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- this amount to the OID shown in box 1 and The Form 1099-INT you received shows in-ductible amount will be shown on Form include the result in your total taxable income. terest income of $841.20. However, since the1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with- If you forfeited interest or principal on the interest on your savings bonds was reporteddrawal of savings, later. obligation because of an early withdrawal, the yearly, you need only include the $26.00 interestBox 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the interest deductible amount will be shown in box 3. See that accrued from January 2010 to March 2010.income you received from U.S. savings bonds, Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later. You received no other taxable interest forTreasury bills, Treasury notes, and Treasury Box 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain an 2010. You file Form 1040A.bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3 to any amount if you were subject to backup withhold- On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,other taxable interest income you received, un- ing. Report the amount from box 4 on Form
line 1, enter your interest income as shown onless part of the amount in box 3 was previously 1040EZ, line 7; on Form 1040A, line 38; or on
Form 1099-INT Ð $841.20. (If you had otherincluded in your interest income. If part of the Form 1040, line 61.
taxable interest income, you would enter it nextamount shown in box 3 was previously included Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment
and then enter a subtotal, as described earlier,in your interest income, see U.S. savings bond expenses you may be able to deduct as an
before going to the next step.) Several linesinterest previously reported , later. If you re- itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-
above line 2, enter ªU.S. Savings Bond Interestdeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought after ment expenses.
Previously Reportedº and enter $815.201989 and you paid qualified educational ex-
($841.20 − $26.00). Subtract $815.20 fromU.S. savings bond interest previously re-penses, see Interest excluded under the Educa-
ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for $841.20 and enter $26.00 on line 2. Entertion Savings Bond Program, later.
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$26.00 on Schedule B, line 4, and on Form (the total interest from the date the bond was this subtotal, enter ªFrozen Depositsº and show
1040A, line 8a. purchased to the date of redemption). Since a the amount of interest that you are excluding.
part of the interest was included in your income Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enter
Example 2. Your uncle died and left you a in 2007, you need to include in your 2010 in- the result on line 2.
$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bond come only the interest that accrued after the
Accrued interest on bonds. If you received awhen it reaches maturity. bond was distributed to you.
Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interestOn Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1,Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500
paid on a bond you bought between interestinclude all the interest shown on your Formof the amount you receive upon redemption is
payment dates, include the full amount shown1099-INT as well as any other taxable interestinterest income. Your uncle's executor included
as interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule Bincome you received. Several lines above line 2,in your uncle's final return $200 of the interest
(Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. Then,put a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1.that had accrued at the time of your uncle's
below a subtotal of all interest income listed,Below this subtotal enter ªU.S. Savings Bonddeath. You have to include only $300 in your
enter ªAccrued Interestº and the amount of ac-Interest Previously Reportedº and enter theincome.
crued interest you paid to the seller. Thatamount figured on the worksheet below.The bank where you redeem the bond gives amount is taxable to the seller, not you. Subtractyou a Form 1099-INT showing interest income that amount from the interest income subtotal.of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT A. Enter the amount of cash received Enter the result on line 2 and also on Form 1040,showing taxable interest income of $300 from upon redemption of the bond .. . $97.84 line 8a.your savings account. B. Enter the value of the bond at the For more information, see Bonds Sold Be-time of distribution by the plan .. . $92.80You file Form 1040 and complete Schedule tween Interest Dates, earlier.C. Subtract the amount on line B fromB. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the $500 and
the amount on line A. This is the$300 interest amounts shown on your Forms Nominee distributions. If you received aamount of interest accrued on the1099. Several lines above line 2, you put a Form 1099-INT that includes an amount youbond since it was distributed bysubtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter ªU.S. received as a nominee for the real owner, reportthe plan ................. . $5.04Savings Bond Interest Previously Reportedº and the full amount shown as interest on the FormD. Enter the amount of interest shownenter the $200 interest included in your uncle's 1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule B (Formon your Form 1099-INT ...... . $47.84final return. Subtract the $200 from the subtotal 1040A or 1040). Then, below a subtotal of allE. Subtract the amount on line C fromand enter $600 on line 2. You then complete the interest income listed, enter ªNominee Distribu-the amount on line D. This is therest of the form. tionº and the amount that actually belongs toamount you include in ªU.S.
someone else. Subtract that amount from theSavings Bond Interest PreviouslyWorksheet for savings bonds distributed
interest income subtotal. Enter the result on lineReportedº ............... . $42.80from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. If
2 and also on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040.you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable Subtract $42.80 from the subtotal and enter thedistribution from a retirement or profit-sharing File Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If youresult on Schedule B, line 2. You then completeplan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds , received interest as a nominee in 2010, youthe rest of the form.earlier), your interest income does not include must file a Form 1099-INT for that interest withInterest excluded under the Education Sav-the interest accrued before the distribution and the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with aings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figuretaxed as a distribution from the plan. Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofyour interest exclusion when you redeem quali- U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-Use the worksheet below to figure the fied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- nue Service Center by February 28, 2011amount you subtract from the interest cational expenses during the same year. (March 31, 2011, if you file Form 1099-INT elec-shown on Form 1099-INT.
 For more information on the exclusion and tronically). Give the actual owner of the interestqualified higher educational expenses, see the Copy B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31,earlier discussion under Education Savings 2011. On Form 1099-INT, you should be listedA. Enter the amount of cash received Bond Program.upon redemption of the bond ... . as the ªPayer.º Prepare one Form 1099-INT forYou must show your total interest from quali- each other owner and show that person as thefied savings bonds you cashed during 2010 onB. Enter the value of the bond at the ªRecipient.º However, you do not have to fileForm 8815, line 6, and on Schedule B (Formtime of distribution by the plan ... . Form 1099-INT to show payments for your1040A or 1040). After completing Form 8815, spouse. For more information about the report-enter the result from line 14 (Form 8815) onC. Subtract the amount on line B from ing requirements and the penalties for failure toSchedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 3.the amount on line A. This is the file (or furnish) certain information returns, seeamount of interest accrued on the the General Instructions for Certain InformationInterest on seller-financed mortgage. If anbond since it was distributed by the Returns (Forms 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, 5498,individual buys his or her home from you in aplan .................... . and W2-G).sale that you finance, you must report the
Similar rules apply to OID reported to you asamount of interest received on Schedule BD. Enter the amount of interest shown a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a(Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Include on line 1on your Form 1099-INT ....... . Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show thethe buyer's name, address, and SSN. If you do
proper distributions of the OID.not, you may have to pay a $50 penalty. TheE. Subtract the amount on line C from
the amount on line D. This is the buyer may have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she Example. You and your sister have a jointamount you include in ªU.S. Savings does not give you this information. savings account that paid $1,500 interest forBond Interest Previously Reportedº You must also give your name, address, and 2010. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds inSSN (or employer identification number) to theYour employer should tell you the value of this account, and you and she have agreed tobuyer. If you do not, you may have to pay a $50each bond on the date it was distributed. share the yearly interest income in proportion topenalty. the amount each of you has invested. Because
Example. You received a distribution of se- Frozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form your SSN was given to the bank, you received a
ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2007 1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could Form 1099-INT for 2010 that includes the inter-
from your company's profit-sharing plan. not withdraw at the end of 2010, you must ex- est income earned belonging to your sister. This
In March 2010, you redeemed a $100 series clude these amounts from your gross income. amount is $450, or 30% of the total interest of
EE bond that was part of the distribution you (See Interest income on frozen deposits  under $1,500.
received in 2007. You received $97.84 for the Interest Income , earlier.) Do not include this You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT
bond the company bought in May 1993. The income on line 8a of Form 1040A or 1040. On by January 31, 2011, showing $450 of interest
value of the bond at the time of distribution in Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, in- income she earned for 2010. You must also
2007 was $92.80. (This is the amount you in- clude the full amount of interest shown on your send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT,
cluded on your 2007 return.) The bank gave you Form 1099-INT on line 1. Several lines above along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue
a Form 1099-INT that shows $47.84 interest line 2, put a subtotal of all interest income. Below Service Center by February 28, 2011 (March 31,
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.2011, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically). apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are
Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you subject to the 0% rate.Show your own name, address, and SSN as that
must still report all your taxable dividend in- To qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate,of the ªPayerº on the Form 1099-INT. Show your
come. For example, you may receive distributive all of the following requirements must be met.sister's name, address, and SSN in the blocks
shares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-provided for identification of the ªRecipient.º • The dividends must have been paid by aporations. These dividends are reported to youWhen you prepare your own federal income U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor-on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1tax return, report the total amount of interest poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora-(Form 1120S).income, $1,500, on Schedule B (Form 1040A or tion later.)
1040), Part I, line 1, and identify the name of the Nominees. If someone receives distribu- • The dividends are not of the type listedbank that paid this interest. Show the amount tions as a nominee for you, that person will give later under Dividends that are not qualifiedbelonging to your sister, $450, as a subtraction you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu- dividends.from a subtotal of all interest on Schedule B and tions received on your behalf.
identify this subtraction as a ªNominee Distribu- If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includes • You meet the holding period (discussed
tion.º (Your sister will report the $450 of interest amounts belonging to another person, see Nom- next).
income on her own tax return, if she has to file a inees under How To Report Dividend Income ,
return, and identify you as the payer of that later, for more information. Holding period. You must have held the stockamount.) for more than 60 days during the 121-day periodForm 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-
that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date.ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestOriginal issue discount (OID) adjustment. If
The ex-dividend date is the first date followingreceived by a broker on your behalf must beyou are reporting OID in an amount less than the
the declaration of a dividend on which the buyerreported to you on Form 1099-MISC, Miscella-amount shown on Form 1099-OID or other writ-
of a stock is not entitled to receive the nextneous Income, or a similar statement. See alsoten statement (such as for a REMIC regular
dividend payment. When counting the numberReporting Substitute Payments  under Shortinterest), include the full amount of OID shown
of days you held the stock, include the day youSales in chapter 4.on your Form 1099-OID or other statement on
disposed of the stock, but not the day you ac-Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I, line 1. Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If quired it. See the examples, below.Show OID you do not have to report below a you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
subtotal of the interest and OID listed. Identify Exception for preferred stock. In the caseamount (or other incorrect information), you
the amount as ªOID Adjustmentº and subtract it of preferred stock, you must have held the stockshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. The
from the subtotal. more than 90 days during the 181-day periodnew Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor-
that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend daterected.ºPenalty on early withdrawal of savings. If if the dividends are due to periods totaling moreDividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are dueexchanged, or otherwise disposed of after aor other deferred interest account before matur- to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold-dividend is declared but before it is paid, theity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form ing period in the preceding paragraph applies.owner of record (usually the payee shown on the1099-INT or similar statement given to you by
dividend check) must include the dividend inthe financial institution will show the total Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares ofincome.amount of interest in box 1 and will show the XYZ Corp. common stock on July 8, 2010. XYZ
penalty separately in box 2. You must include in Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents perDividends received in January. If a mutualincome all interest shown in box 1. You can share. The ex-dividend date was July 16, 2010.fund (or other regulated investment company) ordeduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De- Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. showsreal estate investment trust (REIT) declares aduct the entire penalty even if it is more than $500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in boxdividend (including any exempt-interest divi-your interest income. 1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold thedend or capital gain distribution) in October,
5,000 shares on August 11, 2010. You held yourNovember, or December payable to sharehold-
shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of theers of record on a date in one of those months
121-day period (from July 9, 2010, through Au-but actually pays the dividend during January of
Dividends and gust 11, 2010). The 121-day period began onthe next calendar year, you are considered to
May 17, 2010 (60 days before the ex-dividendhave received the dividend on December 31.
Other Distributions date), and ended on September 14, 2010. YouYou report the dividend in the year it was de-
have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-clared.
Dividends are distributions of money, stock, or cause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61
other property paid to you by a corporation or by days.Ordinary Dividendsa mutual fund. You also may receive dividends
through a partnership, an estate, a trust, or an Example 2. Assume the same facts as inOrdinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-association that is taxed as a corporation. How- Example 1 except that you bought the stock onmon type of distribution from a corporation or aever, some amounts you receive called divi- July 15, 2010 (the day before the ex-dividendmutual fund. They are paid out of earnings anddends are actually interest income. (See date), and you sold the stock on September 16,profits and are ordinary income to you. ThisDividends that are actually interest  under Tax- 2010. You held the stock for 63 days (from Julymeans they are not capital gains. You can as-able Interest Ð General, earlier.) 16, 2010, through September 16, 2010). Thesume that any dividend you receive on common
The most common kinds of distributions are: $500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b ofor preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless
your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividendsthe paying corporation or mutual fund tells you• Ordinary dividends, because you held the stock for 61 days of theotherwise. Ordinary dividends will be shown in
• Capital gain distributions, and 121-day period (from July 16, 2010, throughbox 1a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive.
September 14, 2010).• Nondividend distributions.
Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares ofMost distributions are paid in cash (check). Qualified Dividends
ABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 8,However, distributions can consist of more
Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividends 2010. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofstock, stock rights, other property, or services.
subject to the same 0% or 15% maximum tax 10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date was
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form rate that applies to net capital gain. They should July 16, 2010. The ABC Mutual Fund advises
1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show be shown in box 1b of the Form 1099-DIV you you that the portion of the dividend eligible to be
you the distributions you received from them receive. treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per
during the year. Keep this form with your rec- Qualified dividends are subject to the 15% share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual
ords. You do not have to attach it to your tax rate if the regular tax rate that would apply is Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000
return. 25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would and qualified dividends of $200. However, you
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sold the 10,000 shares on August 11, 2010. You corporation instead of receiving the dividends inTable 1-3. Income Tax Treaties
cash. Most mutual funds also permit sharehold-have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual
Income tax treaties that the United States ers to automatically reinvest distributions inFund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund
has with the following countries satisfy more shares in the fund, instead of receivingstock for less than 61 days.
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign cash. If you use your dividends to buy moreHolding period reduced where risk of loss corporation. stock at a price equal to its fair market value, youis diminished. When determining whether still must report the dividends as income.Australia Indonesia Romaniayou met the minimum holding period discussed
If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-Austria Ireland Russianearlier, you cannot count any day during which ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a priceBangladesh Israel Federationyou meet any of the following conditions. less than its fair market value, you must reportBarbados Italy Slovak
as dividend income the fair market value of the1. You had an option to sell, were under a Belgium Jamaica Republic
additional stock on the dividend payment date.contractual obligation to sell, or had made Canada Japan Slovenia
(and not closed) a short sale of substan- You also must report as dividend income anyChina Kazakhstan South Africa
tially identical stock or securities. service charge subtracted from your cash divi-Cyprus Korea Spain
dends before the dividends are used to buy theCzech Latvia Sri Lanka2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to additional stock. But you may be able to deductRepublic Lithuania Swedenbuy substantially identical stock or securi- the service charge. See Expenses of ProducingDenmark Luxembourg Switzerlandties. Income in chapter 3.Egypt Mexico Thailand
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding Estonia Morocco Trinidad and In some dividend reinvestment plans, you
one or more other positions in substantially Finland Netherlands Tobago can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a
similar or related property. France New Zealand Tunisia price less than fair market value. If you choose
Germany Norway Turkey to do this, you must report as dividend incomeFor information about how to apply condition
the difference between the cash you invest andGreece Pakistan Ukraine(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.
the fair market value of the stock you buy. WhenHungary Philippines United
figuring this amount, use the fair market value ofIceland Poland KingdomQualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-
the stock on the dividend payment date.India Portugal Venezuelaporation is a qualified foreign corporation if it
meets any of the following conditions. 
  Money Market Funds1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.
possession. Dividends that are not qualified dividends. Report amounts you receive from money marketThe following dividends are not qualified divi-2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits funds as dividend income. Money market fundsdends. They are not qualified dividends even ifof a comprehensive income tax treaty with are a type of mutual fund and should not bethey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV.the United States that the Treasury De- confused with bank money market accounts that
partment determines is satisfactory for this • Capital gain distributions. pay interest.
purpose and that includes an exchange of • Dividends paid on deposits with mutualinformation program. For a list of those Capital Gain Distributionssavings banks, cooperative banks, credittreaties, see Table 1-3. unions, U.S. building and loan associa- Capital gain distributions (also called capitaltions, U.S. savings and loan associations,3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2) gain dividends) are paid to you or credited tofederal savings and loan associations, andabove, but the stock for which the dividend your account by mutual funds (or other regu-similar financial institutions. (Report theseis paid is readily tradable on an estab- lated investment companies) and real estateamounts as interest income.)lished securities market in the United investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown inStates. See Readily tradable stock, later. • Dividends from a corporation that is a box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from
tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop- the mutual fund or REIT.Exception. A corporation is not a qualified erative during the corporation's tax year in Report capital gain distributions as long-termforeign corporation if it is a passive foreign in- which the dividends were paid or during capital gains, regardless of how long you ownedvestment company during its tax year in which the corporation's previous tax year. your shares in the mutual fund or REIT. Seethe dividends are paid or during its previous tax
Capital gain distributions under How To Report• Dividends paid by a corporation on em-year. Dividend Income, later in this chapter.ployer securities held on the date of record
Controlled foreign corporation (CFC). by an employee stock ownership plan
Dividends paid out of a CFC's earnings and (ESOP) maintained by that corporation. Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
profits that were not previously taxed are quali- and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs• Dividends on any share of stock to thefied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualified keep their long-term capital gains and pay tax onextent you are obligated (whether under aforeign corporation and the other requirements them. You must treat your share of these gainsshort sale or otherwise) to make relatedin this discussion are met. Certain dividends as distributions, even though you did not actu-payments for positions in substantiallypaid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas- ally receive them. However, they are not in-similar or related property.sive foreign investment company but for section cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are
1297(d) of the Internal Revenue Code may be • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if reported to you in box 1a of Form 2439, Notice
you know or have reason to know the pay-treated as qualified dividends. For more infor- to Shareholder of Undistributed Long-Term
ments are not qualified dividends.mation, see Notice 2004-70, which can be found Capital Gains.
at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-44_IRB/ar09.html. Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,• Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, box
of the undistributed capital gains is:1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentReadily tradable stock. Any stock (such as
you know or have reason to know the pay-common, ordinary, or preferred stock), or an • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b),
ments are not qualified dividends.American depositary receipt in respect of that • Gain from qualified small business stockstock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if (section 1202 gain, box 1c), orit is listed on one of the following securities Dividends Used To
markets: the New York Stock Exchange, the • Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d).Buy More StockNASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex- For information about these terms, see Capitalchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin- The corporation in which you own stock may Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan
The tax paid on these gains by the mutualExchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, or lets you choose to use your dividends to buy
fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.the Pacific Exchange, Inc. (through an agent) more shares of stock in the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Basis adjustment. Increase your basis in basis of your stock. After the basis of your stock If you receive taxable stock dividends or
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by stock rights, include their fair market value at thehas been reduced to zero, you must report the
the difference between the gain you report and time of distribution in your income.liquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whether
the credit you claim for the tax paid. you report the gain as a long-term or short-term
Constructive distributions. You must treatcapital gain depends on how long you have held
certain transactions that increase your propor-the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4.Nondividend Distributions tionate interest in the earnings and profits or
Stock acquired at different times. If you assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-A nondividend distribution is a distribution that is acquired stock in the same corporation in more tions of stock or stock rights. These constructivenot paid out of the earnings and profits of a than one transaction, you own more than one distributions are taxable if they have the samecorporation or a mutual fund. You should re- block of stock in the corporation. If you receive result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4),ceive a Form 1099-DIV or other statement
distributions from the corporation in complete or (5) of the above discussion.showing you the nondividend distribution. On
liquidation, you must divide the distribution This treatment applies to a change in yourForm 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution will
among the blocks of stock you own in the follow- stock's conversion ratio or redemption price, abe shown in box 3. If you do not receive such a
ing proportion: the number of shares in that difference between your stock's redemptionstatement, you report the distribution as an ordi-
block over the total number of shares you own. price and issue price, a redemption not treatednary dividend.
Divide distributions in partial liquidation among as a sale or exchange of your stock, and any
that part of the stock redeemed in the partialBasis adjustment. A nondividend distribution other transaction having a similar effect on your
reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed liquidation. After the basis of a block of stock is interest in the corporation.
until your basis in the stock is fully recovered. reduced to zero, you must report the part of any Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.This nontaxable portion is also called a return of later distribution for that block as a capital gain. If you hold preferred stock having a redemptioncapital; it is a return of your investment in the price higher than its issue price, the differenceDistributions less than basis. If the totalstock of the company. If you buy stock in a (the redemption premium) generally is taxableliquidating distributions you receive are lesscorporation in different lots at different times, as a constructive distribution of additional stockthan the basis of your stock, you may have aand you cannot definitely identify the shares on the preferred stock.capital loss. You can report a capital loss onlysubject to the nondividend distribution, reduce
For stock issued before October 10, 1990,after you have received the final distribution inthe basis of your earliest purchases first.
you include the redemption premium in yourliquidation that results in the redemption or can-When the basis of your stock has been re- income ratably over the period during which thecellation of the stock. Whether you report theduced to zero, report any additional nondividend stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedloss as a long-term or short-term capital lossdistribution you receive as a capital gain. after October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-depends on how long you held the stock. SeeWhether you report it as a long-term or tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-Holding Period in chapter 4.short-term capital gain depends on how long crual over the period during which the stockyou have held the stock. See Holding Period in cannot be redeemed, as if it were original issuechapter 4. Distributions of Stock discount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-
and Stock Rights sue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter.Example 1. You bought stock in 1997 for
The redemption premium is not a construc-$100. In 2000, you received a nondividend dis- Distributions by a corporation of its own stock tive distribution, and is not taxable as a result, intribution of $80. You did not include this amount are commonly known as stock dividends. Stock the following situations.in your income, but you reduced the basis of rights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri-
your stock to $20. You received a nondividend butions by a corporation of rights to acquire the 1. The stock was issued before October 10,distribution of $30 in 2010. The first $20 of this corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends 1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-amount reduced your basis to zero. You report and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you deemable solely at the option of the is-the other $10 as a long-term capital gain for do not report them on your return. suer), and the redemption premium is2010. You must report as a long-term capital ªreasonable.º (For stock issued before Oc-gain any nondividend distribution you receive on Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re-this stock in later years. Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights demption premium that is not ªreasonableº
are taxable to you if any of the following apply. is a constructive distribution.) The redemp-Example 2. You bought shares in a mutual tion premium is reasonable if it is not morefund in 2006 for $12 a share. In 2007, you 1. You or any other shareholder have the than 10% of the issue price on stock notreceived a nondividend distribution of $5 a choice to receive cash or other property redeemable for 5 years from the issue dateshare. You reduced your basis in each share by instead of stock or stock rights. or is in the nature of a penalty for making a$5 to an adjusted basis of $7. In 2008, you premature redemption.2. The distribution gives cash or other prop-received a nondividend distribution of $1 per
erty to some shareholders and an increaseshare and further reduced your basis in each 2. The stock was issued after October 9,
in the percentage interest in the corpora-share to $6. In 2009, you received a nondividend 1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem-
tion's assets or earnings and profits todistribution of $2 per share. Your basis was able solely at the option of the issuer), and
other shareholders.reduced to $4. In 2010, the nondividend distribu- the redemption premium is ªde minimis.º
tion from the mutual fund was $5 a share. You The redemption premium is de minimis if it3. The distribution is in convertible preferredreduce your basis in each share to zero and is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of thestock and has the same result as in (2).report the excess ($1 per share) as a long-term redemption price multiplied by the number
4. The distribution gives preferred stock tocapital gain on Schedule D (Form 1040). of full years from the date of issue to the
some common stock shareholders and date redeemable.
common stock to other common stockLiquidating Distributions 3. The stock was issued after October 9,shareholders. 1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui- 5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The fied time or is redeemable at your option,dating dividends, are distributions you receive distribution, however, is not taxable if it is but the redemption is unlikely because it isduring a partial or complete liquidation of a cor- an increase in the conversion ratio of con- subject to a contingency outside your con-poration. These distributions are, at least in part, vertible preferred stock made solely to take trol (not including the possibility of default,one form of a return of capital. They may be paid into account a stock dividend, stock split, insolvency, etc.).in one or more installments. You will receive or similar event that would otherwise resultForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showing 4. The stock was issued after December 19,in reducing the conversion right.)you the amount of the liquidating distribution in 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-
box 8 or 9. The term ªstockº includes rights to acquire tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-
stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes a mium is in the nature of a penalty forAny liquidating distribution you receive is not
holder of rights or convertible securities. premature redemption or redemption is nottaxable to you until you have recovered the
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
more likely than not to occur. The redemp- receive it. If you choose to have the corporation must reduce the basis (cost) of the items
tion will be treated under a ªsafe harborº as sell the certificate for you and give you the pro- bought. If the dividend is more than the
not more likely than not to occur if all of the ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re-
following are true. tween the proceeds and the part of your basis in port the excess as income.
the corporation's stock allocated to the certifi-
a. You and the issuer are not related These rules are the same whether the cooper-cate.
under the rules discussed in chapter 4 ative paying the dividend is a taxable orHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate
under Losses on Sales or Trades of tax-exempt cooperative.that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
Property, substituting ª20%º for ª50%.º of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do notceive it. You must include its fair market value inb. There are no plans, arrangements, or report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-income on the date you receive it.agreements that effectively require or port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Formare intended to compel the issuer to 1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3. redeem the stock. Other Distributions
c. The redemption would not reduce the You may receive any of the following distribu-stock's yield. tions during the year.
How To ReportExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re- dividends you receive from a mutual fund or Dividend Incomeceived in a taxable distribution is their fair market other regulated investment company are not in-
value when distributed. If you receive stock or cluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest
Terms you may need to knowstock rights that are not taxable to you, see dividends should be shown in box 8 of Form
(see Glossary):Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment 1099-INT.
Property in chapter 4 for information on how to Information reporting requirement. Al- Nomineefigure their basis. though exempt-interest dividends are not tax- Restricted stockable, you must show them on your tax return ifFractional shares. You may not own enough
you have to file a return. This is an informationstock in a corporation to receive a full share of
reporting requirement and does not change thestock if the corporation declares a stock divi- Generally, you can use either Form 1040 orexempt-interest dividends to taxable income.dend. However, with the approval of the share- Form 1040A to report your dividend income.See Reporting tax-exempt interest  under Howholders, the corporation may set up a plan in Report the total of your ordinary dividends onTo Report Interest Income, earlier.which fractional shares are not issued but in- line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are given qualified dividends on line 9b.Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex-
to the shareholders. Any cash you receive for empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- If you receive capital gain distributions, you
fractional shares under such a plan is treated as vate activity bonds may be subject to the may be able to use Form 1040A or you may
an amount realized on the sale of the fractional alternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-
shares. You must determine your gain or loss dividends subject to the alternative minimum tax butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri-
and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched- should be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT. butions required to be reported as capital gains,
ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is the See Form 6251 and its instructions for more you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form
difference between the cash you receive and the information. 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income.
basis of the fractional shares sold.
Dividends on insurance policies. Insurance Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichpolicy dividends the insurer keeps and uses toExample. You own one share of common you received $10 or more in dividends and otherpay your premiums are not taxable. However,stock that you bought on January 3, 2001, for distributions, you should receive a Formyou must report as taxable interest income the$100. The corporation declared a common stock 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Forminterest that is paid or credited on dividends leftdividend of 5% on June 30, 2010. The fair mar- 1099-DIV, you must report all your taxable divi-with the insurance company.ket value of the stock at the time the stock dend income. If dividends on an insurance contract (otherdividend was declared was $200. You were paid See Form 1099-DIV for more information onthan a modified endowment contract) are distrib-$10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under how to report dividend income.uted to you, they are a partial return of thea plan described in the above paragraph. You
premiums you paid. Do not include them in yourfigure your gain or loss as follows: Form 1040A or Form 1040. You must com-gross income until they are more than the total of
plete Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II,all net premiums you paid for the contract. (ForFair market value of old stock ... . $200.00 and attach it to your Form 1040A or 1040, if:information on the treatment of a distributionFair market value of stock dividend
from a modified endowment contract, see Distri-(cash received) ............. . + 10.00 • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
bution Before Annuity Starting Date From aFair market value of old stock and box 1a) are more than $1,500, or
stock dividend .............. . $210.00 Nonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi-
• You received, as a nominee, dividendsBasis (cost) of old stock odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and
that actually belong to someone else.after the stock dividend Annuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu-
(($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ........ . $95.24 tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,Basis (cost) of stock dividend 21. you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.(($10 ÷  $210) ×  $100) ......... . + 4.76
Dividends on veterans' insurance. Divi-Total .................... . $100.00 List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- payer's name and the ordinary dividends youCash received .............. .  $10.00 cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on received. If your securities are held by a broker-Basis (cost) of stock dividend .... . − 4.76 dividends left with the Department of Veterans age firm (in ªstreet nameº), list the name of the
Affairs is not taxable. brokerage firm shown on Form 1099-DIV as theGain  $5.24
payer. If your stock is held by a nominee who isPatronage dividends. Generally, patronageBecause you had held the share of stock for the owner of record, and the nominee credited ordividends you receive in money from a coopera-more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend paid you dividends on the stock, show the nametive organization are included in your income.was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is of the nominee and the dividends you receivedDo not include in your income patronagea long-term capital gain. or for which you were credited.dividends you receive on:
Scrip dividends. A corporation that de- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed• Property bought for your personal use, orclares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a
certificate that entitles you to a fractional share. • Capital assets or depreciable property nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
The certificate is generally nontaxable when you bought for use in your business. But you total on Form 1040, line 9a.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to 
the Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a 
return, a negligence 
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you if 
this income is taxable
and the IRS 
determines that it has
not been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
3
$
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation distributionsCash liquidation distributions
$
2b
$$
Form 1099-DIV
98
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
2010
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain2c 2d
$$
Nondividend distributions
6
$
Foreign tax paid 7 Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
Dividends received on restricted stock. Re- on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A is If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-stricted stock is stock you get from your em- different from the amount shown on your Form
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in theployer for services you perform and that is W-2.
Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk Independent contractor. If you received ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-of forfeiture. You do not have to include the restricted stock for services as an independent tions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedvalue of the stock in your income when you contractor, the rules in the previous discussion dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.receive it. However, if you get dividends on re- apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youstricted stock, you must include them in your Investment interest deducted. If you claimreceive on the stock as income fromincome as wages, not dividends. See Restricted a deduction for investment interest, you mayself-employment.Property in Publication 525 for information on have to reduce the amount of your qualifiedrestricted stock dividends. dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% taxQualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Your employer should include these divi- rate. Reduce it by the qualified dividends youdends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofdends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. If choose to include in investment income whenForm 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in boxyou also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi- figuring the limit on your investment interest de-1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add thedends, list them on Schedule B (Form 1040A or duction. This is done on the Qualified Dividendsamount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the1040), line 5, with the other dividends you re- and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Sched-amount in box 1a. Do not include any of theceived. Enter a subtotal of all your dividend ule D Tax Worksheet. For more informationfollowing on line 9b.income several lines above line 6. Below the about the limit on investment interest, see Inter-
subtotal, enter ªDividends on restricted stock est Expenses in chapter 3.• Qualified dividends you received as a
reported as wages on Form 1040 (or Form nominee. See Nominees, later. Capital gain distributions. If you received1040A), line 7,º and enter the dividends included
• Dividends on stock for which you did not capital gain distributions, you report them eitherin your wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form
meet the holding period. See Holding pe- directly on Form 1040, line 13, or on Schedule D1040A. Subtract this amount from the subtotal
riod, earlier under Qualified Dividends. (Form 1040), line 13, depending on your situa-and enter the result on line 6.
tion. Report them on Schedule D (Form 1040),• Dividends on any share of stock to theElection. You can choose to include the line 13, unless both of the following are true.extent you are obligated (whether under avalue of restricted stock in gross income as pay
short sale or otherwise) to make relatedfor services. If you make this choice, report the 1. The only amounts you would have to re-
payments for positions in substantiallydividends on the stock like any other dividends. port on Schedule D (Form 1040) are capi-
similar or related property.List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule B, along tal gain distributions from Form 1099-DIV,
with your other dividends (if the amount of ordi- box 2a (or similar statement).• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only ifnary dividends received from all sources is more you know or have reason to know the pay- 2. You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,than $1,500). If you receive both a Form ments are not qualified dividends. or 2d, of any Form 1099-DIV (or similar1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing these divi- statement).• Payments shown on Form 1099-DIV, boxdends, do not include the dividends in your
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentwages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form If both of the above statements are true, report
you know or have reason to know the pay-1040A. Attach a statement to your Form 1040 or your capital gain distributions directly on Form
Form 1040A explaining why the amount shown ments are not qualified dividends. 1040, line 13, and check the box on that line.
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Also, use the Qualified Dividends and Capital should be listed as the ªPayer.º The other owner purchase price. The rules described in Treat-
Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc- should be listed as the ªRecipient.º You do not, ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you.
tions to figure your tax. however, have to file a Form 1099-DIV to show
payments for your spouse. For more informationUndistributed capital gains. To report un- about the reporting requirements and the penal-distributed capital gains, you must complete ties for failure to file (or furnish) certain informa- REMICs, FASITs,Schedule D (Form 1040) and attach it to your tion returns, see the General Instructions forreturn. Report these gains on Schedule D (Form Certain Information Returns (Forms 1098, 1099, and Other CDOs1040), line 11, column (f), and attach Copy B of 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G) and the Instruc-Form 2439 to your return. Report the tax paid by tions for Form 2439. Holders of interests in real estate mortgage in-the mutual fund on these gains on Form 1040,
vestment conduits (REMICs), financial assetline 71, and check box a on that line. Liquidating distributions. If you receive a securitization investment trusts (FASITs), andThe mutual fund (or other regulated invest- liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation other collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)ment company) or real estate investment trust will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the liqui- must follow special rules for reporting income(REIT) making the distribution should tell you dating distribution in boxes 8 and 9. and any expenses from these investment prod-how much of it is:
ucts.
• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),
or REMICsStripped• Section 1202 gain (box 2c).
A REMIC is an entity formed for the purpose ofPreferred StockFor information about these terms, see Capital holding a fixed pool of mortgages secured byGain Tax Rates in chapter 4. interests in real property. A REMIC issues regu- If the dividend rights are stripped from certain
lar and residual interests to investors. For taxEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section preferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre-
purposes, a REMIC is generally treated as a1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc- ferred stock may have to include amounts in
partnership with the residual interest holderstions the part reported to you as unrecaptured income equal to the amounts that would have
treated as the partners. The regular interests aresection 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified been included if the stock were a bond with OID.
treated as debt instruments.small business stock (section 1202 gain), follow
Stripped preferred stock defined. Strippedthe reporting instructions under Section 1202 REMIC income or loss is not income or loss
preferred stock is any stock that meets both ofExclusion in chapter 4. from a passive activity.
the following tests. For more information about the qualificationsNondividend distributions. Report nondivi-
and tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and thedend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) 1. There has been a separation in ownership interests of investors in a REMIC, see sectionsonly after your basis in the stock has been re- between the stock and any dividend on the 860A through 860G of the Internal Revenueduced to zero. After the basis of your stock has stock that has not become payable. Code, and the regulations under those sections.been reduced to zero, you must show this 2. The stock:amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you held
the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D, a. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, Regular InterestPart II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than
b. Does not participate in corporate growth1 year. Enter ªNondividend Distribution Exceed- A REMIC can have several classes (also knownto any significant extent, anding Basisº in column (a) of Schedule D and the as ªtranchesº) of regular interests. A regularname of the company. Report your gain in col- c. Has a fixed redemption price. interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re-umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu- ceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-tion that is more than your basis in the stock. lar amount).Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre-Nominees. If you received ordinary dividends A REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in-as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in your instrument for income tax purposes. Accord-clude certain amounts in your gross incomename but actually belong to someone else), ingly, the OID, market discount, and incomewhile you hold the stock. These amounts areinclude them on line 5 of Schedule B (Form reporting rules that apply to bonds and otherordinary income. They are equal to the amounts1040A or 1040). Several lines above line 6, put a debt instruments as described earlier in thisyou would have included in gross income if thesubtotal of all dividend income listed on line 5. publication under Discount on Debt Instrumentsstock were a bond that:Below this subtotal, enter ªNominee Distribu- apply, with certain modifications discussed be-
tionº and show the amount received as a nomi- low.1. Was issued on the purchase date of the
nee. Subtract the total of your nominee stock, and Generally, you report your income from a
distributions from the subtotal. Enter the result regular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For more2. Has OID equal to:on line 6. information on how to report interest and OID,
If you received a capital gain distribution or see How To Report Interest Income, earlier.a. The redemption price for the stock, mi-were allocated an undistributed capital gain as a nusnominee, report only the amount that belongs to Holders must use accrual method. Holdersb. The price at which you bought theyou on Form 1040A, line 10; Form 1040, line 13; of regular interests must use an accrual methodstock.or Schedule D (Form 1040), line 13, whichever of accounting to report OID and interest income.is appropriate. Attach a statement to your return Because income under an accrual method is notReport these amounts as other income onshowing the full amount you received or were determined by the receipt of cash, you may haveForm 1040, line 21. For information about OID,allocated and the amount you received or were to include OID or interest income in your taxablesee Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.allocated as a nominee. income even if you have not received any cashThis treatment also applies to you if you payments.File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you acquire the stock in such a way (for example, byreceived dividends as a nominee in 2010, you gift) that your basis in the stock is determined by Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldmust file a Form 1099-DIV (or Form 2439) for using a buyer's basis. receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Formthose dividends with the IRS. Send the Form
1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receive1099-DIV with a Form 1096, Annual Summary Treatment of person stripping stock. If you
a written statement by March 15, 2011 (if youand Transmittal of U.S. Information Returns, to strip the rights to one or more dividends from
are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesyour Internal Revenue Service Center by Febru- stripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav-
additional information. The statement shouldary 28, 2011 (March 31, 2011, if you file form ing purchased the stock. You are treated as
contain enough information to enable you to1099-DIV electronically). Give the actual owner making the purchase on the date you disposed
figure your accrual of market discount or amor-of the dividends Copy B of the Form 1099-DIV of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the
tizable bond premium.by January 31, 2011. On Form 1099-DIV, you stripped preferred stock is treated as your
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-INT shows interest income that divided into different classes (also calledResidual Interest
accrued to you for the period you held the regu- ªtranchesº).
A residual interest is an interest in a REMIC thatlar interest. CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-is not a regular interest. It is designated as a gages, automobile loans, equipment leases, orForm 1099-OID shows OID and interest, if residual interest by the REMIC. credit card receivables.any, that accrued to you for the period you held
If you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC,the regular interest. You will not need to make For more information about the qualifications
you must take into account on a quarterly basisany adjustments to the amounts reported even if and the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of ayour daily portion of the taxable income or netyou held the regular interest for only a part of the CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internalloss of the REMIC for each day during the taxcalendar year. However, if you bought the regu- Revenue Code and the regulations under thatyear you hold the residual interest. You mustlar interest at a premium or acquisition premium, section.report these amounts as ordinary income orsee Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID The OID, market discount, and in-loss.under Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. come-reporting rules that apply to bonds and
other debt instruments, as described earlier inYou may not get a Form 1099. Corpora- Basis in the residual interest. Your basis intions and other persons specified in Regulations this chapter under Discount on Debt Instru-the residual interest is increased by taxable in-section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099. ments, also apply to a CDO.come you take into account. Your basis is de-These persons and fiscal year taxpayers may You must include interest income from yourcreased (but not below zero) by the cash or theobtain tax information by contacting the REMIC CDO in your gross income under your regularfair market value of any property distributed toor the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter- method of accounting. Also include any OIDyou, and by any net loss you have taken intoest directly from the REMIC or issuer of the accrued on your CDO during the tax year.account. If you sell your residual interest, youCDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgage must adjust your basis to reflect your share of Generally, you report your income from aInvestment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor- the REMIC's taxable income or net loss immedi- CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-mation, explains how to request this information. ately before the sale. See Wash Sales, in chap- tion about reporting these amounts on your re-
ter 4, for more information about selling aPublication 938 is available only on the turn, see How To Report Interest Income ,
residual interest.Internet at IRS.gov. earlier.
Treatment of distributions. You must in- Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldclude in your gross income the part of any distri- receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or FormIf you hold a regular interest or CDO through bution that is more than your adjusted basis. 1099-OID. You will also receive a written state-a nominee (rather than directly), you can re- Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or ment by March 15, 2011, that provides addi-quest the information from the nominee. exchange of your residual interest. tional information. The statement should contain
enough information about the CDO to enableAllocated investment expenses. Regular in- Schedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual you to figure your accrual of market discount orterest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form amortizable bond premium.deduct the REMIC's investment expenses, but 1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interestonly if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. A Form 1099-INT shows the interest incomeHolder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Losssingle-class REMIC is one that generally would paid to you for the period you held the CDO.Allocation, and instructions from the REMICbe classified as a trust for tax purposes if it had Form 1099-OID shows the OID accrued toeach quarter. Schedule Q will indicate yournot elected REMIC status. you and the interest, if any, paid to you for theshare of the REMIC's quarterly taxable income
The single-class REMIC will report your period you held the CDO. You should not need(or loss). Do not attach Schedule Q to your tax
share of its investment expenses in box 5 of return. Keep it for your records. to make any adjustments to the amounts re-
Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. It ported even if you held the CDO for only a part ofUse Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, towill also include this amount in box 1 of Form the calendar year. However, if you bought thereport your total share of the REMIC's taxable1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on the CDO at a premium or acquisition premium, seeincome (or loss) for each quarter included inadditional written statement. Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID underyour tax year.
Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier.You may be able to take a deduction for For more information about reporting yourthese expenses subject to a 2% limit that also If you did not receive a Form 1099, see Youincome (or loss) from a residual interest in aapplies to certain other miscellaneous itemized may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier.REMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) anddeductions. See chapter 3 for more information. Schedule E (Form 1040) instructions.
FASITsRedemption of regular interests at maturity. Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-Redemption of debt instruments at their maturity A financial asset securitization investment trustgross-income limit, you may be able to claim ais treated as a sale or exchange. You must (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga-miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or-report redemptions on your tax return whether or tions such as credit card receivables, home eq-dinary and necessary expenses you paid or in-not you realize gain or loss on the transaction. uity loans, and automobile loans.curred in connection with your investment in aYour basis is your adjusted issue price, which REMIC. These expenses may include certain A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as aincludes any OID you previously reported in expense items incurred by the REMIC and debt instrument. The rules described under Col-income. passed through to you. The REMIC will report lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-
Any amount you receive on the retirement of these expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. ply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a
a debt instrument is treated as if you had sold or See chapter 3 for information on how to report holder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use
exchanged that instrument. A debt instrument is these expenses. an accrual method of accounting to report OID
retired when it is reacquired or redeemed by the and interest income.
issuer and canceled. Collateralized Debt For more information about FASITs, see
Sale or exchange of a regular interest. sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-Obligations (CDOs)
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a enue Code.
A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debtREMIC regular interest may be ordinary income. Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialinstrument, other than a REMIC regular interest,The ordinary income part, if any, is: rules for FASITs are repealed. How-that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other• The amount that would have been in- ever, the special rules still apply to any
CAUTION
!evidence of debt and that has principal pay-cluded in your income if the yield to matur- FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to thements subject to acceleration. (Note: Whileity on the regular interest had been 110% extent that regular interests issued by the FASITREMIC regular interests are collateralized debtof the applicable federal rate at the begin- before that date continue to remain outstandingobligations, they have unique rules that do notning of your holding period, minus in accordance with the original terms of issu-apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs, also ance.• The amount you included in your income. known as ªpay-through bonds,º are commonly
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committee The club's expenses for producing or collect-
ing income, for managing investment property,that gathers information on securities, selectsS Corporations
or for determining any tax are listed separatelythe most promising securities, and recommends
on Schedule K-1. Each individual partner whothat the club invest in them. Other clubs rotateIn general, an S corporation does not pay a tax
itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)these responsibilities among all their members.on its income. Instead, its income and expenses
can deduct his or her share of those expenses.Most clubs require all members to vote for orare passed through to the shareholders, who
The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 23,against all investments, sales, trades, and otherthen report these items on their own income tax
along with other miscellaneous deductions sub-transactions.returns.
ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3  for moreIf you are an S corporation shareholder, your Identifying number. Each club must have an information on the 2% limit.share of the corporation's current year income employer identification number (EIN) to use For more information about reporting youror loss and other tax items are taxed to you when filing its return. The club's EIN also may income from a partnership, see the Schedulewhether or not you receive any amount. Gener- have to be given to the payer of dividends or K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part-ally, those items increase or decrease the basis nerships.other income from investments recorded in theof your S corporation stock as appropriate. For
club's name. To obtain an EIN, file Form SS-4,more information on basis adjustments for S Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatApplication for Employer Identification Number.corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds under limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofSee chapter 5 of this publication for more infor-Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4. Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructionsmation about how to get this form.Generally, S corporation distributions, ex- will tell you where on your return to report your
cept dividend distributions, are considered a re- share of partnership items from passive activi-Investments in name of member. When
turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stock ties. If you have a passive activity loss from aan investment is recorded in the name of one
of the corporation. The part of any distribution partnership, you must complete Form 8582 toclub member, this member must give his or her
that is more than your basis is treated as a gain figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterSSN to the payer of investment income. (When
from the sale or exchange of property. The cor- on your tax return.an investment is held in the names of two or
poration's distributions may be in the form of more club members, the SSN of only one mem- No social security coverage for investmentcash or property. ber must be given to the payer.) This member is club earnings. If an investment club partner-S corporation distributions are not treated as considered the record owner for the actual ship's activities are limited to investing in sav-dividends except in certain cases in which the owner, the investment club. This member is a ings certificates, stock, or securities, andcorporation has accumulated earnings and prof- ªnomineeº and must file an information return collecting interest or dividends for its members'its from years before it became an S corporation. with the IRS. For example, the nominee member accounts, a member's share of income is notmust file Form 1099-DIV for dividend income, earnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-Reporting S corporation income, deduc- showing the club as the owner of the dividend, untarily pay the self-employment tax to increasetions, and credits. The S corporation should his or her SSN, and the EIN of the club. your social security coverage and ultimate bene-send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) fits.showing your share of the S corporation's in- Tax Treatment of the Clubcome, credits, and deductions for the tax year.
You must report your distributive share of the S Generally, an investment club is treated as a Club as a Corporationcorporation's income, gain, loss, deductions, or partnership for federal tax purposes unless itcredits on the appropriate lines and schedules of chooses otherwise. In some situations, how- An investment club formed after 1996 is taxedyour Form 1040. ever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. as a corporation if:
For more information about your treatment of
• It is formed under a federal or state lawS corporation tax items, see Shareholder's In- Clubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, the that refers to it as incorporated or as astructions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). rules for determining how an investment club is corporation, body corporate, or body poli-treated were different from those explained inLimit on losses and deductions. The de- tic,the following discussions. An investment clubduction for your share of losses and deductions
that existed before 1997 is treated for later years • It is formed under a state law that refers toshown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limited
the same way it was treated before 1997, unless it as a joint-stock company or joint-stockto the adjusted basis of your stock and any debt
it chooses to be treated a different way under the association, orthe corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
new rules. To make that choice, the club mustnot allowed because of this limit is carried over • It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.and treated as a loss or deduction in the next tax
year.
Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. To
Passive activity losses. Rules apply that Club as a Partnership choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club
limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) orIf your club is not taxed as a corporation or aSchedule K-1 and its instructions will explain the otherwise subject to special treatment under thetrust, it will be treated as a partnership.limits and tell you where on your return to report tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to make
your share of S corporation items from passive the choice.Filing requirement. If your investment club isactivities.
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as atreated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
Form 8582. If you have a passive activity corporation, it must file Form 1120. In that case,However, as a partner in the club, you must
loss from an S corporation, you must complete you do not report any of its income or expensesreport on your individual return your share of the
Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, to on your individual return. All ordinary incomeclub's income, gains, losses, deductions, and
figure the allowable loss to enter on your return. and expenses and capital gains and losses mustcredits for the club's tax year. (Its tax year gener-
See Publication 925 for more information. be reported on the Form 1120. Any distributionally must be the same tax year as that of the
the club makes that qualifies as a dividend mustpartners owning a majority interest.) You must
be reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distribu-report these items whether or not you actually
tions to the shareholder are $10 or more for thereceive any distribution from the partnership.
Investment Clubs year.
Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy of You must report any distributions you re-
An investment club is formed when a group of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of ceive from the club on your individual return.
friends, neighbors, business associates, or Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIV
others pool their money to invest in stock or nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1 from the club showing the distributions you re-
other securities. The club may or may not have a are your share of the partnership's income, de- ceived.
written agreement, a charter, or bylaws. ductions, and credits. Report each amount on Some corporations can choose not to be
the appropriate lines and schedules of your in-Usually the group operates informally with taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-
come tax return.members pledging to pay a regular amount into ers. See S Corporations, earlier.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about corporations, • Penalties that may apply. • Is there a nontax justification for the way
see Publication 542, Corporations. profits and losses are allocated to part-
ners?Useful Items
• Do the facts and supporting documentsClub as a Trust You may want to see: make economic sense? In that connec-
tion, are there sales and resales of the taxIn a few cases, an investment club is taxed as a Publication
shelter property at ever increasing prices?trust. In general, a trust is an arrangement
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsthrough which trustees take title to property for • Does the investment plan involve a gim-the purpose of protecting or conserving it for the mick, device, or sham to hide the eco-❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appealbeneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied in Rights, and Claims for Refund nomic reality of the transaction?chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is
❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donatedtreated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose • Does the promoter offer to backdate docu-
Propertyis to vest in trustees responsibility for protecting ments after the close of the year? Are you
and conserving property for beneficiaries who instructed to backdate checks covering❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulescannot share in that responsibility and so are not your investment?
associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct of Form (and Instructions) • Is your debt a real debt or are you assuredbusiness for profit. If you need more information by the promoter that you will never have toabout trusts, see Regulations section ❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement pay it?301.7701-4.
❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement • Does this transaction involve laundering
United States source income through for-❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable ContributionsFiling requirement. If your club is taxed as a
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha-trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receive ❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure ven and owned by United Statesa copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from the Statement shareholders?trust. Report the amounts shown on Schedule
K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules of See chapter 5  for information about getting
your income tax return. these publications and forms. Rules To Curb 
Abusive Tax Shelters
Congress has enacted a series of income tax
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxAbusive Tax Shelters
shelters. These provisions include the following.
Abusive tax shelters are marketing schemes Disclosure of reportable transactions.involving artificial transactions with little or no You must disclose information for each reporta-economic reality. They often make use of un- ble transaction in which you participate. Seerealistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses2. Reportable Transaction Disclosure Statement ,in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- later.matching of income and deductions, financing
Material advisors with respect to any reporta-techniques that do not conform to standard com-
ble transaction must disclose information aboutTax Shelters and mercial business practices, or mischaracteriza-
the transaction on Form 8918, Material Advisortion of the substance of the transaction. Despite
Disclosure Statement. This requirement appliesappearances to the contrary, the taxpayer gen-Other to material advisors who provide material aid,erally risks little.
assistance, or advice on any reportable transac-Abusive tax shelters commonly involve tion after October 22, 2004.Reportable package deals designed from the start to gener-
Material advisors will receive a reportableate losses, deductions, or credits that will be far
transaction number for the disclosed reportablemore than present or future investment. Or, theyTransactions transaction. They must provide this number tomay promise investors from the start that future
all persons to whom they acted as a materialinflated appraisals will enable them, for exam-
advisor. They must provide the number at theple, to reap charitable contribution deductions
time the transaction is entered into. If they do notbased on those appraisals. (But see the ap-Introduction
have the number at that time, they must providepraisal requirements discussed under Rules ToInvestments that yield tax benefits are some- it within 60 days from the date the number isCurb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) They aretimes called ªtax shelters.º In some cases, Con- mailed to them. For information on penalties forcommonly marketed in terms of the ratio of taxgress has concluded that the loss of revenue is failure to disclose and failure to maintain lists,deductions allegedly available to each dollar in-an acceptable side effect of special tax provi- see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707,vested. This ratio (or ªwrite-offº) is frequentlysions designed to encourage taxpayers to make said to be several times greater than 6707A, and 6708.certain types of investments. In many cases, one-to-one. Requirement to maintain list. Material ad-however, losses from tax shelters produce little Because there are many abusive tax shel- visors must maintain a list of persons to whomor no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are ters, it is not possible to list all the factors you they provide material aid, assistance, or adviceexaggerated beyond those intended. Those should consider in determining whether an offer- on any reportable transaction after October 22,cases are called ªabusive tax shelters.º An in- ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you 2004. Before October 23, 2004, organizers andvestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- should ask the following questions, which might sellers who acted as material advisors with re-ject to restrictions, including the requirement provide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan. spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter (in-that it be disclosed, as discussed later.
cluding a reportable transaction, discussed• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco-
later) were required to maintain a list of personsTopics nomic benefits?
involved in the tax shelter. The list must beThis chapter discusses: • Is this a transaction you would seriously available for inspection by the IRS, and the infor-consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you mation required to be included on the list gener-• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, hoped to make a profit? ally must be kept for 7 years. See Regulations• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax section 301.6112-1 for more information (includ-• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so,shelters, ing what information is required to be includedare they insured for less than their
on the list).• Investor's reporting requirements, and purchase price?
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Confidentiality privilege. The confidential- not compromise even if you or your representa- under conditions of confidentiality if the advisor
tive believes you have authority for the positionsity privilege between you and a federally author- who is paid the fee places a limit on your disclo-
taken on your tax return.ized tax practitioner does not apply to written sure of the tax treatment or tax structure of the
communications made after October 21, 2004, transaction and the limit protects the confidenti-The courts have generally been un-regarding the promotion of your direct or indirect ality of the advisor's tax strategies. The transac-sympathetic to taxpayers involved inparticipation in any tax shelter. tion is treated as confidential even if theabusive tax shelter schemes and have
CAUTION
! conditions of confidentiality are not legally bind-Appraisal requirement for donated prop- ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the ing on you.cases in which these shelters have been chal-erty. If you claim a deduction of more than
lenged.$5,000 for an item or group of similar items of Transaction with contractual protection.
donated property, you generally must get a qual- Generally, a transaction with contractual protec-
ified appraisal from a qualified appraiser and tion is one in which you or a related party has theInvestor Reportingcomplete and attach section B of Form 8283 to right to a full or partial refund of fees if all or part
your tax return. If you claim a deduction of more of the intended tax consequences of the trans-You may be required to file a reportable transac-
than $500,000 for the donated property, you action are not sustained, or a transaction fortion disclosure statement.
generally must attach the qualified appraisal to which the fees are contingent on your realizing
your tax return. For more information about ap- the tax benefits from the transaction. For infor-
praisals, including exceptions, see Publication mation on exceptions, see Revenue ProcedureReportable Transaction Disclosure
561. 2007-20 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2007-7,Statement
available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-07_IRB/ar15.Passive activity loss and credit limits. Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each html.The passive activity loss and credit rules limit the reportable transaction in which you participated.amount of losses and credits that can be Loss transaction. For individuals, a lossGenerally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourclaimed from passive activities and limit the transaction is one that results in a deductiblereturn for each tax year in which you participatedamount that can offset nonpassive income, such loss if the gross amount of the loss is at least $2in the transaction. Under certain circumstances,as certain portfolio income from investments. million in a single tax year or $4 million in anya transaction must be disclosed within 90 daysFor more detailed information about determining combination of tax years. A loss from a foreignof the transaction being identified as a listedand reporting income, losses, and credits from currency transaction under Internal Revenuetransaction or a transaction of interest. In addi-passive activities, see Publication 925. Code section 988 is a loss transaction if thetion, for the first year Form 8886 is attached to gross amount of the loss is at least $50,000 in ayour return, you must send a copy of the form to:Interest on penalties. If you are assessed single tax year, whether or not the loss flowsan accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty (as Internal Revenue Service through from an S corporation or partnership.discussed under Penalties, later), interest will be OTSA Mail Stop 4915 Certain losses (such as losses from casual-imposed on the amount of the penalty from the 1973 North Rulon White Blvd. ties, thefts, and condemnations) are excepteddue date of the return (including any extensions) Ogden, Utah 84404 from this category and do not have to be re-to the date you pay the penalty. ported on Form 8886. For information on other
If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or failAccounting method restriction. Tax shel- exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 in
to include any required information on the form,ters generally cannot use the cash method of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or future
you may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty foraccounting. published guidance) available at www.irs.gov/
failure to disclose a reportable transaction, later irb/2004-50_IRB/ar11.html.Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform under Penalties.capitalization rules generally apply to producing Transaction of interest. A transaction ofThe following discussion briefly describes re-property or acquiring it for resale. Under those interest is a transaction entered into after No-portable transactions. For more details, see therules, the direct cost and part of the indirect cost vember 1, 2006, that is the same as or substan-Instructions for Form 8886.of the property must be capitalized or included in tially similar to one of the types of transactions
Reportable transaction. A reportable trans-inventory. For more information, see Publication that the IRS has identified by notice, regulation,
action is any of the following.538. or other form of published guidance as a trans-
action of interest. As of the date this publication• A listed transaction.Denial of deduction for interest on an un-
was prepared for print, the IRS has identified thederpayment due to a reportable transaction. • A confidential transaction. following transactions of interest.You cannot deduct any interest you paid or ac-
• A transaction with contractual protection.crued on any part of an underpayment of tax due • ªTogglingº grantor trusts as described in
to an understatement arising from a reportable Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-• A loss transaction.transaction (discussed later) if the relevant facts able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar20.• A transaction of interest entered into afteraffecting the tax treatment of the item are not html.November 1, 2006.adequately disclosed. This rule applies to re-
• Certain transactions involving contribu-portable transactions entered into in tax years
tions of a successor member interest in abeginning after October 22, 2004.
limited liability company as described inNote. Transactions with a brief asset hold-
Notice 2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, avail-ing period were removed from the definition of
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar19.reportable transaction for transactions enteredAuthority for Disallowance of Tax
html.into after August 2, 2007.Benefits
• Certain transactions involving the sale orListed transaction. A listed transaction isThe IRS has published guidance concluding that other disposition of all interests in a chari-the same as or substantially similar to one of thethe claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax table remainder trust and claiming little ortypes of transactions the IRS has determined toshelters should be disallowed. The guidance is no taxable gain as described in Noticebe a tax-avoidance transaction. These transac-the conclusion of the IRS on how the law is 2008-99, 2008-47 I.R.B. 1194, available attions have been identified in notices, regula-applied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is www.irs.gov/irb/2008-47_IRB/ar11.html.tions, and other published guidance issued bypublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for the IRS. For a list of existing guidance, see • Certain transactions involving a U.S. tax-taxpayers' information and also for use by IRS Notice 2009-59 in Internal Revenue Bulletin payer owning controlled foreign corpora-officials. So, if your return is examined and an 2009-31, available at www.irs.gov/irb/ tions (CFC) that hold stock of a lower-tierabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged, 2009-31_IRB/ar07.html. CFC through a domestic partnership topublished guidance dealing with that type of
avoid reporting income as described inshelter, which disallows certain claimed tax Confidential transaction. A confidential
Notice 2009-7, 2009-3 I.R.B. 312, avail-shelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the transaction is offered to you under conditions of
able at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-03_IRB/ar10.examining official's challenge of the tax benefits confidentiality and for which you have paid an
html.you claimed. In such a case, the examiner will advisor a minimum fee. A transaction is offered
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For updates to this list, go to www.irs.gov/ • You make an adequate disclosure of your • The transaction changes your economic
businesses/corporations and click on ªAbusive position in a meaningful way (apart fromposition.
Tax Shelters and Transactions.º Federal income tax effects), orUse Form 8275 to make your disclosure and
• You have a substantial purpose (apartattach it to your tax return. To disclose a positionPenalties from Federal income tax effects) for enter-contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Use
ing into the transaction.Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transactionInvesting in an abusive tax shelter may be an
(discussed earlier).expensive proposition when you consider all the For purposes of determining whether eco-consequences. First, the promoter generally Substantial understatement of tax. An nomic substance exists, a transaction's profitcharges a substantial fee. If your return is ex- understatement is considered to be substantial if potential will only be taken into account if theamined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter- it is more than the greater of: present value of the reasonably expectedmined, you will be faced with payment of more pre-tax profit from the transaction is substantial• 10% of the tax required to be shown ontax, interest on the underpayment, possibly a compared to the present value of the expectedthe return, or20%, 30%, or even 40% accuracy-related pen-
net tax benefits that would be allowed if thealty, or a 75% civil fraud penalty. You may also • $5,000. transaction were respected.be subject to the penalty for failure to pay tax.
An ªunderstatementº is the amount of tax re- If any part of your underpayment is due toThese penalties are explained in the following
quired to be shown on your return for a tax year any disallowance of claimed tax benefits by rea-paragraphs.
son of a transaction lacking economic sub-minus the amount of tax shown on the return,
Accuracy-related penalties. An accuracy- stance or failing to meet the requirements of anyreduced by any rebates. The term ªrebateº gen-
related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un- similar rule of law, that part of your underpay-erally means a decrease in the tax shown on
derpayments of tax due to: ment will be subject to the 20% accuracy-relatedyour original return as the result of your filing an
penalty even if you had a reasonable cause andamended return or claim for refund.• Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- acted in good faith concerning that part.tions, For items other than tax shelters, you can file Additionally, the penalty increases to 40% ifForm 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items• Substantial understatement of tax, you do not adequately disclose on your return orthat could cause a substantial understatement in a statement attached to your return the rele-• Substantial valuation misstatement (in- of income tax. In that way, you can avoid the vant facts affecting the tax treatment of a trans-creased to 40% for gross valuation mis- substantial understatement penalty if you have a action that lacks economic substance. Relevantstatement), reasonable basis for your position on the tax facts include any facts affecting the tax treat-• Transaction lacking economic substance issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax ment of the transaction.(increased to 40% for undisclosed trans- return does not reduce the amount of the under-
Any excessive amount of an erroneousaction lacking economic substance), or statement.
claim for an income tax refund or creditAlso, the understatement penalty will not be• Undisclosed foreign financial asset under- (other than a refund or credit related to
CAUTION
!imposed if you can show there was reasonablestatement (40% in all cases). the earned income credit) that results from acause for the underpayment caused by the un- transaction found to be lacking economic sub-Except for a transaction lacking economic sub- derstatement and that you acted in good faith. stance will not be treated as having a reasona-stance, this penalty will not be imposed if you An important factor in establishing reasonablecan show you had reasonable cause for any ble basis and could be subject to a 20% penalty.cause and good faith will be the extent of yourunderstatement of tax and that you acted in effort to determine your proper tax liability under Undisclosed foreign financial asset under-good faith. Your failure to disclose a reportable
the law. statement. For tax years beginning aftertransaction is a strong indication that you failed
March 18, 2010, you may be liable for a 40%to act in good faith. Substantial valuation misstatement. In penalty for an understatement of your tax liabilitygeneral, you are liable for a 20% penalty for aIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen- due to an undisclosed foreign financial asset. Ansubstantial valuation misstatement if all the fol-alty, interest will be imposed on the amount of undisclosed foreign financial asset is any assetlowing are true.the penalty from the due date of the return (in- for which an information return, required to becluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- • The value or adjusted basis of any prop- provided under Internal Revenue Code sectionalty. 6038, 6038B, 6038D, 6046A, or 6048 for anyerty claimed on the return is 150% or moreThe 20% penalties do not apply to any un- taxable year, is not provided. The penalty ap-of the correct amount.derpayment attributable to a reportable transac- plies to any part of an underpayment related to• You underpaid your tax by more thantion understatement subject to an the following undisclosed foreign financial as-$5,000 because of the misstatement.accuracy-related penalty (discussed later). sets.
• You cannot establish that you had reason-Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- • Any foreign business you control, reporta-tions. The penalty for negligence or disregard able cause for the underpayment and that ble on Form 5471 or Form 8865.of rules or regulations is imposed only on the you acted in good faith.
• Certain transfers of property to a foreignpart of the underpayment due to negligence or
corporation or partnership, reportable ondisregard of rules or regulations. The penalty will You may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a
not be charged if you can show you had reason- Form 926, or certain distributions to a for-gross valuation misstatement. If you misstate
able cause for understating your tax and that eign person, reportable on Form 8865.the value or the adjusted basis of property by
you acted in good faith. 200% or more of the amount determined to be • Your ownership interest in certain foreign Negligence includes any failure to make a correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%, financial assets, temporarily reportable onreasonable attempt to comply with the provi- instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid Form 8275 or 8275-R.sions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- because of the gross valuation misstatement.
cludes any failure to keep adequate books and • Your acquisition, disposition, or substantialThe penalty rate is also 40% if the property's
records. A return position that has a reasonable change in ownership interest in a foreigncorrect value or adjusted basis is zero.basis is not negligence. partnership, reportable on Form 8865.
Transaction lacking economic substance.Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or • Creation or transfer of money or propertyThe economic substance doctrine only appliesintentional disregard of rules or regulations. to certain foreign trusts, reportable onto an individual that entered into a transaction inThe penalty for disregard of rules and regula- Form 3520.connection with a trade or business or an activitytions can be avoided if all the following are true.
engaged in for the production of income. For• You keep adequate books and records. transactions entered into after March 30, 2010, Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The person
a transaction has economic substance for you who prepares an appraisal of the value of prop-• You have a reasonable basis for your po-
sition on the tax issue. as an individual taxpayer only if: erty may have to pay a penalty if:
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• He or she knows, or reasonably should • The passive activity loss limits,Whether To Invest
have known, that the appraisal would be • The limit on investment interest, orused in connection with a return or claim In light of the adverse tax consequences and the
• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneousfor refund; and substantial amount of penalties and interest that
itemized deductions.will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-• The claimed value of the property on a lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-return or claim for refund based on that The at-risk rules and passive activity rules arements carefully and seek competent legal andappraisal results in a substantial valuation explained briefly in this section. The limit onfinancial advice.misstatement or a gross valuation mis- investment interest  is explained later in thisstatement as discussed earlier. chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is
explained later in this chapter under ExpensesFor details on the penalty amount and excep-
of Producing Income.tions, see Publication 561.
At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply toPenalty for failure to disclose a reportable most income-producing activities. These rulestransaction. If you fail to include any required 3. limit the amount of loss you can deduct to theinformation regarding a reportable transaction amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally,(discussed earlier) on a return or statement, you this is the cash and the adjusted basis of prop-may have to pay a penalty of 75% of the de- erty you contribute to the activity. It also includescrease in tax shown on your return as a result of Investment money you borrow for use in the activity if yousuch transaction (or that would have resulted if are personally liable for repayment or if you usethe transaction were respected for Federal tax property not used in the activity as security forExpensespurposes). For an individual, the minimum pen- the loan. For more information, see Publication
alty is $5,000 and the maximum is $10,000 (or 925.
$100,000 for a listed transaction. This penalty is Terms you may need to know Passive activity losses and credits. Thein addition to any other penalty that may be (see Glossary): amount of losses and tax credits you can claimimposed.
from passive activities is limited. Generally, youThe IRS may rescind or abate the penalty for At-risk rules are allowed to deduct passive activity lossesfailing to disclose a reportable transaction under only up to the amount of your passive activityPassive activitycertain limited circumstances but cannot rescind income. Also, you can use credits from passivethe penalty for failing to disclose a listed transac- Portfolio income activities only against tax on the income fromtion. For information on rescission, see Revenue passive activities. There are exceptions for cer-Procedure 2007-21 in Internal Revenue Bulletin tain activities, such as rental real estate activi-2007-9 available at http://www.irs.gov/irb/ Topics ties.2007-09_IRB/ar12.html. This chapter discusses: Passive activity. A passive activity gener-
ally is any activity involving the conduct of anyAccuracy-related penalty for a reportable • Limits on Deductions, trade or business in which you do not materiallytransaction understatement. If you have a
participate and any rental activity. However, if• Interest Expenses,reportable transaction understatement, you may
you are involved in renting real estate, the activ-have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of the • Bond Premium Amortization, ity is not a passive activity if both of the followingamount of that understatement. This applies to
are true.• Expenses of Producing Income,any item due to a listed transaction or other
reportable transaction with a significant purpose • More than one-half of the personal serv-• Nondeductible Expenses, and
of avoiding or evading federal income tax. The ices you perform during the year in all• How To Report Investment Expenses.penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part of trades or businesses are performed in real
any reportable transaction understatement if the property trades or businesses in which
transaction was not properly disclosed. You may you materially participate.Useful Items
not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet the You may want to see: • You perform more than 750 hours of serv-strengthened reasonable cause and good faith ices during the year in real property tradesexception. The reasonable cause and good faith Publication or businesses in which you materially par-exception does not apply to any part of a report- ticipate.able transaction understatement attributable to ❏ 535 Business Expenses
one or more transactions that lack economic ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulessubstance. The term ªtrade or businessº generally means
any activity that involves the conduct of a trade❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children andThis penalty does not apply to the part of an
or business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Dependentsunderstatement on which the fraud penalty,
ing a trade or business, or involves certain re-gross valuation misstatement penalty, or pen-
search or experimental expenditures. However,Form (and Instructions)alty for nondisclosure of noneconomic sub-
it does not include rental activities or certainstance transactions is imposed. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized activities treated as incidental to holding prop-
Deductions erty for investment.Civil fraud penalty. If any underpayment of
❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expensetax on your return is due to fraud, a penalty of You are considered to materially participate in
Deduction75% of the underpayment will be added to your an activity if you are involved on a regular, con-
tax. tinuous, and substantial basis in the operations
See chapter 5  for information about getting of the activity.Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint these publications and forms.return applies to a spouse only if some part of Other income (nonpassive income). Gen-
the underpayment is due to the fraud of that erally, you can use losses from passive activities
spouse. only to offset income from passive activities.
You cannot use passive activity losses to offsetLimits on DeductionsFailure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed your other income, such as your wages or your
and is not paid within 10 days of the demand for portfolio income. Portfolio income includesYour deductions for investment expenses maypayment, an investor can be penalized with up gross income from interest, dividends, annui-be limited by:to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to pay ties, or royalties that is not derived in the ordi-
continues. • The at-risk rules, nary course of a trade or business. It also
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
includes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi- your share of investment interest from a partner- Example 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay
nary course of a trade or business) from the sale $500 on November 1, the entire repayment isship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
or trade of property (other than an interest in a applied against the amount allocated to per-other investment interest.
passive activity) producing portfolio income or sonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo-
held for investment. This includes capital gain cated as $8,000 for investment purposes and
Allocation of Interest Expensedistributions from mutual funds (and other regu- $1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next
lated investment companies) and real estate reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
If you borrow money for business or personalinvestment trusts. $9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is
purposes as well as for investment, you must allocated to investment.You cannot use passive activity losses to allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyoffset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Pass-through entities. If you use borrowedthe interest expense on the part of the debt used
funds to buy an interest in a partnership or SExpenses. Do not include in the computa- for investment purposes is treated as invest-
corporation, then the interest on those fundstion of your passive activity income or loss: ment interest. The allocation is not affected by
must be allocated based on the assets of thethe use of property that secures the debt.• Expenses (other than interest) that are entity. If you contribute to the capital of theclearly and directly allocable to your port- entity, you can make the allocation using anyExample 1. You borrow $10,000 and usefolio income, or reasonable method.$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to
• Interest expense properly allocable to buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt Additional allocation rules. For more infor-portfolio income. is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- mation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest-However, this interest and other expenses may chapter 4 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductiblebe subject to other limits. These limits are ex- personal interest.plained in the rest of this chapter.
When To DeductAdditional information. For more informa- Debt proceeds received in cash. If you re- Investment Interesttion about determining and reporting income ceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are
and losses from passive activities, see Publica- generally not treated as investment property. If you use the cash method of accounting, yoution 925. must pay the interest before you can deduct it. Debt proceeds deposited in account. If you If you use an accrual method of accounting,deposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- you can deduct interest over the period it ac-posit is treated as investment property, regard- crues, regardless of when you pay it. For anless of whether the account bears interest. But, ifInterest Expenses exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re-you withdraw the funds and use them for an- lated party under When To Report Investmentother purpose, you must reallocate the debt toThis section discusses interest expenses you Expenses, later in this chapter.determine the amount considered to be for in-may be able to deduct as an investor. vestment purposes. Example. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-For information on business interest, see
tember 3, 2010, payable in 90 days at 12%chapter 4 of Publication 535. Example 2. Assume in Example 1 that you interest. On December 2, 2010, you paid thisYou cannot deduct personal interest ex- borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- with a new note for $1,030, due on March 2,penses other than qualified home mortgage in- ately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not 2011. If you use the cash method of accounting,terest, as explained in Publication 936, Home buy the household items until June 1. You had you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interestMortgage Interest Deduction, and interest on deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no on your return for 2010 because you did notcertain student loans, as explained in Publica- other transactions on the bank account until actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, yoution 970, Tax Benefits for Education. June. You did not sell the stock, and you made may be able to deduct a portion of the interest onno principal payments on the debt. You paid the loans through December 31, 2010, on yourinterest from another account. The $8,000 isInvestment Interest return for 2010.treated as being used for an investment pur-
If you borrow money to buy property you hold for pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an Interest paid in advance. Generally, if you
investment, the interest you pay is investment investment purpose for the 3-month period. pay interest in advance for a period that goes
interest. You can deduct investment interest Your total interest expense for 3 months on this beyond the end of the tax year, you must spread
subject to the limit discussed later. However, debt is investment interest. In June, when you the interest over the tax years to which it belongs
you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro- spend the $2,000 for household items, you must under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. You
duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in- begin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter- can deduct in each year only the interest for that
come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Nor est expense to investment purposes and 20% to year.
can you deduct interest expenses on straddles, personal purposes.
Interest on margin accounts. If you are aalso discussed under Nondeductible Expenses. Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interestInvestment interest does not include any ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- on margin accounts to buy taxable securities asqualified home mortgage interest or any interest ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat investment interest in the year you paid it. Youtaken into account in computing income or loss any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) are considered to have paid interest on thesefrom a passive activity. made from any account you own, or from cash, accounts only when you actually pay the brokeras made from those proceeds. This applies to or when payment becomes available to the bro-Investment property. Property held for in- any payment made within 30 days before or ker through your account. Payment may be-vestment includes property that produces inter- after the proceeds are received in cash or de- come available to the broker through yourest, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived posited in your account. account when the broker collects dividends orin the ordinary course of a trade or business. It If you received the loan proceeds in cash, interest for your account, or sells securities heldalso includes property that produces gain or loss you can treat the payment as made on the date for you or received from you.(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade or you received the cash instead of the date you You cannot deduct any interest on moneybusiness) from the sale or trade of property actually made the payment. borrowed for personal reasons.producing these types of income or held for
investment (other than an interest in a passive Payments on debt may require new alloca- Limit on interest deduction for market dis-activity). Investment property also includes an tion. As you repay a debt used for more than count bonds. The amount you can deduct forinterest in a trade or business activity in which one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. interest expense you paid or accrued during theyou did not materially participate (other than a You must first reduce the amount allocated to year to buy or carry a market discount bond maypassive activity). personal purposes by the repayment. You then be limited. This limit does not apply if you accrue
reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part isPartners, shareholders, and beneficiaries. the market discount and include it in your in-
for investment purposes.To determine your investment interest, combine come currently.
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Under this limit, the interest is deductible You can carry over disallowed investment 1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-
only to the extent it is more than: interest to the next tax year even if it is more than vestment income. However, you can choose to
your taxable income in the year the interest was include all or part of it in investment income, as
1. The total interest and OID includible in paid or accrued. explained under Choosing to include qualified
gross income for the bond for the year, dividends, earlier.
plus Your investment income also includes theNet Investment Income2. The market discount for the number of amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,
days you held the bond during the year. the reduced amount figured next under Child'sDetermine the amount of your net investment Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).income by subtracting your investment ex-Figure the amount in (2) above using the rules
penses (other than interest expense) from yourfor figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1 Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.
investment income.under Market Discount Bonds. If part of the amount you report is your child's
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partInterest not deducted due to limit. In the does not count as investment income. To figureInvestment income. This generally includesyear you dispose of the bond, you can deduct the amount of your child's income that you canyour gross income from property held for invest-any interest expense you were not allowed to consider your investment income, start with thement (such as interest, dividends, annuities, anddeduct in earlier years because of the limit. amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply thatroyalties). Investment income does not include
Choosing to deduct disallowed interest amount by a percentage that is equal to theAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does
expense before the year of disposition. You Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided bynot include qualified dividends or net capital gain
can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex- the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtractunless you choose to include them.
pense in any year before the year you dispose of the result from the amount on Form 8814, lineChoosing to include qualified dividends.the bond, up to your net interest income from the 12.Investment income generally does not includebond during the year. The rest of the disallowed qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1.interest expense remains deductible in the year Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax-However, you can choose to include all or part ofyou dispose of the bond. able interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per-your qualified dividends in investment income. manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You chooseNet interest income. This is the interest You make this choice by completing Form to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onincome (including OID) from the bond that you 4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, andinclude in income for the year, minus the interest If you choose to include any of your qualified $6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,100 on Formexpense paid or accrued during the year to dividends in investment income, you must re- 8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.purchase or carry the bond. duce your qualified dividends that are eligible for You figure the amount of your child's incomethe lower capital gains tax rates by the same that you can consider your investment incomeamount.Limit on interest deduction for short-term as follows:obligations. If the current income inclusion Choosing to include net capital gain. In-rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount on $4,100 − ($4,100 ×  ($2,000 ÷  $6,000))vestment income generally does not include netShort-Term Obligations do not apply to you, the capital gain from disposing of investment prop-amount you can deduct for interest expense you You include the result, $2,733, on Form 4952,erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry a line 4a.tual funds). However, you can choose to includeshort-term obligation is limited. all or part of your net capital gain in investment Child's capital gain distributions. If partThe interest is deductible only to the extent it income. of the amount you report is your child's capitalis more than: You make this choice by completing Form gain distributions, that part (which is reported on4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)• The amount of acquisition discount or OID If you choose to include any of your net generally does not count as investment income.on the obligation for the tax year, plus capital gain in investment income, you must However, you can choose to include all or part of• The amount of any interest payable on the reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for it in investment income, as explained in Choos-obligation for the year that is not included the lower capital gains tax rates by the same ing to include net capital gain, earlier.in income because of your accounting amount. Your investment income also includes themethod (other than interest taken into ac- For more information about the capital gains amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,count in determining the amount of acqui- rates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. the reduced amount figured under Child'ssition discount or OID). Before making either choice, consider Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).
The method of determining acquisition discount the overall effect on your tax liability.
and OID for short-term obligations is discussed Compare your tax if you make one or
TIP Investment expenses. Investment expensesin chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli- both of these choices with your tax if you do not. are your allowed deductions (other than interestgations. expense) directly connected with the production
Investment income of child reported on par- of investment income. Investment expensesInterest not deducted due to limit. In the
ent's return. Investment income includes the that are included as a miscellaneous itemizedyear you dispose of the obligation, or if you
part of your child's interest and dividend income deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040) are allow-choose, in another year in which you have net
you choose to report on your return. If the child able deductions after applying the 2% limit thatinterest income from the obligation, you can
does not have qualified dividends, Alaska Per- applies to miscellaneous itemized deductions.deduct any interest expense you were not al-
manent Fund dividends, or capital gain distribu- Use the smaller of:lowed to deduct for an earlier year because of
tions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form 8814,the limit. Follow the same rules provided in the • The investment expenses included onParents' Election To Report Child's Interest andearlier discussion under Limit on interest deduc- Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, orDividends. Include it on line 4a of Form 4952.tion for market discount bonds, earlier.
• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.
Example. Your 8-year-old son has interestLimit on Deduction See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for aincome of $2,200, which you choose to report on discussion of the 2% limit.your own return. You enter $2,200 on FormGenerally, your deduction for investment inter-
8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and 12est expense is limited to your net investment Losses from passive activities. Income orand complete Part II. Also enter $300 on Formincome. expenses that you used in computing income or1040, line 21. Your investment income includesYou can carry over the amount of investment loss from a passive activity are not included inthis $300.interest you could not deduct because of this determining your investment income or invest-
limit to the next tax year. The interest carried Child's qualified dividends. If part of the ment expenses (including investment interest
over is treated as investment interest paid or amount you report is your child's qualified divi- expense). See Publication 925 for information
accrued in that next year. dends, that part (which is reported on Form about passive activities.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  4952 
Department of the Treasury 
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
a Attach to your tax return.
OMB No. 1545-0191 
2010
Attachment 
Sequence No. 51 
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number 
Part I Total Investment Interest Expense 
1 Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2010 (see instructions) ........ 1 
2 Disallowed investment interest expense from 2009 Form 4952, line 7 ......... 2 
3 Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 2 .............. 3 
Part II Net Investment Income 
4 a Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net 
gain from the disposition of property held for investment) . . .  4a 
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a ......... 4b 
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a ...................... 4c 
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment . . 4d 
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the 
disposition of property held for investment (see instructions)   . 4e 
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d ...................... 4f 
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see 
instructions) ............................ 4g
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g ................. 4h 
5 Investment expenses (see instructions) ................... 5 
6 Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... 6 
Part III Investment Interest Expense Deduction 
7 Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2011. Subtract line 6 from 
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 7 
8 Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions . . 8 
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
Example. Ted is a partner in a partnership $9,000 from the sale of investment property. If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct
that operates a business. However, he does not She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of a all of your investment interest. materially participate in the partnership's busi- painting given to her by an artist friend. The
ness. Ted's interest in the partnership is consid- painting is not a capital asset because Jane's
ered a passive activity. basis in the painting is determined by reference
to her friend's basis in the painting. She incurredTed's investment income from interest and Bond Premium$12,500 of investment interest expense. Herdividends (other than qualified dividends) is
other investment expenses directly connected$10,000. His investment expenses (other than Amortizationwith the production of investment income totalinterest) are $3,200 after taking into account the
$980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions. If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (FormHis investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the1040).also has income from the partnership of $2,000. bond yields taxable interest, you can choose toFor 2010, Jane chooses to include all of herTed figures his net investment income and amortize the premium. This generally meansnet capital gain in investment income. Her totalthe limit on his investment interest expense de- that each year, over the life of the bond, you useinvestment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-duction in the following way: a part of the premium to reduce the amount ofdends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 from interest includible in your income. If you makethe sale of the painting). Her net investmentTotal investment income ....... . $10,000 this choice, you must reduce your basis in theincome is $12,020 ($13,000 total investmentMinus: Investment expenses (other bond by the amortization for the year.income − $980 other investment expenses).than interest) ............... . 3,200 If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, youJane's illustrated Form 4952 is shownNet investment income ........ . $6,800 must amortize the premium. This amortizedabove. Her investment interest expense deduc-
amount is not deductible in determining taxableDeductible investment interest tion is limited to $12,020, the amount of her net
income. However, each year you must reduceexpense for the year .......... . $6,800 investment income. The $480 disallowed invest-
your basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interestment interest expense is carried forward to
The $2,000 of income from the passive activ- otherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by2011.
ity is not used in determining Ted's net invest- the amortization for the year.
ment income. His investment interest deduction Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not
for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount of Bond premium. Bond premium is the amounthave to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your
his net investment income. by which your basis in the bond right after youreturn if you meet all of the following tests.
get it is more than the total of all amounts pay-• Your investment interest expense is not able on the bond after you get it (other thanmore than your investment income fromForm 4952 payments of qualified stated interest). For exam-interest and ordinary dividends minus any ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000qualified dividends.Use Form 4952 to figure your deduction for generally would have a $50 premium if you buy itinvestment interest. for $1,050.• You do not have any other deductible in-
vestment expenses. Basis. In general, your basis for figuringExample. Jane Smith is single. Her 2010
bond premium amortization is the same as yourincome includes $3,000 in dividends (other than • You have no carryover of investment inter-
basis for figuring any loss on the sale of thequalified dividends) and a net capital gain of est expense from 2009.
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bond. However, you may need to use a different Example. On February 1, 2009, you bought 2008-52 at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.
a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has a html.basis for:
stated principal amount of $100,000, payable at• Convertible bonds, maturity on February 1, 2016, making your pre- How To Report
mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The• Bonds you got in a trade, and Amortizationbond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000• Bonds whose basis has to be determined on February 1 of each year. Your yield is Subtract the bond premium amortization fromusing the basis of the person who trans- 8.07439% compounded annually. You choose your interest income from these bonds.ferred the bond to you. to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru- Report the bond's interest on Schedule Bary 1 of each year. To find your bond premiumSee Regulations section 1.171-1(e). (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1. Several linesamortization for the accrual period ending on above line 2, put a subtotal of all interest listedFebruary 1, 2010, you multiply the adjusted ac-Dealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone on line 1. Below this subtotal, print ªABP Adjust-quisition price at the beginning of the periodwho holds them mainly for sale to customers in ment,º and the amortization amount. Subtract($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract thethe ordinary course of a trade or business or this amount from the subtotal, and enter theresult ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-who would properly include bonds in inventory result on line 2.est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourat the close of the tax year) cannot claim a
bond premium amortization for the period isdeduction for amortizable bond premium. Bond premium amortization more than inter-$1,118.17.See section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code est. If the amount of your bond premium amor-for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in Special rules. For special rules that apply tization for an accrual period is more than theto variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds,tax-exempt bonds. qualified stated interest for the period, you canand bonds that provide for alternative payment deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item-schedules or remote or incidental contingen-How To Figure ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), linecies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. 28.Amortization
 But your deduction is limited to the amount
For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you by which your total interest inclusions on theBonds Issued Beforemust amortize bond premium using a constant bond in prior accrual periods is more than yourSeptember 28, 1985yield method on the basis of the bond's yield to total bond premium deductions on the bond in
maturity, determined by using the bond's basis For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre- prior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct
and compounding at the close of each accrual mium using any reasonable method. Reasona- because of this limit can be carried forward to
period. ble methods include: the next accrual period.
• The straight-line method, andConstant yield method. Figure the bond pre- Pre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.
mium amortization for each accrual period as • The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Generally, if you first elected to amortize bond
follows. premium before 1998, the above treatment of
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-Straight-line method. Under this method, theStep 1: determine your yield. Your yield is
quired before 1988.amount of your bond premium amortization isthe discount rate that, when used in figuring the
the same each month. Divide the number ofpresent value of all remaining payments to be Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986.
months you held the bond during the year by themade on the bond (including payments of quali- The amortization of the premium on these bonds
number of months from the beginning of the taxfied stated interest), produces an amount equal is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-
year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to theto your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiplythe date you got the bond. It must be constant Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, butthe result by the bond premium (reduced by anyover the term of the bond and must be figured to before 1988. The amortization of the premiumbond premium amortization claimed in earlierat least two decimal places when expressed as on these bonds is investment interest expenseyears). This gives you your bond premium amor-a percentage. subject to the investment interest limit, unlesstization for the year.If you do not know the yield, consult your you choose to treat it as an offset to interest
broker or tax advisor. Databases available to income on the bond. Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this
them are likely to show the yield at the date of method, the amount of your bond premium
purchase. amortization increases each month over the life
of the bond. This method is explained in Reve-Step 2: determine the accrual periods.
nue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46.You can choose the accrual periods to use. Expenses of
They may be of any length and may vary in
Producing IncomeChoosing To Amortizelength over the term of the bond, but each ac-
crual period can be no longer than 1 year and
You choose to amortize the premium on taxable You deduct investment expenses (other thaneach scheduled payment of principal or interest
bonds by reporting the amortization for the year interest expenses) as miscellaneous itemizedmust occur either on the first or the final day of on your income tax return for the first tax year deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To bean accrual period. The computation is simplest if you want the choice to apply. You should attach deductible, these expenses must be ordinaryaccrual periods are the same as the intervals a statement to your return that you are making and necessary expenses paid or incurred:between interest payment dates. this choice under section 171. See How To Re-
• To produce or collect income, orStep 3: determine the bond premium for port Amortization, next.
the accrual period. To do this, multiply your This choice is binding for the year you make • To manage property held for producing in-
adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of the it and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable come.
accrual period by your yield. Then subtract the bonds you own in the year you make the choice The expenses must be directly related to theresult from the qualified stated interest for the and also to those you acquire in later years. income or income-producing property, and theperiod. You can change your decision to amortize income must be taxable to you.Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin- bond premium only with the written approval of
ning of the first accrual period is the same as The deduction for most income-producing ex-the IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115,
your basis. After that, it is your basis decreased penses is subject to a 2% limit that also appliesApplication for Change in Accounting Method.
by the amount of bond premium amortized for to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc-For more information on requesting approval,
earlier periods and the amount of any payment tions. The amount deductible is limited to thesee section 5 of the Appendix to Revenue Pro-
total of these miscellaneous deductions that ispreviously made on the bond other than a pay- cedure 2008-52 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.ment of qualified stated interest. 2008-36. You can find Revenue Procedure
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information on how to report expenses of Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for more fund, you must include on your return the full
producing income, see How To Report Invest- information about the treatment of these sale amount of ordinary dividends or other distribu-
ment Expenses, later. expenses. tions of stock, as shown in box 1a of Form
1099-DIV or an equivalent statement. If you areAttorney or accounting fees. You can de- Investment counsel and advice. You can a residual interest holder in a REMIC, you mustduct attorney or accounting fees that are neces- deduct fees you pay for counsel and advice report as ordinary income on Schedule E (Formsary to produce or collect taxable income. about investments that produce taxable income. 1040) the total amounts shown on Schedule QHowever, in some cases, attorney or accounting This includes amounts you pay for investment (Form 1066), lines 1b and 3b. If you are afees are part of the basis of property. See Basis advisory services. REMIC regular interest holder, you must includeof Investment Property in chapter 4. the amount of any expense allocation you re-Safe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent
Automatic investment service and dividend ceived on Form 1040, line 8a.you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the box
reinvestment plans. A bank may offer its to store taxable income-producing stocks, Publicly-offered mutual funds. Most mutualchecking account customers an automatic in- bonds, or other investment-related papers and funds are publicly offered. These mutual funds,vestment service so that, for a charge, each documents. If you also use the box to store generally, are traded on an established securi-customer can choose to invest a part of the tax-exempt securities or personal items, you can ties exchange. These funds do not pass invest-checking account each month in common stock. deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt ment expenses through to you. Instead, theOr, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent for income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to dividend income they report to you in box 1a ofa number of publicly-owned corporations may figure what part you can deduct. Form 1099-DIV is already reduced by yourset up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv- share of investment expenses. As a result, youState and local transfer taxes. You cannotice. Through that service, cash dividends are cannot deduct the expenses on your return.deduct the state and local transfer taxes you payreinvested in more shares of stock after the bank Include the amount from box 1a of Formwhen you buy or sell securities. If you pay thesededucts a service charge. 1099-DIV in your income.transfer taxes when you buy securities, youA corporation in which you own stock also must treat them as part of the cost of the prop-may have a dividend reinvestment plan. This A nonpublicly offered mutual fund iserty. If you pay these transfer taxes when youplan lets you choose to use your dividends to one that:sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc-buy more shares of stock in the corporation
TIP tion in the amount realized.instead of receiving the dividends in cash.
1. Is not continuously offered pursuant to aYou can deduct the monthly service charge Trustee's commissions for revocable trust. public offering,you pay to a bank to participate in an automatic If you set up a revocable trust and have its
investment service. If you participate in a divi- income distributed to you, you can deduct the 2. Is not regularly traded on an established
dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct any commission you pay the trustee for managing securities market, and
service charge subtracted from your cash divi- the trust to the extent it is to produce or collect 3. Is held by fewer than 500 persons at anydends before the dividends are used to buy taxable income or to manage property. How- time during the year.more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in the ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis-
year you pay them. sion used for producing or collecting tax-exempt Contact your mutual fund if your are not sure
income or for managing property that produces whether it is nonpublicly offered.Clerical help and office rent. You can deduct tax-exempt income.office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay thethat you pay in connection with your investments commissions for several years in advance, youand collecting the taxable income on them. must deduct a part of the commission each year.
Cost of replacing missing securities. To re- You cannot deduct the entire amount in the year Nondeductibleplace your taxable securities that are mislaid, you pay it.
lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to post ExpensesInvestment expenses from pass-through en-an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premium tities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, Syou pay to buy the indemnity bond and the Some expenses that you incur as an investorcorporation, real estate mortgage investmentrelated incidental expenses. are not deductible.conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered mu-You may, however, get a refund of part of the tual fund, you can deduct your share of that Stockholders' meetings. You cannot deductbond premium if the missing securities are re- entity's investment expenses. A partnership or S transportation and other expenses you pay tocovered within a specified time. Under certain corporation will show your share of these ex- attend stockholders' meetings of companies intypes of insurance policies, you can recover penses on your Schedule K-1. A nonpublicly which you have no interest other than owningsome of the expenses. offered mutual fund will indicate your share of stock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-If you receive the refund in the tax year you these expenses in box 5 of Form 1099-DIV, or ing is to get information that would be useful inpay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ- on an equivalent statement. Publicly-offered making further investments.ence between the expenses paid and the mutual funds are discussed later.amount refunded. If the refund is made in a later Investment-related seminar. You cannot de-If you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex-tax year, you must include the refund in income duct expenses for attending a convention, semi-penses relating to your residual interest invest-in the year you received it, but only to the extent nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes.ment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066),that the expenses decreased your tax in the year line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regular Single-premium life insurance, endowment,you deducted them. interest investment will appear in box 5 of Form and annuity contracts. You cannot deductFees to collect income. You can deduct fees 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. interest on money you borrow to buy or carry ayou pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar Report your share of these investment ex- single-premium life insurance, endowment, oragent to collect investment income, such as penses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to annuity contract.your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or your the 2% limit, in the same manner as your other
Used as collateral. If you use a single pre-dividends on shares of stock. investment expenses.
mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain orFees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct a Including mutual fund or REMIC expenses continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deductfee you pay to a broker to acquire investment in income. Your share of the investment ex- any interest on the loan that is collateralized byproperty, such as stocks or bonds. You must penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basis mutual fund, as described above, are consid- est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur-of Investment Property in chapter 4. ered to be indirect deductions through that rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by theYou cannot deduct any broker's fees, com- pass-through entity. You must include in your lesser of the amount of the annuity contract usedmissions, or option premiums you pay (or that gross income an amount equal to the expenses as collateral or the amount of the loan.were netted out) in connection with the sale of allocated to you, whether or not you are able to
investment property. They can be used only to claim a deduction for those expenses. If you are Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you
figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reporting a shareholder in a nonpublicly offered mutual cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, or • All the offsetting positions making up the Enter your deductible investment interest ex-
annuity contract if you plan to systematically pense on Schedule A, line 14. Include any de-straddle either consist of one or more
borrow part or all of the increases in the cash ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Salesqualified covered call options and the op-
value of the contract. This rule applies to the in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.)tioned stock or consist of section 1256
interest on the total amount borrowed to buy or Also attach a completed Form 4952 if you usedcontracts (and the straddle is not part of acarry the contract, not just the interest on the that form to figure your investment interest ex-larger straddle), orborrowed increases in the cash value. pense.
• The straddle is a hedging transaction. Enter the total amount of your other invest-
ment expenses (other than interest expenses)Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex-
on Schedule A, line 23. List the type and amountpenses you incur to produce tax-exempt in- For information about straddles, including defini- of each expense on the dotted lines next to linecome. Nor can you deduct interest on money tions of the terms used in this discussion, see 23. (If necessary, you can show the requiredyou borrow to buy tax-exempt securities or chapter 4. information on an attached statement.)shares in a mutual fund or other regulated in-
For information on how to report amortizablevestment company that distributes only ex- Interest includes any amount you pay or incur
bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza-empt-interest dividends. in connection with personal property used in a tion, earlier in this chapter.short sale. However, you must first apply theShort-sale expenses. The rule disallowing
rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividendsa deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
under Short Sales in chapter 4.securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
nection with personal property used in a short To determine the interest on market discount When To Reportsale or amounts paid by others for the use of any bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofcollateral in connection with the short sale. How- Investment Expensesa straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur cussed under Limit on interest deduction forif you deposit cash as collateral for the property If you use the cash method to report income andmarket discount bonds  and Limit on interestused in the short sale and the cash does not expenses, you generally deduct your expenses,deduction for short-term obligations (both underearn a material return during the period of the except for certain prepaid interest, in the yearInterest Expenses, earlier).sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4. you pay them.
Nondeductible amount. Figure the nonde- If you use an accrual method, you generallyExpenses for both tax-exempt and taxable
deduct your expenses when you incur a liabilityductible interest and carrying charges on strad-income. You may have expenses that are for
for them, rather than when you pay them.both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can- dle property as follows.
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-not specifically identify what part of the ex-
1. Add: est, earlier in this chapter.penses is for each type of income, you can
divide the expenses, using reasonable propor- Unpaid expenses owed to related party. Ifa. Interest on indebtedness incurred ortions based on facts and circumstances. You you use an accrual method, you cannot deductcontinued to buy or carry the personalmust attach a statement to your return showing interest and other expenses owed to a relatedproperty, andhow you divided the expenses and stating that cash-basis person until payment is made andeach deduction claimed is not based on b. All other amounts (including charges to the amount is includible in the gross income oftax-exempt income. insure, store, or transport the personal that person. The relationship, for purposes of
One accepted method for dividing expenses this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxproperty) paid or incurred to carry the
is to do it in the same proportion that each type year for which the interest or expense wouldpersonal property.
of income is to the total income. If the expenses otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denied
relate in part to capital gains and losses, include under this rule, this rule will continue to apply2. Subtract from the amount in (1):
the gains, but not the losses, in figuring this even if your relationship with the person ceases
a. Interest (including OID) includible inproportion. To find the part of the expenses that to exist before the amount is includible in the
is for the tax-exempt income, divide your gross income for the year on the per- gross income of that person.
tax-exempt income by the total income and mul- This rule generally applies to those relation-sonal property,
tiply your expenses by the result. ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Partyb. Any income from the personal property Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-treated as ordinary income on the dis-Example. You received $6,000 interest; nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,
position of short-term government obli-$4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable. shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-
gations or as ordinary income under theIn earning this income, you had $500 of ex- tions to shareholders.
penses. You cannot specifically identify the market discount and short-term bond The postponement of deductions for unpaid
amount of each expense item that is for each expenses and interest under the related partyprovisions Ð see Discount on Debt In-
income item, so you must divide your expenses. rule does not apply to original issue discountstruments in chapter 1,
80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided by (OID), regardless of when payment is made.c. The dividends includible in gross in-$6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for the This rule also does not apply to loans with be-
come for the year from the personaltax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400 low-market interest rates or to certain payments
property, and(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deduct for the use of property and services when the
$100 (the rest of the expenses) because they lender or recipient has to include payments peri-d. Any payment on a loan of the personalare for the taxable interest. odically in income, even if a payment has notproperty for use in a short sale that is been made.State income taxes. If you itemize your de- includible in gross income.
ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-
come taxes on interest income that is exempt Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductiblefrom federal income tax. But you cannot deduct, amount to the basis of your straddle property.as either taxes or investment expenses, state
income taxes on other exempt income.
Interest expense and carrying charges on
How To Reportstraddles. You cannot deduct interest and
carrying charges allocable to personal property
Investment Expensesthat is part of a straddle. The nondeductible
interest and carrying charges are added to the
To deduct your investment expenses, you mustbasis of the straddle property. However, this
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).treatment does not apply if:
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- rate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. under Nontaxable Trades, later.
4.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stockTopics is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the
This chapter discusses: capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
Sales and demption is a dividend or other distribution on
• What a sale or trade is, stock.
• Basis,Trades of Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a
redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,• Adjusted basis,
or other distribution depends on the circum-Investment • Figuring gain or loss, stances in each case. Both direct and indirect
ownership of stock will be considered. The re-• Nontaxable trades,
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:Property • Capital gains and losses, and
• The redemption is not essentially• How to report your gain or loss. equivalent to a dividend Ð see Dividends
and Other Distributions in chapter 1,Introduction Useful Items • There is a substantially disproportionateThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales You may want to see: redemption of stock,and trades of investment property.
• There is a complete redemption of all thePublication stock of the corporation owned by theInvestment property. This is property that
shareholder, orproduces investment income. Examples include ❏ 551 Basis of Assets
stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. • The redemption is a distribution in partialProperty used in a trade or business is not in- Form (and Instructions) liquidation of a corporation.vestment property.
❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains
and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as
demption or retirement of bonds or notes at theirstocks, bonds, mutual funds, or certain com- ❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Section maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.modities through a broker during the year, you 1256 Contracts and Straddles See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds  and Dis-should receive, for each sale, a Form 1099-B,
❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-Proceeds From Broker and Barter Exchange
nary Gain or Loss, later.Transactions, or an equivalent statement from ❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges In addition, a significant modification of athe broker. You should receive the statement by
bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forMarch 1 of the next year. It will show the gross See chapter 5  for information about getting a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-proceeds from the sale. The IRS will also get a these publications and forms. tion 1.1001-3.copy of Form 1099-B from the broker.
Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state-
Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by ament received from your broker) to complete
dominant shareholder who retains ownership ofSchedule D of Form 1040. If the total of the sales What Is a more than half of the corporation's voting sharesprice amounts reported on Form(s) 1099-B in
is treated as a contribution to capital rather thanbox 2 is more than the total you report on Sched- Sale or Trade? as an immediate loss deductible from taxableule D (Form 1040), lines 3 and 10, attach a
income. The surrendering shareholder must re-statement to your return explaining the differ- Terms you may need to know allocate his or her basis in the surrenderedence. For more information, see Form 1099-B (see Glossary): shares to the shares he or she retains.transactions under Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses, later. Equity option Trade of investment property for an annuity.
Nominees. If someone receives gross pro- The transfer of investment property to a corpora-Futures contract
ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-Marked to marketyou a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
ceeds received on your behalf. will make guaranteed annual payments to youNonequity option
If you receive Form 1099-B that includes for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealergross proceeds belonging to another person, the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
see Nominees later under Reporting Capital erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the yearRegulated futures contract
Gains and Losses for more information. of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contract annuity according to factors used by commercial
insurance companies issuing annuities.Short saleOther property transactions. Certain trans-
fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi-
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer ofcations. These include:
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It property of a decedent to the executor or admin-• Sale of your main home, discussed in also explains certain transactions and events istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-Publication 523, Selling Your Home, that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable
A sale is generally a transfer of property for• Installment sales, covered in Publication gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to537, Installment Sales,
pay money. Termination of certain rights and obliga-• Various types of transactions involving tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for otherbusiness property, discussed in Publica- other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in thetion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.Assets, property that is a capital asset (or that would be
• Transfers of property at death, covered in Sale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as a
Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gain
Administrators, and for cash and immediately buy similar property to or loss.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This rule does not apply to the retirement of a • Enter into a short sale of the same or a. The position unconditionally entitles the
debt instrument. See Redemption or retirement substantially identical property, holder to receive a specified principal
of bonds, earlier. amount,• Enter into an offsetting notional principal
contract relating to the same or substan- b. The interest payments (or other similar
Worthless Securities tially identical property, amounts) with respect to the position
are payable at a fixed rate or a variable• Enter into a futures or forward contract toStocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than rate described in Regulations sectiondeliver the same or substantially identicalthose held for sale by a securities dealer) that 1.860G-1(a)(3), andproperty (including a forward contract thatbecame completely worthless during the tax
provides for cash settlement), or c. The position is not convertible, eitheryear are treated as though they were sold on the
directly or indirectly, into stock of thelast day of the tax year. This affects whether • Acquire the same or substantially identical issuer (or any related person).your capital loss is long term or short term. See property (if the appreciated financial posi-Holding Period, later. tion is a short sale, an offsetting notional 3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-Worthless securities also include securities principal contract, or a futures or forward scribed in (2).that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To contract).abandon a security, you must permanently sur-
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.render and relinquish all rights in the security You are also treated as having made a con- For the constructive sale rules, an interest in anand receive no consideration in exchange for it. structive sale of an appreciated financial posi- actively traded trust is treated as stock unlessAll the facts and circumstances determine tion if a person related to you enters into a substantially all of the value of the property heldwhether the transaction is properly character- transaction described above with a view toward by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-ized as an abandonment or other type of trans- avoiding the constructive sale treatment. For tion to the definition of an appreciated financialaction, such as an actual sale or exchange, this purpose, a related person is any related position (explained in (2) above).contribution to capital, dividend, or gift. party described under Related Party Transac-If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make tions, later in this chapter. Sale of appreciated financial position. Apayments on a negotiable promissory note that transaction treated as a constructive sale of anException for nonmarketable securities.you issued for stock that became worthless, you appreciated financial position is not treated as aYou are not treated as having made a construc-can deduct these payments as losses in the constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-tive sale solely because you entered into a con-years you actually make the payments. Do not cial position, as long as you continue to hold thetract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, ordeduct them in the year the stock became worth- original position. However, if you hold anotherpartnership interest that is not a marketable se-less. appreciated financial position and dispose of thecurity if it settles within 1 year of the date you
original position before closing the transactionHow to report loss. Report worthless securi- enter into it.
that resulted in the constructive sale, you areties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8, Exception for certain closed transactions. treated as if, at the same time, you construc-whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enter Do not treat a transaction as a constructive sale tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your loss in if all of the following are true. tion.parentheses in column (f).
1. You closed the transaction on or beforeFiling a claim for refund. If you do not claim a Section 1256 Contractsthe 30th day after the end of your tax year.loss for a worthless security on your original Marked to Market2. You held the appreciated financial positionreturn for the year it becomes worthless, you can
throughout the 60-day period beginning onfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end ofthe date you closed the transaction.You must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- the tax year, you generally must treat it as sold
vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return at its fair market value on the last business day3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at anyfor the year the security became worthless. You of the tax year.time during that 60-day period by holdingmust file it within 7 years from the date your certain other positions.original return for that year had to be filed, or 2
If a closed transaction is reestablished in ayears from the date you paid the tax, whichever Section 1256 Contract
substantially similar position during the 60-dayis later. (Claims not due to worthless securities
period beginning on the date the first transaction A section 1256 contract is any:or bad debts generally must be filed within 3
was closed, this exception still applies if theyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years • Regulated futures contract,reestablished position is closed before the 30thfrom the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.)
day after the end of your tax year in which the • Foreign currency contract,For more information about filing a claim, see
first transaction was closed and, after that clos-Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- • Nonequity option,ing, (2) and (3) above are true.peal Rights, and Claims for Refund.
This exception also applies to successive • Dealer equity option, or
short sales of an entire appreciated financialConstructive Sales • Dealer securities futures contract.position. For more information, see Revenueof Appreciated Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue Bulletin Exceptions. For tax years beginning afterFinancial Positions 2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/ July 21, 2010, a section 1256 contract does notpub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf. include:You are treated as having made a constructive
sale when you enter into certain transactions Appreciated financial position. This is any • Interest rate swaps,involving an appreciated financial position (de- interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debt
• Currency swaps,fined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or instrument (including a futures or forward con-
certain debt instruments. You must recognize tract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing of • Basis swaps,gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair the interest would result in a gain.
• Interest rate caps,market value on the date of the constructive Exceptions. An appreciated financial posi-sale. This gives you a new holding period for the • Interest rate floors,tion does not include the following.position that begins on the date of the construc-
• Commodity swaps,tive sale. Then, when you close the transaction, 1. Any position from which all of the apprecia-
you reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by tion is accounted for under marked to mar- • Equity swaps,
the gain recognized on the constructive sale. ket rules, including section 1256 contracts • Equity index swaps,(described later under Section 1256 Con-Constructive sale. You are treated as having tracts Marked to Market). • Credit default swaps, ormade a constructive sale of an appreciated fi-
nancial position if you: 2. Any position in a debt instrument if: • Similar agreements.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more details, including definitions of these does not include an option that is a right to On February 1, 2010, you sold the contract
acquire stock from the issuer.terms, see section 1256. for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000
gain on your 2009 return, you recognize aDealer equity option. This is any listed optionRegulated futures contract. This is a con- $1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2010that, for an options dealer:tract that: tax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%
• Is an equity option, short-term capital loss.• Provides that amounts that must be de-
posited to, or can be withdrawn from, your • Is bought or granted by that dealer in the Limited partners or entrepreneurs. The
margin account depend on daily market normal course of the dealer's business ac- 60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op-
conditions (a system of marking to mar- tivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts that
ket), and result in capital gain or loss allocable to limited• Is listed on the qualified board of ex-
partners or limited entrepreneurs (defined later• Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, a change where that dealer is registered.
under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, thesequalified board of exchange. A qualified
gains or losses are treated as short term.An ªoptions dealerº is any person registeredboard of exchange is a domestic board of
with an appropriate national securities ex-trade designated as a contract market by
change as a market maker or specialist in listed Terminations and transfers. The marked tothe Commodity Futures Trading Commis-
options.sion, any board of trade or exchange ap- market rules also apply if your obligation or
proved by the Secretary of the Treasury, rights under section 1256 contracts are termi-Equity option. This is any option:or a national securities exchange regis- nated or transferred during the tax year. In this
tered with the Securities and Exchange • To buy or sell stock, or case, use the fair market value of each section
Commission. 1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations orerence to any stock or narrow-based se-
transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv-Foreign currency contract. This is a contract curity index.
ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli-that:
gation or rights under section 1256 contracts.• Requires delivery of a foreign currency Equity options include options on a group of
that has positions traded through regu- stocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock Loss carryback election. An individual hav-lated futures contracts (or settlement of index. ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (definedwhich depends on the value of that type of Dealer securities futures contract. For later) for 2010 can elect to carry this loss back 3foreign currency), any dealer in securities futures contracts or op- years, instead of carrying it over to the next year.
• Is traded in the interbank market, and tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu- See How To Report, later, for information about
tures contract (or option on such a contract) that: reporting this election on your return.• Is entered into at arm's length at a price
The loss carried back to any year under this• Is entered into by the dealer (or, in thedetermined by reference to the price in the
election cannot be more than the net sectioncase of an option, is purchased or grantedinterbank market.
1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, theby the dealer) in the normal course of the
amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yeardealer's activity of dealing in this type ofBank forward contracts with maturity dates
cannot increase or produce a net operating losscontract (or option), andlonger than the maturities ordinarily available for
for that year.regulated futures contracts are considered to • Is traded on a qualified board or exchangemeet the definition of a foreign currency contract The loss is carried to the earliest carryback(as defined under Regulated futures con-if the above three conditions are satisfied. year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount cantract, earlier).
Special rules apply to certain foreign cur- then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. In
A securities futures contract that is not a dealerrency transactions. These transactions may re- each carryback year, treat 60% of the carryback
securities futures contract is treated as de-sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as ascribed later under Securities Futures Con-details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-tracts.and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and tracts.
1.988-3. If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-Marked to Market Rules tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,
Nonequity option. This is any listed option the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearof the tax year will generally be treated as sold atquity options include debt options, commodity following the loss. (See Capital Losses  underits fair market value on the last business day offutures options, currency options, and the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-broad-based stock index options. A loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossbroad-based stock index is based on the value account in figuring your gain or loss when you year, you had an additional short-term capitalof a group of diversified stocks or securities later dispose of the contract, as shown in the gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256(such as the Standard and Poor's 500 index). example under 60/40 rule, below. contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsWarrants based on a stock index that are and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%Hedging exception. The marked to marketeconomically, substantially identical in all mate- of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treatrules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seerial respects to options based on a stock index any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging Transactions, later.are treated as options based on a stock index. 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from section
60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys-Cash-settled options. Cash-settled op- 1256 contracts for that year.
tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will betions based on a stock index and either traded Net section 1256 contracts loss. This losstreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andon or subject to the rules of a qualified board of is the lesser of:40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainexchange are nonequity options if the Securities
or loss. This is true regardless of how long youand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines • The net capital loss for your tax year de-
actually held the property.that the stock index is broad based. termined by taking into account only the
gains and losses from section 1256 con-This rule does not apply to options estab- Example. On June 22, 2009, you bought a tracts, orlished before the SEC determines that the stock regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-index is broad based. • The capital loss carryover to the next taxcember 31, 2009 (the last business day of your
year determined without this election.Listed option. This is any option traded on, tax year), the fair market value of the contract
or subject to the rules of, a qualified board or was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain on
Net section 1256 contracts gain. This gainexchange (as discussed earlier under Regu- your 2009 tax return, treated as 60% long-term
is the lesser of:lated futures contract). A listed option, however, and 40% short-term capital gain.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The capital gain net income for the car- b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur- relating to contributions to self-employment re-
ryback year determined by taking into ac- tirement plans apply. For information on retire-rency fluctuations, on your current or
count only gains and losses from section ment plan contributions, see Publication 560,future borrowings or ordinary obliga-
1256 contracts, or Retirement Plans for Small Business, and Publi-tions.
cation 590, Individual Retirement Arrangements• The capital gain net income for that year. (IRAs). 2. You clearly identified the transaction as
being a hedging transaction before the
Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain for close of the day on which you entered
any carryback year without regard to the net into it.
section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year or Basis ofThis hedging transaction exception does notany later tax year. apply to transactions entered into by or for any Investment Propertysyndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor-Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or poration, or other entity (other than a regularloss from the trading of section 1256 contracts is Terms you may need to knowcorporation) that allocates more than 35% of itscapital gain or loss subject to the marked to (see Glossary):losses to limited partners or limited entrepre-market rules. However, this does not apply to neurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person whocontracts held for purposes of hedging property Basishas an interest in an enterprise (but not as aif any loss from the property would be an ordi- Fair market valuelimited partner) and who does not actively par-nary loss. ticipate in its management. However, an inter- Original issue discount (OID)Treatment of underlying property. The est is not considered held by a limited partner
determination of whether an individual's gain or or entrepreneur if the interest holder actively
loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain participates (or did so for at least 5 full years) Basis is a way of measuring your investment inor loss is made without regard to the fact that the in the management of the entity, or is the property for tax purposes. You must know theindividual is actively engaged in dealing in or spouse, child (including a legally adopted basis of your property to determine whether youtrading section 1256 contracts related to that child), grandchild, or parent of an individual have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-property. who actively participates in the management of tion.
the entity. Investment property you buy normally has an
original basis equal to its cost. If you get propertyHow To Report Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner in some way other than buying it, such as by gift
or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign hedging loss you can claim is limited. A ªhedging portant in figuring the basis.currency contracts in 2010 (or had unrealized lossº is the amount by which the allowable de-profit or loss on these contracts that were open ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-at the end of 2009 or 2010), you should receive Cost Basising transaction (determined without regard toForm 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from the limit) are more than the income received or The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.your broker. accrued during the tax year from this transac- The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debttion.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781 to report obligations, or other property or services.
Any hedging loss allocated to you for the taxyour gains and losses from all section 1256
year is limited to your taxable income for thatcontracts that are open at the end of the year or Unstated interest. If you buy property on a
year from the trade or business in which thethat were closed out during the year. This in- time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-
hedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-cludes the amount shown in box 11 of Form est, the basis of your property is your stated
ing transaction items in determining this taxable1099-B. Then enter the net amount of these purchase price, minus the amount considered to
income. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). be unstated interest. You generally have un-
lowed because of this limit, you can carry it overInclude a copy of Form 6781 with your income stated interest if your interest rate is less than
to the next tax year as a deduction resulting fromtax return. the applicable federal rate. For more informa-
a hedging transaction.If the Form 1099-B you receive includes a tion, see Unstated Interest and  Original Issue
straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it If the hedging transaction relates to property Discount (OID) in Publication 537.
may be necessary to show certain adjustments other than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-
on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre- Basis Other Than Costtions for completing Part I. preneur is an individual.
The limit on hedging losses does not apply to There are times when you must use a basisLoss carryback election. To carry back your any hedging loss to the extent that it is more other than cost. In these cases, you may need toloss under the election procedures described than all your unrecognized gains from hedging know the property's fair market value or theearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- transactions at the end of the tax year that are adjusted basis of the previous owner.tion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which from the trade or business in which the hedgingyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form transaction occurred. The term ªunrecognized Fair market value. This is the price at which6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. gainº has the same meaning as defined under the property would change hands between aFollow the instructions for completing Form Straddles, later. buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy or6781 for the loss year to make this election. sell and both having reasonable knowledge of
Sale of property used in a hedge. Once you all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,
identify personal property as being part of a around the same date, may be helpful in figuringHedging Transactions hedging transaction, you must treat gain from its fair market value.
sale or exchange as ordinary income, not capitalThe marked to market rules, described earlier,
gain.do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac-
Property Received for Servicestion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow-
ing conditions are met. If you receive investment property for services,Self-Employment Income
you must include the property's fair market value1. You entered into the transaction in the nor-
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course in income. The amount you include in incomemal course of your trade or business pri-
of a commodity or option dealer's trading in then becomes your basis in the property. If themarily to manage the risk of:
section 1256 contracts and property related to services were performed for a price that was
these contracts are included in net earningsa. Price changes or currency fluctuations agreed to beforehand, this price will be accepted
from self-employment. See the Instructions foron ordinary property you hold (or will as the fair market value of the property if there is
Schedule SE (Form 1040). In addition, the ruleshold), or no evidence to the contrary.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Restricted property. If you receive, as pay- of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Gift
the amount of the gift.ment for services, property that is subject to
To figure your basis in property that you re- The net increase in value of the gift is the faircertain restrictions, your basis in the property ceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted market value of the gift minus the donor's ad-generally is its fair market value when it be- basis to the donor just before it was given to you, justed basis. The amount of the gift is its valuecomes substantially vested. Property becomes its fair market value at the time it was given to for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-substantially vested when it is transferable or is you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture, date it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift.whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
erty in Publication 525 for more information. Fair market value less than donor's adjusted Example. In 2010, you received a gift of
basis. If the fair market value of the property at property from your mother. At the time of the gift,
the time of the gift was less than the donor's the property had a fair market value of $101,000Bargain purchases. If you buy investment adjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for and an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theproperty at less than fair market value, as pay- gain on its sale or other disposition is the same amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasment for services, you must include the differ- as the donor's adjusted basis plus or minus any $88,000 ($101,000 minus the $13,000 annualence in income. Your basis in the property is the required adjustments to basis during the period exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax ofprice you pay plus the amount you include in you hold the property. Your basis for loss is its $21,000. You figure your basis in the followingincome. fair market value at the time of the gift plus or way:
minus any required adjustments to basis during
the period you hold the property. Fair market value ............ . $101,000Property Received Minus: Adjusted basis ......... .  40,000No gain or loss. If you use the basis forin Taxable Trades Net increase in value of gift ..... . $ 61,000figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then
use the basis for figuring a loss and the result isIf you received investment property in trade for Gift tax paid ............... . $ 21,000a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss.other property, the basis of the new property is Multiplied by .693 ($61,000 ÷
its fair market value at the time of the trade $88,000) ................. . .693
Example. You receive a gift of investment Gift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,553unless you received the property in a nontaxable property having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at Plus: Adjusted basis of property to trade. the time of the gift. The fair market value at the your mother ............... . 40,000
time of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the Your basis in the property $ 54,553Example. You trade A Company stock for B property for $9,500. You have neither gain norCompany stock having a fair market value of loss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and Part sale, part gift. If you get property in a$1,200. If the adjusted basis of the A Company $9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss. transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, yourstock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and basis is the larger of the amount you paid for thegain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A $9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain. property or the transferor's adjusted basis in theCompany stock is more than $1,200, you have a
property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatdeductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B Fair market value equal to or more than do- amount the amount of any gift tax paid on thenor's adjusted basis. If the fair market valueCompany stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B gift, as described in the preceding discussion.of the property at the time of the gift was equal toCompany stock for $1,300, you will have a gain For figuring loss, your basis is limited to theor more than the donor's adjusted basis justof $100. property's fair market value at the time of thebefore the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its transfer.sale or other disposition is the donor's adjusted
basis plus or minus any required adjustments toProperty Received Gift tax information. For information on giftbasis during the period you hold the property.in Nontaxable Trades tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to EstateAlso, you may be allowed to add to the donor's and Gift Taxes. For information on figuring theIf you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec- adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid, amount of gift tax to add to your basis, seedepending on the date of the gift.ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the Property Received as a Gift  in Publication 551,
property you received in the trade. See Nontax- Basis of Assets.Gift received before 1977. If you received
able Trades, later. property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the
property is the donor's adjusted basis increasedThe basis of property you received in a non-
Property Received as Inheritanceby the total gift tax paid on the gift. However,taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally
your basis cannot be more than the fair marketthe same as the adjusted basis of the property
value of the gift at the time it was given to you. Before 2010. If you inherited property from ayou gave up. Increase this amount by any cash
decedent who died before 2010, your basis inyou paid, additional costs you had, and any gain Example 1. You were given XYZ Company that property generally is its fair market value (itsrecognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stock appraised value on Form 706, United Statesunlike property you received, any loss recog- had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor's Estate (and Generation-Skipping Transfer) Taxnized, and any liability of yours that was as- adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a Return) on:sumed or treated as assumed. gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or • The date of the decedent's death, orloss is $20,500, the donor's adjusted basis plus
the amount of gift tax paid. • The later alternate valuation date if theProperty Received estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-
From Your Spouse Example 2. The facts are the same as in ternate valuation.
Example 1  except that the gift tax paid wasIf property is transferred to you from your spouse If no Form 706 was filed, use the appraised$1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor's ad- value on the date of death for state inheritance(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to or transmission taxes. For stocks and bonds, ifyour divorce), your basis is the same as your the fair market value of the stock at the time of no Form 706 was filed and there are no statespouse's or former spouse's adjusted basis just the gift. inheritance or transmission taxes, see the Formbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between Gift received after 1976. If you received 706 instructions for figuring the fair market valueSpouses, later. property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the of the stocks and bonds on the date of the
Recordkeeping. The transferor must donor's adjusted basis increased by the part of decedent's death.
give you the records necessary to de- the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in
termine the adjusted basis and holding value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply- Appreciated property you gave the dece-
RECORDS
period of the property as of the date of the ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-
numerator (top part) is the net increase in valuetransfer. erty that you inherited is the decedent's adjusted
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
basis in the property immediately before death Broker holds stock. If you have left the Example. You bought 100 shares of Fund A
rather than its fair market value. This applies to stock certificates with your broker or other for $10 a share. You paid a $50 commission to
appreciated property that you or your spouse agent, you will make an adequate identification if the broker for the purchase. Your cost basis for
gave the decedent as a gift during the 1-year you: each share is $10.50 ($1,050 ÷  100).
period ending on the date of death. Appreciated • Tell your broker or other agent the particu- Commissions and load charges. The feesproperty is any property whose fair market value lar stock to be sold or transferred at the and charges you pay to acquire or redeemon the day you gave it to the decedent was more time of the sale or transfer, and shares of a mutual fund are not deductible. Youthan its adjusted basis. can usually add acquisition fees and charges to• Receive a written confirmation of this from your cost of the shares and thereby increaseyour broker or other agent within a reason-More information. See Publication 551, Ba- your basis. A fee paid to redeem the shares isable time.sis of Assets, for more information on the basis usually a reduction in the redemption price
of inherited property, including community prop- (sales price).
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a joint Stock identified this way is the stock sold or You cannot add your entire acquisition fee ortenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualified transferred even if stock certificates from a dif- load charge to the cost of the mutual fund sharesjoint interest, and a farm or closely held busi- ferent lot are delivered to the broker or other acquired if all of the following conditions apply. ness. agent.
1. You get a reinvestment right because ofSingle stock certificate. If you bought the purchase of the shares or the paymentAfter 2009. If you inherited property from a stock in different lots at different times and you of the fee or charge.decedent who died after 2009, see Publication hold a single stock certificate for this stock, you4895, Tax Treatment of Property Acquired From 2. You dispose of the shares within 90 dayswill make an adequate identification if you:a Decedent Dying in 2010, to figure your basis. of the purchase date.• Tell your broker or other agent the particu-
3. You acquire new shares in the same mu-lar stock to be sold or transferred whenAdjusted Basis
tual fund or another mutual fund, for whichyou deliver the certificate to your broker or
the fee or charge is reduced or waivedother agent, andBefore you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,
because of the reinvestment right you gotexchange, or other disposition of property or • Receive a written confirmation of this from when you acquired the original shares.figure allowable depreciation, depletion, or your broker or other agent within a reason-amortization, you usually must make certain ad- The amount of the original fee or charge inable time.justments (increases and decreases) to the ba- excess of the reduction in (3) is added to thesis of the property. The result of these cost of the original shares. The rest of the origi-If you sell part of the stock represented by aadjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis. nal fee or charge is added to the cost basis of thesingle certificate directly to the buyer instead ofAdjustments to the basis of stocks and new shares (unless all three conditions abovethrough a broker, you will make an adequatebonds are explained in the following discussion. also apply to the purchase of the new shares).identification if you keep a written record of theFor information about other adjustments to ba- particular stock that you intend to sell. Choosing average basis for mutual fundsis, see Publication 551.
shares. You can choose to use the averageBonds. These methods of identification
basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired thealso apply to bonds sold or transferred.Stocks and Bonds shares at various times and prices and left themIdentification not possible. If you buy and on deposit in an account kept by a custodian orThe basis of stocks or bonds you own generally sell securities at various times in varying quanti- agent. The methods you can use to figure aver-is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase, ties and you cannot adequately identify the age basis are explained later.such as commissions and recording or transfer shares you sell, the basis of the securities youfees. If you acquired stock or bonds other than Undistributed capital gains. If you had tosell is the basis of the securities you acquiredby purchase, your basis is usually determined include in your income any undistributed capitalfirst. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis-by fair market value or the previous owner's gains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase yourcussed later, you cannot use the average priceadjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basis basis in the stock by the difference between theper share to figure gain or loss on the sale of theOther Than Cost. amount you included and the amount of tax paidshares.The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer- for you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam- capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  underExample. You bought 100 shares of stock
ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1.of XYZ Corporation in 1995 for $10 a share. In
stock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce January 1996 you bought another 200 shares Reinvestment right. This is the right to ac-the basis of your original stock. You must also for $11 a share. In July 1996 you gave your son quire mutual fund shares in the same or anotherreduce your basis when you receive nondivi- 50 shares. In December 1998 you bought 100 mutual fund without paying a fee or load charge,dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). shares for $9 a share. In April 2010 you sold 130 or by paying a reduced fee or load charge.These distributions, up to the amount of your shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis-
basis, are a nontaxable return of capital. The original cost basis of mutual fund sharesposed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
you acquire by reinvesting your distributions isquired first to figure the basis. The shares ofThe IRS partners with companies that
the amount of the distributions used to purchasestock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50offer Schedule D software that can im-
each full or fractional share. This rule applies×  $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares ofport trades from many brokerage firms
TIP
even if the distribution is an exempt-interest divi-stock you sold in 2010 as follows:and accounting software to help you keep track
dend that you do not report as income.of your adjusted basis in securities. To find out
50 shares (50 ×  $10) balance ofmore, go to http://www.irs.gov/efile/topic/index. Table 4-1. This is a worksheet you canstock bought in 1995 ......... . $ 500html. use to keep track of the adjusted basis80 shares (80 ×  $11) stock bought in of your mutual fund shares. Enter the
RECORDSJanuary 1996 .............. . 880 cost per share when you acquire new sharesIdentifying stock or bonds sold. If you can Total basis of stock sold in 2010 $1,380 and any adjustments to their basis when theadequately identify the shares of stock or the
adjustment occurs. This worksheet will help youbonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
figure the adjusted basis when you sell or re-basis of the particular shares of stock or bonds. Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basis deem shares.
Adequate identification. You will make an of shares in a mutual fund (or other regulated
adequate identification if you show that certifi- investment company) or a real estate invest-
cates representing shares of stock from a lot that ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the Automatic investment service. If you partici-
you bought on a certain date or for a certain same way as the basis of other stock and usu- pate in an automatic investment service, your
price were delivered to your broker or other ally includes any commissions or load charges basis for each share of stock, including frac-
agent. paid for the purchase. tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is the purchase price plus a share of the broker's your new stock is its fair market value on the you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the
commission. date of distribution. The basis of your old stock basis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18
does not change. per share. The remaining basis of the old stock
Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici- is $21.78 per share.
pate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receive Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits in
stock from the corporation at a discount, your Investment property received in liquidation.the same way as stock dividends if identical
basis is the full fair market value of the stock on In general, if you receive investment property asstock is distributed on the stock held.
the dividend payment date. You must include a distribution in partial or complete liquidation of
the amount of the discount in your income. a corporation and if you recognize gain or lossStock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire
when you acquire the property, your basis in thea corporation's stock. It may be exercised, it mayPublic utilities. If, before 1986, you ex- property is its fair market value at the time of thebe sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.cluded from income the value of stock you had distribution.Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receivereceived under a qualified public utility reinvest-
them. See Distributions of Stock and Stockment plan, your basis in that stock is zero. S corporation stock. You must increase yourRights under Dividends and Other Distributions basis in stock of an S corporation by your proStock dividends. Stock dividends are distri- in chapter 1. rata share of the following items.butions made by a corporation of its own stock. Taxable stock rights. If you receive stockGenerally, stock dividends are not taxable to • All income items of the S corporation, in-rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isyou. However, see Distributions of Stock and cluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa-their fair market value at the time of distribution.Stock Rights under Dividends and Other Distri- rately stated and passed through to you asThe basis of the old stock does not change.butions in chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the a shareholder.
Nontaxable stock rights. If you receivestock dividends are not taxable, you must divide • The nonseparately stated income of the Snontaxable stock rights and allow them to ex-your basis for the old stock between the old and corporation.pire, they have no basis.new stock.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock • The amount of the deduction for depletionNew and old stock identical. If the new rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stock (other than oil and gas depletion) that isstock you received as a nontaxable dividend is rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of more than the basis of the property beingidentical to the old stock on which the dividend the fair market value of the old stock, you must depleted.was declared, divide the adjusted basis of the divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-old stock by the number of shares of old and You must decrease your basis in stock of an Stween the old stock and the stock rights. Use anew stock. The result is your basis for each corporation by your pro rata share of the follow-ratio of the fair market value of each to the totalshare of stock. ing items.fair market value of both at the time of distribu-
tion.Example 1. You owned one share of com- • Distributions by the S corporation thatIf the fair market value of the stock rights wasmon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora- were not included in your income.less than 15%, their basis is zero. However, yoution distributed two new shares of common • All loss and deduction items of the S cor-can choose to divide the basis of the old stockstock for each share held. You then had three poration that are separately stated andbetween the old stock and the stock rights. Toshares of common stock. Your basis in each passed through to you.make the choice, attach a statement to yourshare is $15 ($45 ÷  3).
return for the year in which you received the • Any nonseparately stated loss of the Srights, stating that you choose to divide the basisExample 2. You owned two shares of com- corporation.of the stock.mon stock. You bought one for $30 and the
• Any expense of the S corporation that isother for $45. The corporation distributed two Basis of new stock. If you exercise the not deductible in figuring its taxable in-new shares of common stock for each share stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost come and not properly chargeable to aheld. You had six shares after the distributionÐ plus the basis of the stock rights exercised. capital account.three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷  3) and
three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷  3). • The amount of your deduction for deple-Example. You own 100 shares of ABC
tion of oil and gas wells to the extent theCompany stock, which cost you $22 per share.New and old stock not identical. If the
deduction is not more than your share ofThe ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxablenew stock you received as a nontaxable divi-
the adjusted basis of the wells.stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 moredend is not identical to the old stock on which it
shares at $26 per share. At the time the stockwas declared, the basis of the new stock is However, your basis in the stock cannot berights were distributed, the stock had a marketcalculated differently. Divide the adjusted basis reduced below zero.value of $30, not including the stock rights. Eachof the old stock between the old and the new
stock right had a market value of $3. The marketstock in the ratio of the fair market value of each Specialized small business investment com-
value of the stock rights was less than 15% oflot of stock to the total fair market value of both pany stock or partnership interest. If you
the market value of the stock, but you chose tolots on the date of distribution of the new stock. bought this stock or interest as replacement
divide the basis of your stock between the stock property for publicly traded securities you sold at
and the rights. You figure the basis of the rightsExample. You bought a share of common a gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock or
and the basis of the old stock as follows:stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributed interest by the amount of any postponed gain on
a share of preferred stock for each share of that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly100 shares ×  $22 = $2,200, basis of oldcommon stock held. At the date of distribution, Traded Securities, later.stockyour common stock had a fair market value of
$150 and the preferred stock had a fair market Qualified small business stock. If you100 shares ×  $30 = $3,000, market value ofvalue of $50. You figure the basis of the old and bought this stock as replacement property forold stocknew stock by dividing your $100 basis between other qualified small business stock you sold at
them. The basis of your common stock is $75 a gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-10 rights ×  $3 = $30, market value of rights($150/$200 ×  $100), and the basis of the new placement stock by the amount of any post-
preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 ×  $100). poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on($3,000 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $2,178.22, Qualified Small Business Stock, later.new basis of old stockStock bought at various times. Figure the
basis of stock dividends received on stock you Short sales. If you cannot deduct payments($30 ÷  $3,030) ×  $2,200 = $21.78, basis ofbought at various times and at different prices by you make to a lender in lieu of dividends onrightsallocating to each lot of stock the share of the stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay tostock dividends due to it. the lender is a capital expense, and you mustIf you sell the rights, the basis for figuring
add it to the basis of the stock used to close theTaxable stock dividends. If your stock divi- gain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷  10) per right. If
short sale.dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis of you exercise the rights, the basis of the stock
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Payments in lieu of dividends , later, for it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis- transaction or that is assumed by the buyer must
information about deducting payments in lieu of pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds or be included in the amount realized. This is true
dividends. coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part of even if neither you nor the buyer is personally
this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID on liable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
Premiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at a these obligations in the manner described in trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
premium, the premium is treated as part of your chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons. loan, the amount you realize generally includesbasis in the bond. If you choose to amortize the Increase your basis in the stripped the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerpremium paid on a taxable bond, you must re- tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable and even if the amount of the note is more than theduce the basis of the bond by the amortized part nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba- fair market value of the property.of the premium each year over the life of the sis by the interest that accrued (but was not paid
bond. and was not previously reflected in your basis) Example. You sell stock that you hadAlthough you cannot deduct the premium on before the date you sold the bond or coupon. In pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de- addition, for bonds acquired after June 10, 1987, Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyertermine your adjusted basis in the bond. You add to your basis any accrued market discount pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 inmust reduce the basis of the bond by the pre- not previously reflected in basis. cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000mium you amortized for the period you held the + $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 ±bond.
$6,000).See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter
3 for more information. Payment of cash. If you trade property andHow To Figure
cash for other property, the amount you realizeMarket discount on bonds. If you include Gain or Loss is the fair market value of the property you re-market discount on a bond in income currently, ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-increase the basis of your bond by the amount of You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basismarket discount you include in your income. See property by comparing the amount you realize of the property you trade in from the amount youMarket Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for more with the adjusted basis of the property. realize. If the result is a positive number, it is ainformation. gain. If the result is a negative number, it is aGain. If the amount you realize from a sale or loss.Bonds purchased at par value. A bond pur- trade is more than the adjusted basis of the
chased at par value (face amount) has no pre- property you transfer, the difference is a gain.
mium or discount. When you sell or otherwise No gain or loss. You may have to use a basisLoss. If the adjusted basis of the property youdispose of the bond, you figure the gain or loss for figuring gain that is different from the basistransfer is more than the amount you realize, theby comparing the bond proceeds to the used for figuring loss. In this case, you may havedifference is a loss.purchase price of the bond. neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
the discussion on the basis of property you re-Amount realized. The amount you realizeExample. You purchased a bond several ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost ,from a sale or trade of property is everything youyears ago for its par value of $10,000. You sold receive for the property minus your expenses of earlier.the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gain sale (such as redemption fees, sales commis-of $100. However, if you had sold the bond for sions, sales charges, or exit fees). Amount real- Special Rules for Mutual$9,900, you would have a loss of $100. ized includes the money you receive plus the fair Fundsmarket value of any property or services youAcquisition discount on short-term obliga-
receive.tions. If you include acquisition discount on a To figure your gain or loss when you dispose ofIf you finance the buyer's purchase of yourshort-term obligation in your income currently, mutual fund shares, you need to determineproperty and the debt instrument does not pro-increase the basis of the obligation by the which shares were sold and the basis of thosevide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedamount of acquisition discount you include in shares. If your shares in a mutual fund wereinterest that you must report as ordinary incomeyour income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli- acquired all on the same day and for the samewill reduce the amount realized from the sale.gations in chapter 1 for more information. price, figuring their basis is not difficult. How-For more information, see Publication 537. ever, shares are generally acquired at variousOriginal issue discount (OID) on debt instru- If a buyer of property issues a debt instru-
times, in various quantities, and at variousments. Increase the basis of a debt instrument ment to the seller of the property, the amount
prices. Therefore, figuring your basis can beby the OID you include in your income. See realized is determined by reference to the issue
more difficult. You can choose to use either aOriginal Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1. price of the debt instrument, which may or may
cost basis or an average basis to figure yournot be the fair market value of the debt instru-Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OID gain or loss.ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g).on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax- However, if the debt instrument was previouslyable. However, when you dispose of a issued by a third party (one not part of the saletax-exempt obligation issued after September 3, Cost Basistransaction), the fair market value of the debt1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, you instrument is used to determine the amount real-must accrue OID on the obligation to determine You can figure your gain or loss using a costized.its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added to basis only if you did not previously use an aver-
the basis of the obligation to determine your gain Fair market value. Fair market value is the age basis for a sale, exchange, or redemption of
or loss. price at which property would change hands other shares in the same mutual fund.
For information on determining OID on a between a buyer and a seller, neither being To figure cost basis, you can choose one oflong-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is- forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable the following methods.sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  or knowledge of all the relevant facts.
Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whichever • Specific share identification.
applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID Example. You trade A Company stock with • First-in first-out (FIFO).on Long-Term Debt Instruments. an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity of stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which
1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules for is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000 Specific share identification. If you ade-
acquisition discount on short-term obligations. ($10,000 ± $7,000). If you also receive a note quately identify the shares you sold, you can use
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in for $6,000 that has an issue price of $6,000, the adjusted basis of those particular shares to
chapter 1. your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 + $6,000 ± figure your gain or loss.
$7,000). You will adequately identify your mutual fundStripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-
shares, even if you bought the shares in differentquired a stripped tax-exempt bond or coupon Debt paid off. A debt against the property,
lots at various prices and times, if you:after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID on or against you, that is paid off as a part of the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Specify to your broker or other agent the various times and prices, and you left the shares of all shares owned at the time of each disposi-
particular shares to be sold or transferred on deposit in an account handled by a custodian tion, regardless of how long you owned them.
at the time of the sale or transfer, and or agent who acquires or redeems those shares. Include shares acquired with reinvested divi-
To figure average basis, you can use one of dends or capital gain distributions.2. Receive confirmation in writing from your
the following methods.broker or other agent within a reasonable Table 4-2 illustrates the use of the sin-
time of your specification of the particular gle-category method to figure the average basis• Single-category method.
shares sold or transferred. of shares sold, compared with the use of the• Double-category method. FIFO method to figure cost basis (discussedYou continue to have the burden of proving
earlier).your basis in the specified shares at the time of Once you elect to use an average basis, you
sale or transfer. Even though you include all unsold shares ofmust continue to use it for all accounts in the
a fund in a single category to compute averagesame fund. (You must also continue to use theFirst-in first-out (FIFO).  If your shares were same method.) However, you may use the cost basis, you may have both short-term andacquired at different times or at different prices basis (or a different method of figuring the aver- long-term gains or losses when you sell theseand you cannot identify which shares you sold, age basis) for shares in other funds, even those shares. To determine your holding period, theuse the basis of the shares you acquired first as within the same family of funds. shares disposed of are considered to be thosethe basis of the shares sold. In other words, the
acquired first.oldest shares you own are considered sold first. Example. You own two accounts that holdYou should keep a separate record of each shares of the income fund issued by Company Example. You bought 400 shares in thepurchase and any dispositions of the shares A. You also own 100 shares of the growth fund LJO Mutual Fund: 200 shares on May 14, 2009,until all shares purchased at the same time have issued by Company A. If you elect to use aver- and 200 shares on May 13, 2010. On Novemberbeen disposed of completely. age basis for the first account of the income 10, 2010, you sold 300 shares. The basis of allTable 4-2 (on the next page) illustrates the fund, you must use average basis for the seconduse of the FIFO method to figure the cost basis 300 shares sold is the same, but you held 200account. However, you may use cost basis forof shares sold, compared with the use of the shares for more than 1 year, so your gain or lossthe growth fund.single-category method to figure average basis on those shares is long term. You held 100
(discussed next). You may be able to find the average shares for 1 year or less, so your gain or loss on
basis of your shares from information those shares is short term.
provided by the fund.
TIP How to figure the basis of shares sold. ToAverage Basis
figure the basis of shares you sell, use the steps
Single-category method. Under the sin-You can figure your gain or loss using an aver- in the following worksheet.
gle-category method, you find the average basisage basis only if you acquired the shares at
Table 4-1. Mutual Fund Record
Acquired1 Sold or redeemed
Adjusted2
Number Cost NumberMutual Fund Adjustment to Basis Per Share Basis Per
Date of Per Date ofShare
Shares Share Shares
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 3. The facts are the same as inTable 4-2. Example of How To Figure Basis of Shares Sold
Example 1, except that you bought an additional
This is an example showing two different ways to figure basis. It compares the cost basis using 150 shares at $14 a share on September 17,
the FIFO method with the average basis using the single-category method. 2010, and then sold 50 shares on December 20,
2010. The total adjusted basis of all the sharesDate Action Share Price No. of Shares Total Shares you owned just before the sale is $4,500, figuredOwned as follows.
2/6/09 Invest $4,000 $25 160 160
1. Basis of remaining shares ($16 x
8/7/09 Invest $4,800 $20 240 400 150) .................. . $2,400
2. Cost of shares acquired 9/17/1012/18/09 Reinvest $300 ($14 x 150) .............. . $2,100dividend $30 10 410 3. Total adjusted basis of all shares
owned ($2,400 + $2,100) .... . $4,50010/1/10 Sell 210 shares $32 210 200
for $6,720
The basis of the shares sold is $750 ($15 a
share), figured as follows.COST BASIS To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/1/10, use the share
(FIFO) price of the first 210 shares you bought, namely the 160 shares you 1. Enter the total adjusted basis of allpurchased on 2/6/09 and 50 of those purchased on 8/7/09. the shares you owned in the fund
$4,000 (cost of 160 shares on 2/6/09) just before the sale. (If you made
+ $1,000 (cost of 50 shares on 8/7/09) an earlier sale of shares in this
fund, add the adjusted basis of anyBasis = $5,000
shares you still owned after the
last sale and the adjusted basis of
AVERAGE BASIS To figure the basis of the 210 shares sold on 10/1/10, use the any shares you acquired after that
(single-category) average basis of all 410 shares owned on 10/1/10. sale.) ................... . $4,500
$9,100 (cost of 410 shares) 2. Enter the total number of shares÷ 410 (number of shares) you owned in the fund just before$22.20 (average basis per share) the sale ................. . 300
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the$22.20
amount on line 2. This is your× 210
average basis per share ..... . $ 15Basis = $4,662
4. Enter the number of shares you
sold .................... . 50
1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all 1. Enter the total adjusted basis of all 5. Multiply the amount on line 3 bythe shares you owned in the fund the shares you owned in the fund the amount on line 4. This is thejust before the sale. (If you made just before the sale. (If you made basis of the shares you sold .. . $ 750an earlier sale of shares in this an earlier sale of shares in this
fund, add the adjusted basis of any fund, add the adjusted basis of any
shares you still owned after the last shares you still owned after the Double-category method. In thesale and the adjusted basis of any last sale and the adjusted basis of double-category method, all shares in an ac-shares you acquired after that any shares you acquired after that count at the time of each disposition are dividedsale.) ................... . $ sale.) ................... . $4,800 into two categories: short term and long term.
2. Enter the total number of shares 2. Enter the total number of shares Shares held 1 year or less are short term.
you owned in the fund just before you owned in the fund just before Shares held longer than 1 year are long term.
the sale ................. . the sale ................. . 300 The basis of each share in a category is the
3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the 3. Divide the amount on line 1 by the average basis for that category. This is the total
amount on line 2. This is your amount on line 2. This is your remaining basis of all shares in that category at
average basis per share ..... . $ average basis per share ..... . $ 16 the time of disposition divided by the total shares
in the category at that time. To use this method,4. Enter the number of shares you 4. Enter the number of shares you
you specify, to the custodian or agent handlingsold .................... . sold .................... . 150
your account, from which category the shares5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by the 5. Multiply the amount on line 3 by are to be sold or transferred. The custodian oramount on line 4. This is the basis the amount on line 4. This is the agent must confirm in writing your specification.of the shares you sold ...... . $ basis of the shares you sold .. . $2,400 If you do not specify or receive confirmation, you
must first charge the shares sold against theExample 1. You bought 300 shares in the Remaining shares. The average basis of long-term category and then charge any remain-LJP Mutual Fund: 100 shares in 2007 for $1,000 the shares you still hold after a sale of some of ing shares sold against the short-term category.($10 per share); 100 shares in 2008 for $1,200 your shares is the same as the average basis of
Changing categories. After you have held($12 per share); and 100 shares in 2009 for the shares sold. The next time you make a sale,
a mutual fund share for more than 1 year, you$2,600 ($26 per share). Thus, the total cost of your average basis will still be the same, unless
must transfer that share from the short-termyour shares was $4,800 ($1,000 + $1,200 + you have acquired additional shares (or have
category to the long-term category. The basis of$2,600). On May 11, 2010, you sold 150 shares. made a subsequent adjustment to basis).
a transferred share is its actual cost or otherThe basis of the shares you sold is $2,400 ($16
Example 2. The facts are the same as in basis to you unless some of the shares in theper share), figured as follows.
Example 1, except that you sold an additional 50 short-term category have been disposed of. In
shares on December 17, 2010. You do not need that case, the basis of a transferred share is the
to recompute the average basis of the 150 average basis of the undisposed shares at the
shares you owned at that time because you time of the most recent disposition from this
acquired or sold no shares, and had no other category.
adjustments to basis, since the last sale. Your
basis is the $16 per share figured earlier. Making the choice. You choose to use the
average basis of mutual fund shares by clearly
showing on your income tax return, for each
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year the choice applies, that you used an aver- or a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a the percentage of its income that is col-
age basis in reporting gain or loss from the sale trade of like property. The trade of a piece lected from its members for the purpose of
or transfer of the shares. You must specify of machinery for a store building is not a meeting losses and expenses).
whether you used the single-category method or trade of like property. Real property lo- • The shares in the company have beenthe double-category method in determining av- cated in the United States and real prop- recognized by the highest court of theerage basis. This choice is effective until you get erty located outside the United States are state in which the company was organizedpermission from the IRS to revoke it. not like property. Also, personal property or by applicable state statute as constitut-used predominantly within the UnitedShares received as gift. If your account ing or representing real property or an in-States and personal property usedincludes shares that you received by gift, and terest in real property.predominantly outside the United Statesthe fair market value of the shares at the time of • The trade occurred after May 22, 2008.are not like property.the gift was not more than the donor's basis,
special rules apply. You cannot choose to use 5. The property to be received must be identi-
How to report. You must report the trade ofthe average basis for the account unless you fied in writing within 45 days after the date
like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-submit a statement with your initial choice. It you transfer the property given up in the
nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onmust state that the basis used in figuring the trade. If you received the replacement
Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,average basis of the gift shares will be the FMV property before the end of the 45-day pe-
Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.at the time of the gift. This statement applies to riod, you automatically are treated as hav-
For information on using Form 4797, seegift shares received before and after making the ing met the 45-day written notice
chapter 4 of Publication 544.choice, as long as the choice to use the average requirement.
basis is in effect. 6. The property to be received must be re-
Corporate Stocksceived by the earlier of:When there is a sale, exchange, or
redemption of your shares in a fund, The following trades of corporate stocks gener-a. The 180th day after the date on whichkeep the confirmation statement you
RECORDS ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleyou transfer the property given up in thereceive. The statement shows the price you re- loss.trade, orceived for the shares and other information you
need to report gain or loss on your return. b. The due date, including extensions, for Corporate reorganizations. In some in-
your tax return for the year in which the stances, a company will give you common stock
transfer of the property given up occurs. for preferred stock, preferred stock for common
stock, or stock in one corporation for stock in
If you trade property with a related party in a another corporation. If this is a result of aNontaxable Trades like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply. merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlled
See Related Party Transactions , later in this corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-This section discusses trades that generally do chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544 porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-not result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss. for more information on exchanges of business zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.For more information on nontaxable trades, see property and special rules for exchanges usingchapter 1 of Publication 544. qualified intermediaries or involving multiple Example 1. On April 19, 2010, KP1 Corpo-
properties. ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You
Like-Kind Exchanges held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis ofPartly nontaxable exchange. If you receive $3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re-If you trade business or investment property for money or unlike property in addition to the like ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange forother business or investment property of a like property, and the preceding six conditions are your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain orkind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deduct met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You are loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70any loss until you sell or dispose of the property taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to the shares of the new stock is still $3,500.you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade must amount of the money and the fair market value
meet all six of the following conditions. of the unlike property you receive. You cannot Example 2. On July 26, 2010, RGB Corpo-deduct a loss. ration divests itself of SFH Corporation. You1. The property must be business or invest-
hold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis ofLike property and unlike property trans-ment property. You must hold both the
$5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock asferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-property you trade and the property you
a result of the spin-off. You do not recognize anytion to the like property, you must recognize gainreceive for productive use in your trade or
gain or loss on the transaction. You receiveor loss on the unlike property you give up. Thebusiness or for investment. Neither prop-
information from RGB Corporation that your ba-gain or loss is the difference between the ad-erty may be property used for personal
sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of yourjusted basis of the unlike property and its fairpurposes, such as your home or family
basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis inmarket value.car.
SFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stock
2. The property must not be held primarily for Like property and money transferred. If (after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 ± $592).
sale. The property you trade and the prop- conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-
erty you receive must not be property you able trade even if you pay money in addition to Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting
sell to customers, such as merchandise. the like property. corporation should send you information that
includes details on how to allocate basis be-3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, Basis of property received. You figure your tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa-notes, choses in action, certificates of trust basis in property received in a nontaxable or tion until the period of limitations expires for theor beneficial interest, or other securities or partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba- year in which you dispose of the stock in aevidences of indebtedness or interest, in- sis Other Than Cost, earlier. taxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years fromcluding partnership interests. However, the date the return was due or filed, or 2 yearssee Special rules for mutual ditch, reser- Special rules for mutual ditch, reservoir, or from the date the tax was paid, whichever isvoir, or irrigation company stock, later. irrigation company stock. For purposes of later.Also, you can have a nontaxable trade of item 3 above, stock does not include shares in a
corporate stocks under a different rule, as mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation company if Stock for stock of the same corporation.discussed later under Corporate Stocks. all of the following conditions are met at the time You can exchange common stock for commonof the trade.4. There must be a trade of like property. The stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the
trade of real estate for real estate, or per- • The mutual ditch, reservoir, or irrigation same corporation without having a recognized
sonal property for similar personal prop- company is an organization described in gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two
erty, is a trade of like property. The trade section 501(c)(12)(A) of the Internal Reve- stockholders as well as a trade between a stock-
of an apartment house for a store building, nue Code (determined without regard to holder and the corporation.
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive cash for fractional shares, see trades that are part of mergers or other corpo- true even if you exchange shares in one fund for
Fractional shares  under Distributions of stock rate reorganizations, you will have no recog- shares in another fund within the same family of
and stock rights in chapter 1. nized gain or loss if certain requirements are funds. Report any gain or loss on the shares you
met. For more information about the tax conse- gave up as a capital gain or loss in the year inMoney or other property received. If in an quences of converting securities of one corpora- which the exchange occurs. Usually, you canotherwise nontaxable trade you receive money tion into common stock of another corporation, add any service charge or fee paid in connectionor other property in addition to stock, then your under circumstances such as those just de- with an exchange to the cost of the shares ac-gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to scribed, consult the respective corporations and quired. For an exception, see Commissions andthe amount of the money or other property. Any the terms of the bond issue. This information is load charges under Shares in a mutual fund orloss is not recognized. also available on the prospectus of the bond REIT, earlier.If you received cash for fractional shares, issue.see Fractional shares  under Distributions of
Insurance PoliciesStock and Stock Rights in chapter 1. Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
tion. If you transfer property to a corporation and AnnuitiesNonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop- and immediately after the trade you are in con- You will not have a recognized gain or loss if theerty other than stock. Generally, this applies to trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not insured or annuitant is the same under bothpreferred stock with one or more of the following recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both contracts and you trade:features. to individuals and to groups who transfer prop- • A life insurance contract for another life• The holder has the right to require the erty to a corporation. It does not apply if the insurance contract or for an endowment orissuer or a related person to redeem or corporation is an investment company. annuity contract or for a qualifiedpurchase the stock. If you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- long-term care insurance contract,ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled• The issuer or a related person is required corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani- • An endowment contract for another en-to redeem or purchase the stock. zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the dowment contract that provides for regular
• The issuer or a related person has the stock you receive in the exchange is used to pay payments beginning at a date no later
right to redeem the stock, and on the issue off your debts. than the beginning date under the old con-
date, it is more likely than not that the right For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo- tract or for annuity contract or for a quali-
will be exercised. ration, you or your group of transferors must fied long-term insurance contract,
own, immediately after the exchange, at least• The dividend rate on the stock varies with • An annuity contract for annuity contract or80% of the total combined voting power of allreference to interest rates, commodity for a qualified long-term care insuranceclasses of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%prices, or similar indices. contract, orof the outstanding shares of each class of non-
For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre- voting stock of the corporation. • A qualified long-term care insurance con-
ferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter- If this provision applies to you, you may have tract for a qualified long-term care insur-
nal Revenue Code. to attach to your return a complete statement of ance contract.
all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,
Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener- see Regulations section 1.351-3. You also may not have to recognize gain or lossally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you Money or other property received. If, in an from an exchange of a portion of an annuityconvert bonds into stock or preferred stock into otherwise nontaxable trade of property for cor- contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-common stock of the same corporation accord- porate stock, you also receive money or prop- nue Ruling 2003-76 and Revenue Procedureing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the erty other than stock, you may have a taxable 2008-24 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008-13.bond or the preferred stock certificate. gain. However, you are taxed only up to the Revenue Ruling 2003-76 is available at www.irs.
amount of money plus the fair market value of gov/irb/2003-33_IRB/ar11.html. Revenue Pro-Example. In November, you bought for $1 a the other property you receive. The rules for cedure 2008-24 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on figuring taxable gain in this situation generally 2008-13_IRB/ar13.html.payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued follow those for a partly nontaxable exchangeby that corporation. Exchanges of contracts not included in thisdiscussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. IfOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond, list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-the property you give up includes depreciablewhich was issued on December 9. The bond ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-property, the taxable gain may have to be re-contained a clause stating that you would re- tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossstock on surrender of one bond and the payment is recognized.of $50. Demutualization of LifeNonqualified preferred stock (described ear-Later, you presented the bond and $50 and Insurance Companieslier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-received one share of XYZ Corporation common tion) received is generally treated as propertystock. You did not have a recognized gain or A life insurance company may change from aother than stock.loss. This is true whether the fair market value of mutual company to a stock company. This is
the stock was more or less than $150 on the Basis of stock or other property received. commonly called demutualization. If you were a
date of the conversion. The basis of the stock you receive is generally policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-
The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + the adjusted basis of the property you transfer. pany, you may have received either stock in the
$99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your Increase this amount by any amount that was stock company or cash in exchange for your
holding period for the part based on your owner- treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognized equity interest in the mutual company.
ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem- on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cash If the demutualization transaction qualifiesber 2. Your holding period for the part based on you received and the fair market value of any as a tax-free reorganization under sectionyour cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the other property you received. 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gainday after you acquired the share of stock. The basis of any other property you receive or loss is recognized on the exchange. Youris its fair market value on the date of the trade. holding period for the new stock includes theBonds for stock of another corporation.
period you held an equity interest in the mutualGenerally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo- Exchange of Shares In One company as a policyholder or annuitant.ration into common stock of another corporation,
Mutual Fund For Shares In If the demutualization transaction does notaccording to the terms of the bond issue, you
qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-must recognize gain or loss up to the difference Another Mutual Fund
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, youbetween the fair market value of the stock re-
must recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold-ceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex- Any exchange of shares in one fund for shares
changed. In some instances, however, such as in another fund is a taxable exchange. This is ing period for the stock does not include the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period you held an equity interest in the mutual • A corporation in which you directly or indi-
company. rectly own more than 50% in value of theRelated PartyIf you received cash in exchange for your outstanding stock (see Constructive own-
equity interest, you must recognize a capital ership of stock, later).Transactionsgain. If you held an equity interest for more than • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-1 year, your gain is long term. Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- ganization directly or indirectly controlled,
erty between related parties. in any manner or by any method, by you
U.S. Treasury or by a member of your family, whether or
not this control is legally enforceable.Notes or Bonds Gain on Sale or Trade
of Depreciable PropertyYou can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertyobligations for other issues, designated by the Your gain from the sale or trade of property to a is not deductible if the transaction is directly orSecretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss related party may be ordinary income, rather indirectly between the following related parties.recognized on the trade. than capital gain, if the property can be depreci-See the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 inTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information and beneficiary, of any trust.Publication 544 for more information.about income from these investments. • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the
fiduciary and beneficiary of two different
Like-Kind Exchanges trusts, if the same person is the grantor of
both trusts.Transfers Between Generally, if you trade business or investment
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichproperty for other business or investment prop-
Spouses more than 50% in value of the outstandingerty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized.
stock is directly or indirectly owned by orSee Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non-
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a for the trust, or by or for the grantor of thetaxable Trades.
transfer of property from an individual to (or in trust.This rule also applies to trades of propertytrust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to between related parties, defined next under • A corporation and a partnership if thea divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How- same persons own more than 50% inrule does not apply in the following situations. ever, if either you or the related party disposes of value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
• The recipient spouse or former spouse is the like property within 2 years after the trade, poration and more than 50% of the capital
a nonresident alien. interest, or the profits interest, in the part-you both must report any gain or loss not recog-
nership.nized on the original trade on your return for the• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must
year in which the later disposition occurs.be recognized to the extent the amount of • Two S corporations if the same persons
This rule generally does not apply to:the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus own more than 50% in value of the out-
any liabilities on the property, exceed the standing stock of each corporation.• Dispositions due to the death of either re-adjusted basis of the property. lated party, • Two corporations, one of which is an S
• An installment obligation is transferred in corporation, if the same persons own• Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 oftrust. For information on the disposition of more than 50% in value of the outstandingPublication 544), oran installment obligation, see Publication stock of each corporation.
• Trades and later dispositions whose main537, Installment Sales. • An executor and a beneficiary of an estatepurpose is not the avoidance of federal• Certain stock redemptions, which are tax- (except in the case of a sale or trade toincome tax.able to a spouse under the tax law, a di- satisfy a pecuniary bequest).
vorce or separation instrument, or a valid If a property holder's risk of loss on the prop- • Two corporations that are members of thewritten agreement, discussed in Regula- erty is substantially diminished during any pe- same controlled group (under certain con-tions section 1.1041-2. riod, that period is not counted in determining ditions, however, these losses are not dis-
whether the property was disposed of within 2 allowed but must be deferred).Any transfer of property to a spouse or former years. The property holder's risk of loss is sub-spouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is • Two partnerships if the same personsstantially diminished by:treated by the recipient as a gift and is not own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%
considered a sale or exchange. The recipient's • The holding of a put on the property, of the capital interests or the profit inter-
basis in the property will be the same as the ests in both partnerships.• The holding by another person of a right toadjusted basis of the giver immediately before acquire the property, orthe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies Multiple property sales or trades. If you sellwhether the adjusted basis of the transferred • A short sale or any other transaction. or trade to a related party a number of blocks ofproperty is less than, equal to, or greater than stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youeither its fair market value at the time of transfer must figure the gain or loss separately for eachLosses on Sales oror any consideration paid by the recipient. This block of stock or piece of property. The gain onTrades of Propertyrule applies for purposes of determining loss as each item may be taxable. However, you cannotwell as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotin trust increases the basis. property, other than a distribution in complete reduce gains from the sales of any of theseA transfer of property is incident to a divorce liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is items by losses on the sales of any of the otherif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date directly or indirectly between you and the follow- items.on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is ing related parties.related to the ending of the marriage. For more Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct
information, see Property Settlements in Publi- • Members of your family. This includes only your loss on the sale of stock through your
cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. your brothers and sisters, half-brothers broker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
and half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par- party buys the same stock you had owned. This
ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de- does not apply to a trade between related par-
ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
dental and is not prearranged.• A partnership in which you directly or indi-
rectly own more than 50% of the capital Constructive ownership of stock. In deter-
interest or the profits interest. mining whether a person directly or indirectly
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora- Put part of the merchandise for sale to custom-
tion, the following rules apply. ers. For an exception see Capital assetRegulated futures contract treatment for self-created musical works,Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by Section 1256 contract later.or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust
Straddleis considered owned proportionately by or for its 2. Depreciable property used in your trade or
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. business, even if fully depreciated.Wash sale
Rule 2. An individual is considered to own 3. Real property used in your trade or busi-
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his ness.
This section discusses the tax treatment ofor her family. Family includes only brothers and 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticgains and losses from different types of invest-sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, composition, a letter or memorandum, orment transactions.ancestors, and lineal descendants. similar property that is:
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by Character of gain or loss. You need to clas- a. Created by your personal efforts,applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly capital gains or losses. You then need to classify b. Prepared or produced for you (in the
owned by or for his or her partner. your capital gains and losses as either short case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-
term or long term. If you have long-term gains lar property), orRule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock
and losses, you must identify your 28% rateconstructively owned by a person under rule 1 is c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,treated as actually owned by that person. But ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisyou must also identify any unrecaptured sectionstock constructively owned by an individual of the person who created the property1250 gain.under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by or for whom it was prepared or pro-The correct classification and identificationthat individual for again applying either rule 2 or duced.helps you figure the limit on capital losses andrule 3 to make another person the constructive
For an exception to this rule, see Capitalthe correct tax on capital gains. For informationowner of the stock.
asset treatment for self-created musicalabout determining whether your capital gain or
works, later.loss is short term or long term, see HoldingProperty received from a related party. If
Period, later. For information about 28% rateyou sell or trade at a gain property you acquired 5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired ingain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250from a related party, you recognize the gain only the ordinary course of a trade or businessgain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report-to the extent that it is more than the loss previ- for services rendered or from the sale ofing Capital Gains and Losses, later.ously disallowed to the related party. This rule property described in (1).
applies only if you are the original transferee and
6. U.S. Government publications that you re-you acquired the property by purchase or ex- Capital or Ordinary ceived from the government free or for lesschange. This rule does not apply if the related Gain or Loss than the normal sales price, or that youparty's loss was disallowed because of the wash
acquired under circumstances entitling yousale rules, described later under Wash Sales. If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss to the basis of someone who received theIf you sell or trade at a loss property you from a transaction, it may be either a capital gain publications free or for less than the nor-acquired from a related party, you cannot recog- or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on mal sales price.nize the loss that was not allowed to the related the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of
party. a capital asset (defined next) results in a capital 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-
gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset struments held by commodities derivativesExample 1. Your brother sells you stock for generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- dealers. For more information, see section$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell a sale or trade of property used in a trade or 8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-the same stock to an unrelated party for business may be treated as either capital or action is clearly identified as a hedging$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report- ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In transaction before the close of the day onable gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus the some situations, part of your gain or loss may be which it was acquired, originated, or en-$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother). a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- tered into. For more information, see thenary gain or loss. definition of hedging transaction earlier,Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the
and the discussion of hedging transactionsstock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-
under Commodity Futures, later.nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minus Capital Assets and
$6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that was Noncapital Assets 9. Supplies of a type you regularly use ornot allowed to your brother. consume in the ordinary course of your
For the most part, everything you own and use trade or business.
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment
is a capital asset. Some examples are: Investment property. Investment property isCapital Gains • Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or
count, trade generally is a capital gain or loss.and Losses
Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.• A house owned and used by you and your
Terms you may need to know These are capital assets except when they arefamily,
held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from(see Glossary): • Household furnishings, their sale or trade generally is a capital gain or
Call • A car used for pleasure or commuting, loss.
Commodity future • Coin or stamp collections, Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of
these, including stock received as a dividend,Conversion transaction • Gems and jewelry, and are capital assets except when they are held for
Forward contract • Gold, silver, or any other metal. sale by a securities dealer. However, see
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) StockLimited partner
Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- and Losses on Small Business Investment
Listed option cept the following noncapital assets. Company Stock, later.
Nonequity option 1. Property held mainly for sale to customers Personal use property. Property held for per-
Options dealer or property that will physically become a sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
capital asset, and you must report a gain from its to include it in income again. See Discount on than the entire OID is treated as ordinary income
sale as a capital gain. However, you cannot Short-Term Obligations  in chapter 1 for more at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable
deduct a loss from selling personal use property. information. gain also applies to corporate instruments is-
sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu- Tax-exempt state and local government mitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, and
sical works. You can elect to treat musical bonds. If these bonds were originally issued at all times thereafter.
compositions and copyrights in musical works at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you
as capital assets when you sell or exchange acquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
them if: part of OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April
your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these 1, 1982, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2010,• Your personal efforts created the property, bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.or of OID. At the time of original issue, there was no inten-• You acquired the property under circum- If the bonds were issued after September 3, tion to call the bond before maturity. You havestances (for example, by gift) entitling you 1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- held the bond for 336 full months. Do not countto the basis of the person who created the crease the adjusted basis by your part of OID to the additional days that are less than a fullproperty or for whom it was prepared or figure gain or loss. For more information on the month. The number of complete months fromproduced. basis of these bonds, see Discounted date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30tax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and years). The fraction 336/360 multiplied by theYou must make a separate election for each Bonds, earlier in this chapter. discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal tomusical composition (or copyright in a musical Any gain from market discount is usually $280. This is your ratable share of OID for thework) sold or exchanged during the tax year. taxable on disposition or redemption of period you owned the bond. You must treat anyYou must make the election on or before the due tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bondsdate (including extensions) of the income tax part of the gain up to $280 as ordinary income.before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-return for the tax year of the sale or exchange. As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated ascount is capital gain. If you bought the bondsYou must make the election on Schedule D ordinary income.after April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis-(Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange as count is ordinary income.the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord- Long-term debt instruments issued after
You figure market discount by subtractinging to the Schedule D and its instructions. May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-
the price you paid for the bond from the sum ofYou can revoke the election if you have IRS ernment instrument). If you hold one of thesethe original issue price of the bond and theapproval. To get IRS approval, you must submit debt instruments, you must include a part of OIDamount of accumulated OID from the date ofa request for a letter ruling under the appropriate in your gross income each year you own theissue that represented interest to any earlierIRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev- instrument. Your basis in that debt instrument isholders. For more information, see Market Dis-enue Procedure 2010-1, 2010-1 I.R.B. 1, avail- increased by the amount of OID that you havecount Bonds in chapter 1.able at www.irs.gov/irb/2010-01_IRB/ar06.html. included in your gross income. See Original Is-Alternatively, you are granted an automatic A loss on the sale or other disposition of a sue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.6-month extension from the due date of your tax-exempt state or local government bond is If you sell or trade the debt instrument beforeincome tax return (excluding extensions) to re- deductible as a capital loss. maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifvoke the election, provided you timely file your Redeemed before maturity. If a state or at the time the instrument was originally issuedincome tax return, and within this 6-month ex- local bond issued before June 9, 1980, is re- there was an intention to call it before its matur-tension period, you file Form 1040X that treats deemed before it matures, the OID is not taxable ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to thethe sale or exchange as the sale or exchange of to you. extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountsproperty that is not a capital asset.
If a state or local bond issued after June 8, of OID previously includible in your income. In
1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of this case, the rest of the gain is capital gain.
OID earned while you hold the bond is not tax-Discounted Debt Instruments An intention to call a debt instrument before
able to you. However, you must report the maturity means there is a written or oral agree-Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, unearned part of OID as a capital gain. ment or understanding not provided for in theor retirement of a bond or other debt instrument debt instrument between the issuer and originaloriginally issued at a discount or bought at a Example. On July 1, 1999, the date of is- holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru-discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru-plained in the following discussions. for $800. The face amount of the bond was ments that are part of an issue, the agreement or$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time understanding must be between the issuer andShort-term government obligations. Treat the bond was issued, the issuer had no intention the original holders of a substantial amount ofgains on short-term federal, state, or local gov- of redeeming it before it matured. The bond was
the debt instruments in the issue.ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli- callable at its face amount beginning 10 years
gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable after the issue date. Example 1. On February 2, 2008, youshare of the acquisition discount. This treatment The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor-applies to obligations with a fixed maturity date 11 years (July 1, 2010) for its face amount of poration's 10-year, 5% bond which has a statednot more than 1 year from the date of issue. $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The redemption price at maturity of $10,000. OnAcquisition discount is the stated redemption OID earned during the time you held the bond, February 4, 2010, you sold the bond for $9,040.price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual Assume you have included $334 of OID in yourtion. interest also is not taxable. However, you must gross income (including the amount accrued forHowever, do not treat these gains as income report the unearned part of OID ($127) as a 2010) and increased your basis in the bond byto the extent you previously included the dis- capital gain. that amount. Your basis is now $7,934. If at thecount in income. See Discount on Short-Term
time of the original issue there was no intentionObligations in chapter 1 for more information. Long-term debt instruments issued after
to call the bond before maturity, your gain of1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July
Short-term nongovernment obligations. $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minus $7,9342, 1982, if a government instrument). If you
Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- adjusted basis) is capital gain.sell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these
gations as ordinary income up to your ratable debt instruments, the part of your gain that is not
share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga- Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time ofmore than your ratable share of OID at the time
tions with a fixed maturity date of not more than original issue there was an intention to call theof sale or redemption is ordinary income. The
1 year from the date of issue. bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinaryrest of the gain is capital gain. If, however, there
However, to the extent you previously in- was an intention to call the debt instrument income. You figure this as follows:
cluded the discount in income, you do not have before maturity, all of your gain that is not more
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1) Entire OID ($10,000 stated gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the sale If the actual loss that is finally determined is
redemption price at maturity minus more than the amount you deducted as an esti-or redemption is capital loss.
$7,600 issue price) ......... . $2,400 mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as a
2) Minus: Amount previously included bad debt. If the actual loss is less than the
in income ............... . 334 Bearer Obligations amount deducted as an estimated loss, you3) Maximum amount of ordinary must include in income (in the final determina-income ................. . $2,066 You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-
required to be in registered form that is instead eries  in Publication 525, Taxable andBecause the amount in (3) is more than your
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the Nontaxable Income.gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-
sale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi-come.
nary income. However, if the issuer was subject Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseMarket discount bonds. If the debt instru- to a tax when the obligation was issued, then to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty lossment has market discount and you chose to you can deduct any loss, and any gain may or an ordinary loss, you wait until the year theinclude the discount in income as it accrued, qualify for capital gain treatment. amount of the actual loss is determined andincrease your basis in the debt instrument by the deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss on Obligations required to be in registered Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched-its disposition. If you did not choose to include form. Any obligation must be in registered ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi-the discount in income as it accrued, you must ness Bad Debts, later.form unless:report gain as ordinary interest income up to the
instrument's accrued market discount. See Mar- • It is issued by a natural person,
ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of the Sale of Annuity• It is not of a type offered to the public,gain is capital gain.
However, a different rule applies if you dis- • It has a maturity at the date of issue of not The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity
pose of a market discount bond that was: more than 1 year, or contract before its maturity date that is based on
interest accumulated on the contract is ordinary• Issued before July 19, 1984, and • It was issued before 1983. income.
• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993.
Deposit in Insolvent or 
Conversion TransactionsBankrupt Financial InstitutionIn that case, any gain is treated as interest
income up to the amount of your deferred inter- Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversionIf you lose money you have on deposit in a bank,est deduction for the year you dispose of the transaction is treated as ordinary income. Thiscredit union, or other financial institution thatbond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The applies to gain on the disposition or other termi-becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may be ablelimit on the interest deduction for market dis- nation of any position you held as part of ato deduct your loss in one of three ways.count bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under conversion transaction you entered into afterWhen To Deduct Investment Interest.) • Ordinary loss. April 30, 1993.
Report the sale or trade of a market discount A conversion transaction is any transaction• Casualty loss.
bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line that meets both of these tests.• Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you did
loss). 1. Substantially all of your expected returnnot choose to include market discount in income
from the transaction is due to the timecurrently, enter ªAccrued Market Discountº on
value of your net investment. In otherthe next line in column (a) and the amount of the Ordinary loss or casualty loss. If you can
words, the return on your investment is, inaccrued market discount as a loss in column (f). reasonably estimate your loss, you can choose substance, like interest on a loan.Also report the amount of accrued market dis- to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinarycount in column (f) as interest income on Sched- loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Either 2. The transaction is one of the following.ule B (Form 1040A or 1040), line 1, and identify way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-it as ªAccrued Market Discount.º a. A straddle as defined under Straddles,tion. later, but including any set of offsettingRetirement of debt instrument. Any amount If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a positions on stock established beforeyou receive on the retirement of a debt instru- miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule October 22, 2004.ment is treated in the same way as if you had A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amount
sold or traded that instrument. b. Any transaction in which you acquireyou can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are
property (whether or not actively traded)married filing separately) reduced by any ex-Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation
at substantially the same time that youpected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isof an individual issued with OID after March 1,
contract to sell the same property, or1984, you generally must include the OID in your subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income substantially identical property, at aincome currently, and your gain or loss on its limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary price set in the contract.sale or retirement is generally capital gain or loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured.
loss. An exception to this treatment applies if the c. Any other transaction that is marketedIf you claim a casualty loss, attach Form
obligation is a loan between individuals and all or sold as producing capital gains from4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return.the following requirements are met. a transaction described in (1).Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your total
casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%• The lender is not in the business of lend-
ing money. of your adjusted gross income.
Amount treated as ordinary income. TheYou cannot choose either of these methods• The amount of the loan, plus the amount amount of gain treated as ordinary income is theif:of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 smaller of:
or less. • You own at least 1% of the financial insti- • The gain recognized on the disposition ortution,• Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- other termination of the position, or
cipal purposes of the loan. • You are an officer of the institution, or • The ªapplicable imputed income amount.º
• You are related to such an owner or of-If the exception applies, or the obligation was
ficer. You are related if you and the ownerissued before March 2, 1984, you do not include Applicable imputed income amount. Figureor officer are ªrelated parties,º as definedthe OID in your income currently. When you sell this amount as follows.earlier under Related Party Transactions,or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain
or if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, or 1. Figure the amount of interest that wouldthat is not more than your accrued share of OID
niece of the owner or officer. have accrued on your net investment inat that time is ordinary income. The rest of the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the conversion transaction for the period February 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the asset and you are obligated to reimburse
identification was made by that date. all or substantially all of any decline inending on the earlier of:
value of the financial asset.
Options dealers and commodities traders.a. The date you dispose of the position, or
• A forward or futures contract to acquire aThese rules do not apply to options dealers andb. The date the transaction stops being a financial asset.commodities traders.conversion transaction.
• The holding of a call option and writing ofHow to report. Use Form 6781 to report con-To figure this amount, use an interest rate a put option on a financial asset at sub-version transactions. See the instructions forequal to 120% of the ªapplicable rate,º de- stantially the same strike price and matur-lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781.fined later. ity date.
2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated as
This provision does not apply if all the posi-Commodity Futuresordinary income from any earlier disposi-
tions are marked to market. Marked to markettion or other termination of a position held
rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed inA commodity futures contract is a standardized,as part of the same conversion transac-
detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked toexchange-traded contract for the sale ortion. Market, earlier.purchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a
future date for a fixed price.Applicable rate. If the term of the conver- Financial asset. A financial asset, for thisIf the contract is a regulated futures contract,sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rate purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-throughthe rules described earlier under Section 1256is the federal short-term rate in effect under entity. Pass-through entities include partner-Contracts Marked to Market apply to it.section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest-The termination of a commodity futures con-during the period of the conversion transaction, ment companies, and real estate investmenttract generally results in capital gain or losscompounded daily. trusts.unless the contract is a hedging transaction.In all other cases, the applicable rate is the
Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap-ªapplicable federal rateº determined as if the Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that
ital gain is treated as ordinary income to theconversion transaction were a debt instrument is a hedging transaction generally produces or-
extent it is more than the net underlyingand compounded semi-annually. dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg-
long-term capital gain. The net underlyinging transaction if you enter into the contract inThe rates discussed above are published by
long-term capital gain is the net capital gain youthe ordinary course of your business primarily tothe IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you
would have realized if you acquired the asset formanage the risk of interest rate or price changescan contact the IRS to get these rates. See
its fair market value on the date the constructiveor currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinarychapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS.
ownership transaction was opened and sold theproperty, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or-
asset for its fair market value on the date theNet investment. To determine your net in- dinary property or obligations are those that can-
transaction was closed. If you do not establishvestment in a conversion transaction, include not produce capital gain or loss under any
the amount of net underlying long-term capitalcircumstances.) For example, the offset or exer-the fair market value of any position at the time it
gain by clear and convincing evidence, it iscise of a futures contract that protects againstbecomes part of the transaction. This means
treated as zero.price changes in your business inventory resultsyour net investment generally will be the total
in an ordinary gain or loss.amount you invested, less any amount you re-
More information. For more informationFor more information about hedging transac-ceived for entering into the position (for exam-
about constructive ownership transactions, seetions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,ple, a premium you received for writing a call).
section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.see Hedging Transactions under Section 1256
Position with built-in loss. A special rule ap- Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
plies when a position with a built-in loss be- If you have multiple transactions in the Losses on Section 1244comes part of a conversion transaction. A commodity futures market during the (Small Business) Stockbuilt-in loss is any loss you would have realized year, the burden of proof is on you to
RECORDSif you had disposed of or otherwise terminated show which transactions are hedging transac- You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanthe position at its fair market value at the time it tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, orbecame part of the conversion transaction. on your books and records before the end of the worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theWhen applying the conversion transaction day you entered into the transaction. It may be loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,rules to a position with a built-in loss, use the helpful to have separate brokerage accounts for line 10.position's fair market value at the time it became your hedging and nonhedging transactions. For Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalpart of the transaction. But, when you dispose of specific requirements concerning identification gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.or otherwise terminate the position in a transac- of hedging transactions and the underlying item, Do not offset gains against losses that are withintion in which you recognize gain or loss, you items, or aggregate risk being hedged, see Reg- the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thismust recognize the built-in loss. The conversion ulations section 1.1221-2(f). discussion, even if the transactions are in stocktransaction rules do not affect whether the of the same company. Report the gain onbuilt-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capital Schedule D (Form 1040).loss. Gains From Certain Constructive If you must figure a net operating loss, any
Ownership Transactions ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stockNetting rule for certain conversion transac-
is a business loss.tions. Before determining the amount of gain If you have a gain from a constructive ownershiptreated as ordinary income, you can net certain transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in- Ordinary loss limit. The amount you can de-gains and losses from positions of the same volving a financial asset (discussed later) and duct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000conversion transaction. To do this, you have to the gain normally would be treated as long-term each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000,dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe- capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated even if only one spouse has this type of loss. Ifriod that is within a single tax year. You cannot instead as ordinary income. In addition, if any your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has nonet the built-in loss against the gain. gain is treated as ordinary income, your tax is loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinary
You can net gains and losses only if increased by an interest charge. loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is a
you identify the conversion transaction capital loss.Constructive ownership transactions. Theas an identified netting transaction on
RECORDS following are constructive ownership transac-your books and records. Each position of the Section 1244 (small business) stock. This istions.conversion transaction must be identified before stock issued for money or property (other than
the end of the day on which the position be- • A notional principal contract in which you stock and securities) in a domestic small busi-
comes part of the conversion transaction. For have the right to receive all or substantially ness corporation. During its 5 most recent tax
conversion transactions entered into before all of the investment yield on a financial years before the loss, this corporation must
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
have derived more than 50% of its gross re- the 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are also How to report. You report this type of ordinary
ceipts from other than royalties, rents, divi- loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tosection 1244 stock.
dends, interest, annuities, and gains from sales the information required by the form, you mustIf you also own stock in the corporation that
and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora- include the name and address of the companyis not section 1244 stock when you receive the
tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but less that issued the stock. If applicable, also includestock dividend, you must divide the shares you
than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the tax the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-receive as a dividend between the section 1244
years ending before the loss. If the corporation proximate date it became worthless. Report astock and the other stock. Only the shares from
was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% test capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock onthe former can be section 1244 stock.
applies to the entire period the corporation was Schedule D of Form 1040.
in existence before the day of the loss. However, Contributed property. To determine ordinary Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBICif the corporation's deductions (other than the loss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade stock with other SBIC stock you bought only fornet operating loss and dividends received de- for property, you have to reduce the basis of the that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is aductions) were more than its gross income dur- stock if: capital loss. See Short Sales, later in this chap-ing this period, this 50% test does not apply. ter, for more information.• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of theThe corporation must have been largely an
property, immediately before the trade,operating company for ordinary loss treatment
Holding Periodwas more than its fair market value, andto apply.
If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984, • The basis of the stock is determined by If you sold or traded investment property, youthe stock must be common stock. If issued after the basis of the property. must determine your holding period for the prop-July 18, 1984, the stock may be either common erty. Your holding period determines whetherReduce the basis of the stock by the differenceor preferred. For more information about the any capital gain or loss was a short-term or abetween the adjusted basis of the property andrequirements of a small business corporation or long-term capital gain or loss.its fair market value at the time of the trade. Youthe qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec-
reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss.tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest-
Do not reduce the basis of the stock for anyregulations. ment property more than 1 year, any capital gain
other purpose. or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you
The stock must be issued to the person tak- hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gain
Example. You transfer property with an ad-ing the loss. You must be the original owner or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.
justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value ofof the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- To determine how long you held the invest-
$250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock.ment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued ment property, begin counting on the date after
The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figureto your partnership, you must have been a part- the day you acquired the property. The day you
the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis ofner when the stock was issued and have re- disposed of the property is part of your holding
your stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youmained so until the time of the loss. You add period.
later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, youryour distributive share of the partnership loss to
$800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capitalany individual section 1244 stock loss you may Example. If you bought investment property
loss of $750.have before applying the ordinary loss limit. on February 5, 2009, and sold it on February 5,
2010, your holding period is not more than 1Stock distributed by partnership. If your Contributions to capital. If the basis of your year and you have a short-term capital gain orpartnership distributes the stock to you, you can- section 1244 stock has increased, through con- loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2009, yournot treat any later loss on that stock as an tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat holding period is more than 1 year and you haveordinary loss. this increase as applying to stock that is not a long-term capital gain or loss.
Stock sold through underwriter. Stock section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary Securities traded on an established market.sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 loss on its sale. For securities traded on an established securi-stock unless the underwriter only acted as a ties market, your holding period begins the dayselling agent for the corporation. Example. You buy 100 shares of section after the trade date you bought the securities,1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original and ends on the trade date you sold them.Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stock owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to
you receive as a stock dividend qualifies as capital that increases the total basis of the 100 Do not confuse the trade date with the
section 1244 stock if: shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares settlement date, which is the date by
for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can which the stock must be delivered and• You receive it from a small business cor-
CAUTION
!
deduct only $2,500 ($3,000 ×  $10,000/$12,000) payment must be made.poration in which you own stock, and
as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-
• The stock you own meets the require- maining $500 is a capital loss. Example. You are a cash method, calendarments when the stock dividend is distrib- year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-Recordkeeping. You must keep rec-uted. cember 29, 2010. According to the rules of theords sufficient to show your stock quali-
stock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryfies as section 1244 stock. YourIf you trade your section 1244 stock for new
RECORDS of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onrecords must also distinguish your section 1244stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza- January 4, 2011. You received payment of thestock from any other stock you own in the corpo-tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that is sale price on that same day. Report your gain onration.only a change in identity, form, or place of organ- your 2010 return, even though you received theization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the payment in 2011. The gain is long term or shortstock you trade meets the requirements when term depending on whether you held the stockLosses on Small Businessthe trade occurs. more than 1 year. Your holding period ended onInvestment Company StockIf you hold section 1244 stock and other December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss,stock in the same corporation, not all of the stock you would also report it on your 2010 return.A small business investment company (SBIC) isyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani- one that is licensed and operated under the U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holdingzation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Only
Small Business Investment Act of 1958. period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold atthat part based on the section 1244 stock you
If you are an investor in SBIC stock, you can auction on the basis of yield starts the day afterhold will qualify.
deduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capital the Secretary of the Treasury, through news
loss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-Example. Your basis for 100 shares of X releases, gives notification of acceptance to
ness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradecommon stock is $1,000. These shares qualify successful bidders. The holding period of U.S.
of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset youras section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-
gains and losses, even if they are on stock of thedividend, you receive 50 more shares of com- ing on a subscription basis at a specified yield
same company.mon stock, the basis of which is determined from starts the day after the subscription is submitted.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Automatic investment service.  In determin- stock rights begins on the date the right was the mutual fund paid a capital gain distribution of
ing your holding period for shares bought by the exercised. $2 a share, which is taxed as a long-term capital
bank or other agent, full shares are considered gain. On July 14, 2010, you sold the share for
Section 1256 contracts. Gains or losses onbought first and any fractional shares are con- $17.50. If it were not for the capital gain distribu-
section 1256 contracts open at the end of thesidered bought last. Your holding period starts tion, your loss would be a short-term loss ofyear, or terminated during the year, are treatedon the day after the bank's purchase date. If a $2.50 ($20 − $17.50). However, the part of theas 60% long term and 40% short term, regard-share was bought over more than one purchase loss that is not more than the capital gain distri-less of how long the contracts were held. Seedate, your holding period for that share is a split bution ($2) must be reported as a long-termSection 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear-holding period. A part of the share is considered capital loss. The remaining $0.50 of the loss canlier.to have been bought on each date that stock be reported as a short-term capital loss.was bought by the bank with the proceeds of Option exercised. Your holding period for Exempt-interest dividends on mutual fundavailable funds. property you acquire when you exercise an op- stock. If you received exempt-interest divi-
Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investment tion begins the day after you exercise the option. dends on the stock, at least part of your loss isproperty in a trade for other investment property disallowed. You can deduct only the amount ofWash sales. Your holding period for substan-and your basis for the new property is deter- loss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-tially identical stock or securities you acquire in amined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the dends. On Schedule D (Form 1040), column (d),wash sale includes the period you held the oldold property, your holding period for the new increase the sales price by the amount of ex-stock or securities.property begins on the day following the date empt-interest dividends, but do not increase it toyou acquired the old property. more than the cost or other basis shown inQualified small business stock. Your hold-
Property received as a gift. If you receive a column (e). Report the loss as a short-term capi-ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free
gift of property and your basis is determined by tal loss.rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small
the donor's adjusted basis, your holding period business stock, described later under Gains on
is considered to have started on the same day Example. On January 7, 2010, you boughtQualified Small Business Stock , includes the
the donor's holding period started. a mutual fund share for $40. On February 4,period you held the old stock.
If your basis is determined by the fair market 2010, the mutual fund paid a $5 dividend from
value of the property, your holding period starts Commodity futures. Futures transactions in tax-exempt interest, which is not taxable to you.
on the day after the date of the gift. any commodity subject to the rules of a board of On February 11, 2010, you sold the share for
trade or commodity exchange are long term if $34. If it were not for the tax-exempt dividend,Inherited property. If you inherited invest- the contract was held for more than 6 months. your loss would be $6 ($40 − $34). However,ment property before 2010, your capital gain or Your holding period for a commodity re- you must increase the sales price from $34 toloss on any later disposition of that property is ceived in satisfaction of a commodity futures $39 (to account for the $5 portion of the loss thattreated as a long-term capital gain or loss. This contract, other than a regulated futures contract is not deductible). You can deduct only $1 as ais true regardless of how long you actually held subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256, short-term capital loss.the property. If you inherit investment property includes your holding period for the futures con-after 2009, see Publication 4895 to determine tract if you held the contract as a capital asset.your holding period. Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends.
Securities futures contract. Your holding pe- Any loss on the sale or trade of stock must beReal property bought. To figure how long
riod for a security received in satisfaction of a treated as a long-term capital loss to the extentyou have held real property bought under an
securities futures contract, other than one that is you received, from that stock, qualified divi-unconditional contract, begin counting on the
a section 1256 contract, includes your holding dends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-day after you received title to it or on the day
period for the futures contract if you held the nary dividends. This is true regardless of howafter you took possession of it and assumed the
contract as a capital asset.burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever long you actually held the stock. Generally, anYour holding period for a security received inhappened first. However, taking delivery or pos- extraordinary dividend is a dividend that equalssatisfaction of a securities futures contract tosession of real property under an option agree- or exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferredsell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-ment is not enough to start the holding period. stock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.tract, is determined by the rules that apply toThe holding period cannot start until there is an
short sales, discussed later under Short Sales.actual contract of sale. The holding period of the Nonbusiness Bad Debtsseller cannot end before that time. Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
If someone owes you money that you cannotmonths or less. If you hold stock in a mutualReal property repossessed. If you sell real
collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able tofund (or other regulated investment company) orproperty but keep a security interest in it, and
deduct the amount owed to you when you figurereal estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 monthsthen later repossess the property under the
your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-or less and then sell it at a loss (other than underterms of the sales contract, your holding period
less.a periodic liquidation plan), special rules mayfor a later sale includes the period you held the
apply.property before the original sale and the period There are two kinds of bad debtsÐbusiness
after the repossession. Your holding period and nonbusiness. A business bad debt, gener-Capital gain distributions received. Thedoes not include the time between the original ally, is one that comes from operating your tradeloss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-sale and the repossession. That is, it does not or business and is deductible as a business loss.dends you received, as explained later) isinclude the period during which the first buyer All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad debtstreated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalheld the property. and are deductible as short-term capital losses.of any capital gain distributions you received
and your share of any undistributed capitalStock dividends. The holding period for stock
Example. An architect made personal loansgains. Any remaining loss is short-term capitalyou received as a taxable stock dividend begins
to several friends who were not clients. Sheloss.on the date of distribution.
could not collect on some of these loans. TheyThe holding period for new stock you re- Reinvested distributions. If your dividends are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debtsceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on and capital gain distributions are reinvested in because the architect was not in the business ofthe same day as the holding period of the old new shares, the holding period of each new lending money and the loans do not have anystock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in share begins the day after that share was pur- relationship to her business.a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or chased. Therefore, if you sell both the newsecurities in a controlled corporation. shares and the original shares, you might have
Business bad debts. For information on busi-Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period both short-term and long-term gains and losses.
ness bad debts of an employee, see Publicationfor nontaxable stock rights includes the holding
529. For information on other business badperiod of the underlying stock. The holding pe- Example. On April 9, 2010, you bought a
debts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.riod for stock acquired through the exercise of mutual fund share for $20. On June 25, 2010,
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To be making the guarantee was to protect your in- amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you
deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to- vestment or that you entered the guarantee cannot collect it from the buyer.
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partly transaction with a profit motive. If you make the
Worthless securities. If you own securitiesworthless nonbusiness debt. guarantee as a favor to friends and do not re-
that become totally worthless, you can take aceive any consideration in return, your pay-Genuine debt required. A debt must be deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seements are considered a gift and you cannot takegenuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale ora deduction.genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela- Trade, earlier in this chapter.
tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli- Example 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin- Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted agation to repay a fixed or determinable sum of cipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, bad debt and in a later tax year you recovermoney. guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora- (collect) all or part of it, you may have to includetion received. The corporation defaulted on theLoan or gift. For a bad debt, you must show the amount you recover in your gross income.loan and Henry made full payment. Because hethere was an intention at the time of the transac- However, you can exclude from gross incomeguaranteed the loan to protect his investment intion to make a loan and not a gift. If you lend the amount recovered up to the amount of thethe corporation, Henry can take a nonbusinessmoney to a relative or friend with the under- deduction that did not reduce your tax in the yearbad debt deduction.standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid- deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525.ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a bad
Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers.debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a bad How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-
Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note atdebt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela- ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
their local credit union. John does not pay thetionship between you and the person or organi- Schedule D (Form 1040).
note and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off thezation that owes you the money. On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name
note. However, since he did not enter into theWhen minor children borrow from their par- of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-
guarantee agreement to protect an investmentents to pay for their basic needs, there is no umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in
or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debtgenuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducted parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line
deduction.for such a loan. for each bad debt.
For each bad debt, attach a statement toDeductible in year paid. Unless you haveBasis in bad debt required. To deduct a your return that contains:rights against the borrower, discussed next, abad debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is,
payment you make on a loan you guaranteed isyou must have already included the amount in • A description of the debt, including the
deductible in the year you make the payment.your income or loaned out your cash. For exam- amount, and the date it became due;
ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for Rights against the borrower. When you • The name of the debtor, and any businesscourt-ordered child support not paid to you by make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you or family relationship between you and theyour former spouse. If you are a cash method may have the right to take the place of the lender debtor;taxpayer (most individuals are), you generally (the right of subrogation). The debt is then owed
cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaid • The efforts you made to collect the debt;to you. If you have this right or some other right
salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends, andto demand payment from the borrower, you can-
and similar items. not take a bad debt deduction until these rights • Why you decided the debt was worthless.
become totally worthless. For example, you could show that the bor-When deductible. You can take a bad debt rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-deduction only in the year the debt becomes Debts owed by political parties. You cannot gal action to collect would probably notworthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any result in payment of any part of the debt.due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt worthless debt owed to you by:
becomes worthless when there is no longer any • A political party;chance that the amount owed will be paid. Short Sales
It is not necessary to go to court if you can • A national, state, or local committee of a
show that a judgment from the court would be political party; or A short sale occurs when you agree to sell
uncollectible. You must only show that you have property you do not own (or own but do not wish• A committee, association, or organizationtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt. to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps.that either accepts contributions or spendsBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- money to influence elections. • You sell short. You borrow property anddence of the worthlessness of at least a part of deliver it to a buyer.an unsecured and unpreferred debt.
Mechanics' and suppliers' liens. WorkersIf your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in a • You close the sale. At a later date, you
and material suppliers may file liens againstfinancial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent or either buy substantially identical property
property because of debts owed by a builder orBankrupt Financial Institution, earlier. and deliver it to the lender or make deliv-
contractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo- ery out of property you held at the time ofFiling a claim for refund. If you do not sure and loss of your property, you are entitled the sale. Delivery of property borroweddeduct a bad debt on your original return for the to repayment from the builder or contractor. If from another lender does not satisfy thisyear it becomes worthless, you can file a claim the debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debt requirement.for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To do deduction.this, use Form 1040X to amend your return for
the year the debt became worthless. You must You do not realize gain or loss until delivery ofInsolvency of contractor. You can take a
file it within 7 years from the date your original property to close the short sale. You will have abad debt deduction for the amount you deposit
return for that year had to be filed, or 2 years capital gain or loss if the property used to closewith a contractor if the contractor becomes insol-
from the date you paid the tax, whichever is the short sale is a capital asset.vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.
later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless If the deposit is for work unrelated to your trade
securities generally must be filed within 3 years Although you do not realize gain or lossor business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc-
from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the on a short sale until you close the sale,tion.
date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more you should still report any short sales
TIP
Secondary liability on home mortgage. Ifinformation about filing a claim, see Publication you enter into in 2010 on Schedule D (Form
the buyer of your home assumes your mort-556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights, 1040) if you received a Form 1099-B regarding
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re-and Claims for Refund. that short sale. See the Instructions for Sched-
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer ule D for more information.
Loan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt defaults on the loan and the house is then sold
that becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad for less than the amount outstanding on the Exception if property becomes worthless.
debt deduction for your payments on the debt mortgage, you may have to make up the differ- A different rule applies if the property sold short
unless you can show either that your reason for ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for the becomes substantially worthless. In that case,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must recognize gain as if the short sale were than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short must add the payment to the cost of the stock
closed when the property became substantially sold short.sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held
worthless. the property used to close the sale for 1 year or Exception. If you close the short sale withinless. Certain losses on short sales of stock or 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay inException for constructive sales. Entering securities are also subject to wash sale treat- lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to theinto a short sale may cause you to be treated as ment. For information, see Wash Sales, later. extent the payments are more than the amounthaving made a constructive sale of property. In
you receive as ordinary income from the lenderthat case, you will have to recognize gain on the Mixed straddles. Under certain elections,
of the stock for the use of collateral with the shortdate of the constructive sale. For details, see you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short
sale. This exception does not apply to paymentsConstructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po- sale as long term under the special rule. These
in place of extraordinary dividends.sitions, earlier. elections are for positions that are part of a
mixed straddle. See Other elections  under
Extraordinary dividends. If the amount ofExample. On May 6, 2010, you bought 100 Mixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor-
any dividend you receive on a share of preferredshares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000. mation about these elections.
stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case ofOn September 7, 2010, you sold short 100
other stock) of the amount realized on the shortshares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. You
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi-made no other transactions involving Baker Reporting Substitute Payments
nary dividend.stock for the rest of 2010 and the first 30 days of
If any broker transferred your securities for use2011. Your short sale is treated as a construc-
in a short sale or similar transaction and re-tive sale of an appreciated financial position Wash Sales
ceived certain substitute dividend payments onbecause a sale of your Baker stock on the date
your behalf while the short sale was open, that You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesof the short sale would have resulted in a gain.
broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or a of stock or securities in a wash sale.You recognize a $600 short-term capital gain
similar statement reporting the amount of these A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradefrom the constructive sale and your new holding
payments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysperiod in the Baker stock begins on September
those substitute payments totaling $10 or more before or after the sale you:7.
that are known on the payment's record date to
1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-be in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi-
ties,tal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,Short-Term or Long-Term
or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, orCapital Gain or Loss 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-
that are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not curities in a fully taxable trade,As a general rule, you determine whether you treat these substitute payments as dividends or
3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss interest. Instead, report the substitute payments
stantially identical stock or securities, oron a short sale by the amount of time you actu- shown on Form 1099-MISC as ªOther incomeº
ally hold the property eventually delivered to the on line 21 of Form 1040. 4. Acquire substantially identical stock forlender to close the short sale. your individual retirement account (IRA) or
Substitute payment. A substitute payment Roth IRA.Example. Even though you do not own any means a payment in lieu of:stock of Ace Corporation, you contract to sell
• Tax-exempt interest (including OID) ac- If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora-100 shares of it, which you borrow from your
crued while the short sale was open, and tion you control buys substantially identicalbroker. After 13 months, when the price of the
stock, you also have a wash sale.stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace • A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is afterCorporation stock and immediately deliver them If your loss was disallowed because of thethe transfer of stock for use in a short saleto your broker to close out the short sale. Your wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to theand before the closing of the short sale.loss is a short-term capital loss because your cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)
holding period for the delivered property is less above). The result is your basis in the new stock
Payments in lieu of dividends. If you borrowthan 1 day. or securities. This adjustment postpones the
stock to make a short sale, you may have to loss deduction until the disposition of the newSpecial rules. Special rules may apply to remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi- stock or securities. Your holding period for thegains and losses from short sales of stocks, dends distributed while you maintain your short new stock or securities includes the holding pe-securities, and commodity and securities futures position. You can deduct these payments only if riod of the stock or securities sold.(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac- you hold the short sale open at least 46 daysquired property substantially identical to prop- (more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinary Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stockerty that sold short. But if the amount of property dividend as defined later) and you itemize your for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 andyou sold short is more than the amount of that deductions. within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 sharessubstantially identical property, the special rules of the same stock for $800. Because you boughtYou deduct these payments as investmentdo not apply to the gain or loss on the excess. substantially identical stock, you cannot deductinterest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter-
your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you addGains and holding period. If you held the est Expenses in chapter 3 for more information.
the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of thesubstantially identical property for 1 year or less If you close the short sale by the 45th day new stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newon the date of the short sale, or if you acquired after the date of the short sale (1 year or less in stock, which is $1,050.the substantially identical property after the the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can-
short sale and by the date of closing the short not deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend Example 2. You are an employee of a cor-sale, then: you make to the lender. Instead, you must in- poration with an incentive pay plan. Under thiscrease the basis of the stock used to close theRule 1. Your gain, if any, when you close plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpora-short sale by that amount.the short sale is a short-term capital gain, tion's stock as a bonus award. You include theTo determine how long a short sale is keptand fair market value of the stock in your grossopen, do not include any period during which income as additional pay. You later sell theseRule 2. The holding period of the substan- you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a shares at a loss. If you receive another bonustially identical property begins on the date contractual obligation to buy substantially identi- award of substantially identical stock within 30of the closing of the short sale or on the cal stock or securities. days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss ondate of the sale of this property, whichever If your payment is made for a liquidating the sale.comes first. distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if
you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu- Options and futures contracts. The wash
tion issued on the borrowed stock during yourLosses. If, on the date of the short sale, you sale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of
short position, you have a capital expense. Youheld substantially identical property for more contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
securities. They do not apply to losses from substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De- Example. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of
cember 28, 2009, you bought 25 shares of sub-sales or trades of commodity futures contracts stock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of
stantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januaryand foreign currencies. See Coordination of the stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7,
7, 2010, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750.
bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossStraddles, later, for information about the tax You close the short sale on November 17 by
on the sale. However, because you bought 75treatment of losses on the disposition of posi- delivering the shares bought on June 2. You
shares of substantially identical stock within 30tions in a straddle. cannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)
days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss because the date of entering into the short saleSecurities futures contract to sell. Losses ($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss (October 6) is considered the date the sale isfrom the sale, exchange, or termination of a ($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the complete for wash sale purposes and yousecurities futures contract to sell generally are 50 shares bought on December 18, 2009, is bought substantially identical stock within 30treated in the same manner as losses from the increased by two-thirds (50 ÷  75) of the $750 days from that date.closing of a short sale, discussed later in this disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares
section under Short sales. is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25 Residual interests in a REMIC. The washshares bought on December 28, 2009, is in-Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if you sale rules generally will apply to the sale of yourcreased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125sell common stock at a loss and, at the same residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-+ $250).time, buy warrants for common stock of the vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period
same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-Example 2. You bought 100 shares of Mloss and, at the same time, buy common stock in est and ending 6 months after that sale, youstock on September 24, 2009. On February 3,the same corporation, the wash sale rules apply acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or2010, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss.only if the warrants and stock are considered any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that isOn each of the 4 days from February 9-12, 2010,substantially identical, as discussed next. comparable to a residual interest. REMICs areyou bought 50 shares of substantially identical discussed in chapter 1.stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000 loss. YouSubstantially identical. In determining must add half the disallowed loss ($500) to thewhether stock or securities are substantially How to report. Report a wash sale or trade onbasis of the 50 shares bought on February 9.identical, you must consider all the facts and line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),Add the other half ($500) to the basis of thecircumstances in your particular case. Ordinar- whichever is appropriate. Show the full amountshares bought on February 10.ily, stocks or securities of one corporation are of the loss in parentheses in column (f). On the
not considered substantially identical to stocks next line, enter ªWash Saleº in column (a) andLoss and gain on same day. Loss from a
or securities of another corporation. However, the amount of the loss not allowed as a positivewash sale of one block of stock or securities
they may be substantially identical in some amount in column (f).cannot be used to reduce any gains on identical
cases. For example, in a reorganization, the blocks sold the same day.
stocks and securities of the predecessor and
Securities Futures ContractsExample. During 2004, you bought 100successor corporations may be substantially
shares of X stock on each of three occasions.identical. A securities futures contract is a contract of saleYou paid $158 a share for the first block of 100Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor- for future delivery of a single security or of ashares, $100 a share for the second block, andporation are not ordinarily considered substan- narrow-based security index.$95 a share for the third block. On December 23,tially identical to the common stock of the same Gain or loss from the contract generally will2010, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 acorporation. However, where the bonds or pre- be treated in a manner similar to gain or lossshare. On January 6, 2011, you bought 250ferred stock are convertible into common stock from transactions in the underlying security. Thisshares of identical X stock. You cannot deductof the same corporation, the relative values, means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, orthe loss of $33 a share on the first block becauseprice changes, and other circumstances may termination of the contract will generally havewithin 30 days after the date of sale you boughtmake these bonds or preferred stock and the the same character as gain or loss from transac-250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, youcommon stock substantially identical. For exam- tions in the property to which the contract re-cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale ofple, preferred stock is substantially identical to the second and third blocks of stock by this loss. lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale,the common stock if the preferred stock: exchange, or termination of a contract to sell
Dealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a• Is convertible into common stock, property will be considered short term, regard-
dealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a less of how long you hold the contract. These• Has the same voting rights as the com- transaction made in the ordinary course of busi- contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unlessmon stock, ness. they are dealer securities futures contracts).
• Is subject to the same dividend restric- Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to ations, Optionsloss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter
• Trades at prices that do not vary signifi- into another short sale of, substantially identical Options are generally subject to the rules de-cantly from the conversion ratio, and stock or securities within a period beginning 30
scribed in this section. If the option is part of adays before the date the short sale is complete• Is unrestricted as to convertibility. straddle, the loss deferral rules covered laterand ending 30 days after that date.
under Straddles may also apply. For specialFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a short
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealerMore or less stock bought than sold. If the sale is considered complete on the date the
equity options, see Section 1256 Contractsnumber of shares of substantially identical stock short sale is entered into, if:
Marked to Market, earlier.or securities you buy within 30 days before or • On that date, you own stock or securitiesafter the sale is either more or less than the Gain or loss from the sale or trade of anidentical to those sold short (or by thatnumber of shares you sold, you must determine option to buy or sell property that is a capitaldate you enter into a contract or option tothe particular shares to which the wash sale asset in your hands, or would be if you acquiredacquire that stock or those securities), andrules apply. You do this by matching the shares it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not or
bought with an equal number of the shares sold. would not be a capital asset, the gain or loss is• You later deliver the stock or securities to
Match the shares bought in the same order that ordinary gain or loss.close the short sale.
you bought them, beginning with the first shares
Example 1. You purchased an option to buybought. The shares or securities so matched are Otherwise, a short sale is not considered
100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stockcomplete until the property is delivered to closesubject to the wash sale rules.
increases in value, and you sell the option forthe sale.
Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalThis treatment also applies to losses from
stock on September 24, 2009, for $5,000. On gain because the stock underlying the optionthe sale, exchange, or termination of a securities
December 18, 2009, you bought 50 shares of would have been a capital asset in your hands.futures contract to sell.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. The facts are the same as in How to report. Gain or loss from the closing or specified future date, a stated number of shares
Example 1, except the stock decreases in value of stock at a specified price.expiration of an option that is not a section 1256
and you sell the option for less than you paid for contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands, Holders of puts and calls. If you buy a put orit. Your loss is a capital loss. is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040). a call, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalIf an option you purchased expired, enter the expenditure.Option not exercised. If you have a loss be- expiration date in column (c) and enter ªExpiredº If you sell the put or the call before youcause you did not exercise an option to buy or in column (d). exercise it, the difference between its cost andsell, you are considered to have sold or traded If an option that you wrote expired, enter the the amount you receive for it is either athe option on the date it expired. expiration date in column (b) and enter ªExpiredº long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
in column (e). pending on how long you held it.Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,
If the option expires, its cost is either ahow you report your gain or loss depends on
long-term or short-term capital loss, dependingwhether it was exercised. Puts and Calls on your holding period, which ends on the expi-If you are not in the business of writing op-
ration date.tions and an option you write on stocks, securi- Puts and calls are options on securities and are If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basisties, commodities, or commodity futures is not covered by the rules just discussed for options. of the stock you bought. If you exercise a put,exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re- The following are specific applications of these reduce your amount realized on the sale of theceive is a short-term capital gain. rules to holders and writers of options that are underlying stock by the cost of the put whenIf an option requiring you to buy or sell prop- bought, sold, or ªclosed outº in transactions on a figuring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on theerty is exercised, see Writers of puts and calls , national securities exchange, such as the Chi- sale of the underlying stock is long term or shortlater. cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section term depending on your holding period for the
1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, for underlying stock.Section 1256 contract options. Gain or loss special rules that may apply to nonequity op-is recognized on the exercise of an option on a Put option as short sale. Buying a put op-tions and dealer equity options.) These rules aresection 1256 contract. Section 1256 contracts tion is generally treated as a short sale, and thealso presented in Table 4-3.are defined under Section 1256 Contracts exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos-Puts and calls are issued by writers (grant-Marked to Market, earlier. ing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. Ifors) to holders for cash premiums. They are you have held the underlying stock for 1 year orended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.Cash settlement option. A cash settlement less at the time you buy the put, any gain on theA ªput optionº is the right to sell to the writer,option is treated as an option to buy or sell exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is aat any time before a specified future date, aproperty. A cash settlement option is any option short-term capital gain. The same is true if you
stated number of shares at a specified price.that on exercise is settled in, or could be settled buy the underlying stock after you buy the put
Conversely, a ªcall optionº is the right to buyin, cash or property other than the underlying but before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your
from the writer of the option, at any time before aproperty. holding period for the underlying stock begins on
the earliest of:
Table 4-3. Puts and Calls • The date you dispose of the stock,
• The date you exercise the put,Puts
• The date you sell the put, or
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
• The date the put expires.
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for Writers of puts and calls. If you write (grant)cost of the put. the put. a put or a call, do not include the amount you
receive for writing it in your income at the time ofExpires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for receipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
• Your obligation expires;
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you • You buy, in the case of a put, or sell, in thecost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the
case of a call, the underlying stock whenreceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
the option is exercised; orpay and the amount you received for
the put as a short-term capital gain • You engage in a closing transaction.or loss.)
If your obligation expires, the amount you re-
ceived for writing the call or put is short-termCalls
capital gain.
If a put you write is exercised and you buyWhen a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer:
the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
stock by the amount you received for the put.Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on
Your holding period for the stock begins on thein the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you
received for the call. date you buy it, not on the date you wrote the
put.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for If a call you write is exercised and you sell
loss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain. the underlying stock, increase your amount real-
ized on the sale of the stock by the amount you
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you received for the call when figuring your gain or
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the loss. The gain or loss is long term or short termreceive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you depending on your holding period of the stock.pay and the amount you received for If you enter into a closing transaction bythe call as a short-term capital gain paying an amount equal to the value of the put oror loss.)
call at the time of the payment, the difference
between the amount you pay and the amount*See Holders of puts and calls and Writers of puts and calls in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. you receive for the put or call is a short-term
capital gain or loss.
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examples of non-dealer transactions. 2. The stock is in a corporation formed or trust, you are also considered to hold that posi-
tion.availed of to take positions in personal
1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is- property that offset positions taken by any
sued on April 7, 2010, for $4,000. These shareholder.
equity options expired in December 2010, Loss Deferral Rules
without being exercised. If you were a Note. For positions established before Oc- Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-holder (buyer) of the options, you would tober 22, 2004, condition (1) earlier does not tion of one or more positions only to the extentrecognize a short-term capital loss of apply. Instead, personal property includes stock the loss is more than any unrecognized gain you$4,000. If you were a writer of the options, if condition (2) above applies or the stock was have on offsetting positions. Unused losses areyou would recognize a short-term capital part of a straddle in which at least one of the treated as sustained in the next tax year.gain of $4,000. offsetting positions was:
2. Closing transaction. The facts are the Unrecognized gain. This is:• An option to buy or sell the stock or sub-same as in (1), except that on May 7, stantially identical stock or securities, • The amount of gain you would have had2010, the options were sold for $6,000. If on an open position if you had sold it onyou were the holder of the options who • A securities futures contract on the stock the last business day of the tax year at itssold them, you would recognize a or substantially identical stock or securi- fair market value, andshort-term capital gain of $2,000. If you ties, or
were the writer of the options and you • The amount of gain realized on a position• A position on substantially similar or re-bought them back, you would recognize a if, as of the end of the tax year, gain haslated property (other than stock).short-term capital loss of $2,000. been realized but not recognized.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1), Position. A position is an interest in personal Example. On July 1, 2010, you entered intoexcept that the options were exercised on property. A position can be a forward or futures a straddle. On December 16, 2010, you closedMay 27, 2010. The buyer adds the cost of contract or an option. one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000.the options to the basis of the stock bought An interest in a loan denominated in a foreign On December 31, 2010, the end of your taxthrough the exercise of the options. The currency is treated as a position in that currency. year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750writer adds the amount received from writ- For the straddle rules, foreign currency for which in the offsetting open position. On your 2010ing the options to the amount realized from there is an active interbank market is considered return, your deductible loss on the position youselling the stock to figure gain or loss. The to be actively-traded personal property. See closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).gain or loss is short term or long term de- also Foreign currency contract  under Section You must carry forward to 2011 the unused losspending upon the holding period of the 1256 Contracts Marked to Market, earlier. of $12,750.stock.
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are the Offsetting position. This is a position that Note. If you physically settle a position es-same as in (1), except the options were substantially reduces any risk of loss you may tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of anonequity options, subject to the rules for have from holding another position. However, if straddle by delivering property to which the posi-
section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer a position is part of a straddle that is not an tion relates (and you would realize a loss on that
of the options, you would recognize a identified straddle (described later), do not treat position if you terminated it), you are treated as
short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a it as offsetting to a position that is part of an having terminated the position for its fair market
long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you identified straddle. value immediately before the settlement and as
were a writer of the options, you would having sold the property used to physically settlePresumed offsetting positions. Two orrecognize a short-term capital gain of the position at its fair market value.more positions will be presumed to be offsetting$1,600, and a long-term capital gain of if:$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap-
Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor- ply to:• The positions are established in the same
mation. personal property (or in a contract for this
1. Positions established after October 21,property), and the value of one or more
2004, comprising an identified straddle,positions varies inversely with the value ofStraddles one or more of the other positions; 2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified
covered call options and the stock to beThis section discusses the loss deferral rules • The positions are in the same personal
purchased under the options,that apply to the sale or other disposition of property, even if this property is in a sub-
positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply stantially changed form, and the positions' 3. Hedging transactions, described earlier
to the straddles described under Exceptions, values vary inversely as described in the under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to
later. first condition; Market, and
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions on • The positions are in debt instruments with 4. Straddles consisting entirely of sectionpersonal property. For example, a straddle may a similar maturity, and the positions' val- 1256 contracts, as described earlier underconsist of a purchased option to buy and a ues vary inversely as described in the first Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Marketpurchased option to sell on the same number of condition; (but see Identified straddle, next).shares of the security, with the same exercise
• The positions are sold or marketed as off-price and period.
setting positions, whether or not the posi- Note. For positions established before Oc-
tions are called a straddle, spread, tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also doPersonal property. This is any actively traded
butterfly, or any similar name; or not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad-property. It includes stock options and contracts
dle at the end of the tax year.to buy stock but generally does not include • The aggregate margin requirement for the
stock. positions is lower than the sum of the mar- Identified straddle. Any straddle (other
gin requirements for each position if held than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) isStraddle rules for stock. Although stock is
separately. an identified straddle if all the following condi-generally excluded from the definition of per-
tions exist.sonal property when applying the straddle rules,
Related persons. To determine if two orit is included in the following two situations. • You clearly identified the straddle on yourmore positions are offsetting, you will be treated records before the close of the day on1. The stock is of a type which is actively as holding any position your spouse holds dur- which you acquired it.traded, and at least one of the offsetting ing the same period. If you take into account part
positions is a position on that stock or sub- or all of the gain or loss for a position held by a • For straddles acquired after December 29,
flowthrough entity, such as a partnership orstantially similar or related property. 2007, you identified the positions in the
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
straddle that are offsetting with respect to • All the offsetting positions consist of one September call options offered on May 13,
one another (for example, position A off- or more qualified covered call options and 2010, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125,
sets position D, and position B offsets po- the stock to be purchased from you under $130, and $135. Because the option has a term
sition C). the options. of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the
second highest strike price that is less than• The straddle is not part of a larger strad- • The straddle is not part of a larger strad- $130.25, the applicable stock price. The calldle. dle. option is a deep-in-the-money option because
its strike price is lower than the LQB. As a result,If there is a loss from any position in an identi-  But see Special year-end rule , later, for an the option is not a qualified covered call option,fied straddle, you must increase the basis of exception. and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed outeach of the positions that offset the loss position the option or the stock at a loss during the year.in the identified straddle. The increase is the loss A qualified covered call option is any option
Capital loss on qualified covered call op-multiplied by the following fraction: you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock
tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-you acquire in connection with granting the op-
Unrecognized gain (if any) on the fied covered call option on that stock with ation), but only if all the following are true.
offsetting position strike price less than the applicable stock price,• The option is traded on a national securi- treat any loss from the option as long-term capi-The total unrecognized gain on all ties exchange or other market approved tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gainpositions that offset the loss position by the Secretary of the Treasury. on the sale or exchange of the stock would bein the identified straddle treated as long-term capital gain. The holding• The option is granted more than 30 days
period of the stock does not include any periodbefore its expiration date.For this purpose, your unrecognized gain is during which you are the writer of the option.For covered call options entered into afterthe excess of the fair market value of the posi-
July 28, 2002, the option is granted not Special year-end rule. The loss deferraltion that is part of an identified straddle at the
more than 12 months before its expiration rules for straddles apply if all the following aretime you incur a loss on another position in the
date or satisfies term limitation and quali- true.identified straddle, over the fair market value of
fied benchmark requirements published inthat position when you identified it as a position • The qualified covered call options arethe Internal Revenue Bulletin.in the straddle. closed, or the stock is disposed of at a
• The option is not a deep-in-the-money op-If the application of the above rule does not loss during any tax year.
tion.result in the increase in basis of any offsetting • Gain on disposition of the stock or gain onposition in the identified straddle, you must in- • You are not an options dealer who granted the options is includible in gross income increase the basis of each of the offsetting posi- the option in connection with your activity a later tax year.tions in the straddle in a manner that: of dealing in options. • The stock or options were held less than• Is reasonable, • Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or 30 days after the closing of the options or
loss.• Is consistently applied by you, the disposition of the stock.
• Is consistent with the purposes of the  A deep-in-the-money option is an option withidentified straddle rules, and How To Report Gainsa strike price lower than the lowest qualified
and Losses (Form 6781)benchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at• Results in a total increase in the basis of
which the option is to be exercised. Strike pricesthose offsetting positions equal to the loss. Report each position (whether or not it is part ofare listed in the financial section of many news- a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedpapers. The LQB is the highest available strikeIf you adopt an allocation method under this gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofprice that is less than the applicable stock price.rule, you must describe that method in your this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.However, the LQB for an option with a term ofbooks and records. Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andmore than 90 days and a strike price of moreThe identified straddle rules also apply to losses on straddles before entering thesethan $50 is the second highest available strikepositions that are or have been a liability or amounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include aprice that is less than the applicable stock price.obligation to you (for example, a debt obligation copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.
The availability of strike prices for equity op-you issued, a written option, or a notional princi-
tions with flexible terms does not affect the de-pal contract you entered into).
termination of the LQB for an option that is not Coordination of Loss DeferralNeither you nor anyone else can take into an equity option with flexible terms. Rules and Wash Sale Rulesaccount any loss on a position that is part of an
The applicable stock price for any stock foridentified straddle to the extent the loss in- Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to anywhich an option has been granted is:creases the basis of any positions that offset the disposition of a position or positions of a strad-loss position in the identified straddle. dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then1. The closing price of the stock on the most
apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only ifrecent day on which that stock was tradedNote. For positions established before Oc- stocks or securities make up a position that isbefore the date on which the option wastober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meet part of the straddle. If a position in the straddlegranted; ortwo additional conditions. does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2.2. The opening price of the stock on the day1. All the original positions that you identify on which the option was granted, but onlywere acquired on the same day. Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-if that price is greater than 110% of the
sition of shares of stock or securities that makeprice determined in (1).2. All the positions included in item (1) were
up the positions of a straddle if, within a perioddisposed of on the same day during the If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the beginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-tax year, or none of the positions were LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the sition and ending 30 days after that date, youdisposed of by the end of the tax year. applicable stock price. If the applicable stock acquired substantially identical stock or securi-price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated asAlso, the losses from positions are deferred until ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to thenot less than an amount that is $10 below theyou dispose of all the positions in the straddle. following tax year, subject to any further applica-applicable stock price.The rule discussed above for increasing the tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will alsobasis of each of the positions does not apply. Example. On May 13, 2010, you held XYZ apply if you entered into a contract or option to
Qualified covered call options and op- stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call acquire the stock or securities within the time
tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the option with a strike price of $120. The closing period described above. See Loss carryover ,
loss deferral rules for straddles if both of the price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12, later, for more information about how to treat the
following are true. 2010, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/ loss in the following tax year.
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se- Example 3. The facts are the same as in before you established the straddle. But see
Exceptions, later.curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any Example 1, except that at year end you have $8
losses you sustained in the ordinary course of of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-
Example. On March 6, 2009, you acquiredyour business. tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsetting
gold. On January 5, 2010, you entered into anshort position. Under these circumstances, $8 of
offsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-Example. You are not a dealer in stock or the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed for
lated futures contract). On April 1, 2010, yousecurities. On December 1, 2010, you bought 2010 because there is $8 of unrecognized gain
disposed of the short gold forward contract at nostock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off- in the successor long position.
gain or loss. On April 8, 2010, you sold the goldsetting put option. On December 10, 2010, there
at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed loss
year or less before the offsetting short positionyou sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem- that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,
was entered into, the holding period for the goldber 16, the value of the put option had declined, you must carry it over to the next tax year and
begins on April 1, 2010, the date the straddleeliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss.
ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the goldDecember 16, you bought a second XX stock For example, a loss disallowed in 2009 under
will be treated as short-term capital gain.position that is substantially identical to the XX Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2010, unless the
stock you sold on December 10. At the end of substantially identical stock or securities (which Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale ofthe year, there is no unrecognized gain in the put caused the loss to be disallowed in 2009) were one or more positions (the loss position) of aoption or in the XX stock. Under these circum- disposed of during 2010. In addition, the carry- straddle as a long-term capital loss if both thestances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2010 over loss will not be allowed in 2010 if Rule 1 or following are true.under Rule 1 because, within a period beginning Rule 2 disallows it.
30 days before December 10, and ending 30 • You held (directly or indirectly) one or
days after that date, you bought stock substan- more offsetting positions to the loss posi-Example. The facts are the same as in the
tially identical to the XX stock you sold. tion on the date you entered into the lossexample under Rule 1. On December 30, 2011,
position.you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss and
Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo- there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put • You would have treated all gain or loss onsition of less than all the positions of a straddle option. Under these circumstances, you cannot one or more of the straddle positions as(your loss position) to the extent that any unrec- deduct in 2011 either the $20 loss disallowed in long-term capital gain or loss if you hadognized gain at the close of the tax year in one or 2010 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De- sold these positions on the day you en-more of the following positions is more than any cember 30, 2011, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does tered into the loss position.loss disallowed under Rule 1. not apply because the substantially identical XX
stock was sold during the year and no substan-• Successor positions. Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to a
tially identical stock or securities were bought loss position that is part of a mixed straddle and• Offsetting positions to the loss position. within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixed
apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain• Offsetting positions to any successor posi- straddle is a straddle:
in the put option, an offsetting position to the losstion. • That is not part of a larger straddle,positions.
Successor position. A successor position • In which all positions are held as capitalCapital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss
is a position that is or was at any time offsetting assets,position would have resulted in a capital loss,
to a second position, if both the following condi- you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on • In which at least one (but not all) of thetions are met. the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the positions is a section 1256 contract, and
gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-• The second position was offsetting to the • For which the mixed straddle electionnary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of aloss position that was sold. (Election A, discussed later) has not beenloss position (in the case of section 1256 con-
• The successor position is entered into dur- made.tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term
ing a period beginning 30 days before, capital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss,
and ending 30 days after, the sale of the you treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule, Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss andloss position. even if you would treat any gain or loss on any 40% short-term capital loss, if all the following
successor positions as 100% long-term or conditions apply.
short-term capital gain or loss.Example 1. On November 3, 2010, you en- • Gain or loss from the sale of one or moretered into offsetting long and short positions in of the straddle positions that are sectionnon-section 1256 contracts. On November 12, Exceptions. The rules for coordinating strad- 1256 contracts would be considered gain2010, you disposed of the long position at a $10 dle losses and wash sales do not apply to the or loss from the sale or exchange of aloss. On November 16, you entered into a new following loss situations. capital asset.long position (successor position) that is offset- • Loss on the sale of one or more positionsting to the retained short position, but not sub- • The sale of no position in the straddle,in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans-stantially identical to the long position disposed other than a section 1256 contract, wouldactions are described under Section 1256of on November 12. You held both positions result in a long-term capital gain or loss.Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.)through year end, at which time there was $10 of • You have not made a straddle-by-straddleunrecognized gain in the successor long posi- • Loss on the sale of a loss position in a identification election (Election B) or mixedtion and no unrecognized gain in the offsetting mixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- straddle account election (Election C),short position. Under these circumstances, the dle account (Election C), later.) both discussed later.entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2010 be- • Loss on the sale of a position that is partcause there is $10 of unrecognized gain in the of a straddle consisting only of section Example. On March 3, 2010, you enteredsuccessor long position. 1256 contracts. into a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
Example 2. The facts are the same as in 2010, you entered into an offsetting short gold
Example 1, except that at year end you have $4 regulated futures contract. You did not make anHolding Period and
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi- election to offset gains and losses from positionsLoss Treatment Rules
tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsetting in a mixed straddle. On August 6, 2010, you
The holding period of a position in a straddleshort position. Under these circumstances, the disposed of the long forward contract at a loss.
generally begins no earlier than the date onentire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2010 be- Because the gold forward contract was part of a
which the straddle ends (the date you no longercause there is a total of $10 of unrecognized mixed straddle and the disposition of this
hold an offsetting position). This rule does notgain in the successor long position and offset- non-section 1256 position would not result in
apply to any position you held more than 1 yearting short position. long-term capital loss, the loss recognized on
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the termination of the gold forward contract will indicate your election choice by checking box A, for all mixed straddle accounts that you had
be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% B, or C, whichever applies. established.
short-term capital loss. The net amounts keep their long-term orStraddle-by-straddle identification elec-
short-term classification. However, no moretion (Election B). Under this election, youExceptions. The special holding period and than 50% of the total annual account net gain formust clearly identify each position that is part ofloss treatment for straddle positions does not the tax year can be treated as long-term capitalthe identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:apply to positions that: gain. Any remaining gain is treated as
• The close of the day the identified mixed short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40%• Constitute part of a hedging transaction, straddle is established, or of the total annual account net loss can be• Are included in a straddle consisting only treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining• The time the position is disposed of.of section 1256 contracts, or loss is treated as long-term capital loss.
• Are included in a mixed straddle account The election to establish one or more mixedIf you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle(Election C), discussed later. straddle accounts for each tax year must bebefore the end of the day on which the straddle made by the due date (without extensions) ofis established, this identification must be made your income tax return for the immediately pre-Mixed Straddle Elections by the time you dispose of the position. You are ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a newpresumed to have properly identified a mixed class of activities during a tax year, you mustIf you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle straddle if independent verification is used. make the election for the new class of activitiesand make one of the elections described in the
The basic tax treatment of gain or loss under by the later of either:following discussions, report your gain or loss as
this election depends on which side of the strad-indicated in those discussions. If you do not • The due date of your return for the imme-dle produced the total net gain or loss. If the netmake any of the elections, report your gain or diately preceding tax year (without exten-gain or loss from the straddle is due to theloss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed of sions), orsection 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated asthe section 1256 component of the straddle,
60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40% • 60 days after you entered into the firstenter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) or
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain mixed straddle in the new class of activi-your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Form
or loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the ties.6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13
election by checking box B.(Part II).
If the net gain or loss is due to the You make the election on Form 6781 by
non-section 1256 positions, gain or loss is checking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-Mixed straddle election (Election A). You
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain come tax return for the immediately precedingcan elect out of the marked to market rules,
or loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify the tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.discussed under Section 1256 Contracts
election. Report the annual account net gain or loss fromMarked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256
For the specific application of the rules of this a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In-
election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T. In addition, you must attach a statement to Formstead, the gain and loss rules for straddles will
apply to these contracts. However, if you make 6781 specifically designating the class of activi-
Example. On April 1, you entered into athis election for an option on a section 1256 ties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-
non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec-contract, the gain or loss treatment discussed lished.
tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec-earlier under Options will apply, subject to the For the specific application of the rules of this
tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixedgain and loss rules for straddles. election, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.
straddle. On April 8, you disposed of theYou can make this election if: Interest expense and carrying charges re-non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the
lating to mixed straddle account positions.• At least one (but not all) of the positions is section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under
You cannot deduct interest and carryinga section 1256 contract, and these circumstances, the $600 loss on the
charges that are allocable to any positions heldnon-section 1256 position will be offset against• Each position forming part of the straddle in a mixed straddle account. Treat thesethe $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. Theis clearly identified as being part of that charges as an adjustment to the annual accountnet gain of $200 from the straddle will be treatedstraddle on the day the first section 1256 net gain or loss and allocate them proportion-as 60% long-term capital gain and 40%contract forming part of the straddle is ac- ately between the net short-term and the netshort-term capital gain because it is due to thequired. long-term capital gains or losses.section 1256 contract.
To find the amount of interest and carryingIf you make this election, it will apply for all Mixed straddle account (Election C). You charges that is not deductible and that must belater years as well. It cannot be revoked without may elect to establish one or more accounts for added to the annual account net gain or loss,the consent of the IRS. If you made this election, determining gains and losses from all positions apply the rules described earlier to the positionscheck box A of Form 6781. Do not report the in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- held in the mixed straddle account. See Interestsection 1256 component in Part I. rate mixed straddle account for each separate expense and carrying charges on straddles  indesignated class of activities. chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expenses.Other elections. You can avoid the 60% Generally, you must determine gain or losslong-term capital loss treatment required for a for each position in a mixed straddle account asnon-section 1256 loss position that is part of a Sales of Stock to ESOPsof the close of each business day of the tax year.mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choose You offset the net section 1256 contracts or Certain Cooperativeseither of the two following elections to offset against the net non-section 1256 positions togains and losses for these positions. If you sold qualified securities held for at least 3determine the ªdaily account net gain or loss.º
years to an employee stock ownership planIf the daily account amount is due to• Election B. Make a separate identification
(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,non-section 1256 positions, the amount isof the positions of each mixed straddle for
you may be able to elect to postpone all or parttreated as short-term capital gain or loss. If thewhich you are electing this treatment (the
of the gain on the sale if you bought qualifieddaily account amount is due to section 1256straddle-by-straddle identification method).
replacement property (certain securities) withincontracts, the amount is treated as 60%• Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac- the period that began 3 months before the salelong-term and 40% short-term capital gain orcount for a class of activities for which and ended 12 months after the sale. If you makeloss.gains and losses will be recognized and the election, you must recognize gain on theOn the last business day of the tax year, youoffset on a periodic basis. sale only to the extent the proceeds from thedetermine the ªannual account net gain or lossº
sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-for each account by netting the daily account
ment property.These two elections are alternatives to the amounts for that account for the tax year. The
You must reduce the basis of the replace-mixed straddle election. You can choose only ªtotal annual account net gain or lossº is deter-
ment property by any postponed gain. If youone of the three elections. Use Form 6781 to mined by netting the annual account amounts
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dispose of any replacement property, you may prohibited allocations of the stock pur- How to report and postpone gain. Report
chased by the ESOP or cooperative.have to recognize all of the postponed gain. the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or
line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever isGenerally, to qualify for the election the
appropriate. To make the choice to postponeMore information. For details, see sectionESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of
gain, enter ªSSBIC Rolloverº in column (a) of the1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-the outstanding stock of the corporation that
line directly below the line on which you reportedtions section 1.1042-1T.issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-
the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed infied replacement property must have been is-
column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses).sued by a domestic operating corporation. Rollover of Gain
Also attach a schedule showing how youFrom PubliclyHow to make the election. You must make figured the postponed gain, the name of theTraded Securitiesthe election no later than the due date (including SSBIC in which you purchased common stock
extensions) for filing your tax return for the year or a partnership interest, the date of thatYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainin which you sold the stock. If your original return purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICgains from the sale of publicly traded securities.was filed on time, you may make the election on stock or partnership interest.This means that if you buy certain replacementan amended return filed no later than 6 months You must make the choice to postpone gainproperty and make the choice described in thisafter the due date of your return (excluding ex- no later than the due date (including extensions)section, you postpone part or all of your gain.tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to section for filing your tax return for the year in which youYou postpone the gain by adjusting the basis301.9100-2º at the top of the amended return sold the securities. If your original return wasof the replacement property as described in Ba-and file it at the same address you used for your filed on time, you may make the choice on ansis of replacement property , later. Thisoriginal return. amended return filed no later than 6 monthspostpones your gain until the year you dispose
after the due date of your return (excluding ex-How to report and postpone gain. Report of the replacement property.
tensions). Enter ªFiled pursuant to sectionthe entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D. You qualify to make this choice if you meet
301.9100-2º at the top of the amended returnTo make the choice to postpone gain, enter all the following tests.
and file it at the same address you used for yourªSection 1042 electionº in column (a) of the line • You sell publicly traded securities at a original return.directly below the line on which you reported the gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- Your choice is revocable with the consent ofgain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain ties traded on an established securities the IRS.you are postponing or expecting to postpone. market.Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actual
• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.postponed gain is different from the amount you Gains on Qualified
report, file an amended return. • During the 60-day period beginning on the Small Business StockAlso attach the following statements. date of the sale, you buy replacement
This section discusses two provisions of the lawproperty. This replacement property must1. A ªstatement of electionº that indicates you that may apply to gain from the sale or trade ofbe either common stock of, or a partner-are making an election under section qualified small business stock. You may qualifyship interest in a specialized small busi-1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code and for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.ness investment company (SSBIC). Thisthat includes the following information. You may be able to exclude part of the gain fromis any partnership or corporation licensed
your income.by the Small Business Administrationa. A description of the securities sold, the
under section 301(d) of the Small Busi-date of the sale, the amount realized on
Qualified small business stock. This isness Investment Act of 1958, as in effectthe sale, and the adjusted basis of the
stock that meets all the following tests.on May 13, 1993.securities.
1. It must be stock in a C corporation.b. The name of the ESOP or cooperative
Amount of gain recognized. If you make theto which the qualified securities were 2. It must have been originally issued afterchoice described in this section, you must rec-sold. August 10, 1993.ognize gain only up to the following amount:
c. For a sale that was part of a single, 3. The corporation must have total gross as-• The amount realized on the sale, minusinterrelated transaction under a prear- sets of $50 million or less at all times afterranged agreement between taxpayers • The cost of any common stock or partner- August 9, 1993, and before it issued theinvolving other sales of qualified securi- ship interest in an SSBIC that you bought stock. Its total gross assets immediately af-ties, the names and identifying numbers during the 60-day period beginning on the ter it issued the stock must also be $50of the other taxpayers under the agree- date of sale (and did not previously take million or less.ment and the number of shares sold by into account on an earlier sale of publicly When figuring the corporation's totalthe other taxpayers. traded securities). gross assets, you must also count the as-
sets of any predecessor of the corporation.2. A notarized ªstatement of purchaseº In addition, you must treat all corporationsIf this amount is less than the amount of yourdescribing the qualified replacement prop- that are members of the same par-gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain,erty, date of purchase, and the cost of the ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor-subject to the limit described next. If this amountproperty and declaring the property to be poration. is equal to or more than the amount of your gain,qualified replacement property for the qual- you must recognize the full amount of your gain.ified stock you sold. The statement must 4. You must have acquired the stock at its
have been notarized no later than 30 days original issue, directly or through an under-Limit on gain postponed. The amount of
after the purchase. If you have not yet pur- writer, in exchange for money or othergain you can postpone each year is limited to the
chased the qualified replacement property, property (not including stock), or as pay forsmaller of:
you must attach the notarized ªstatement services provided to the corporation (other• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married andof purchaseº to your income tax return for than services performed as an underwriterfile a separate return), orthe year following the election year (or the of the stock). In certain cases, your stock
election will not be valid). may also meet this test if you acquired it• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married
from another person who met this test, orand file a separate return), minus the3. A verified written statement of the domes- through a conversion or trade of qualifiedamount of gain you postponed for all ear-tic corporation whose employees are cov- small business stock that you held.lier years.ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,
or of any authorized officer of the coopera- 5. The corporation must have met the active
tive, consenting to the taxes under sec- business test, defined next, and must haveBasis of replacement property. You must
tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internal been a C corporation during substantiallysubtract the amount of postponed gain from the
Revenue Code on certain dispositions, and all the time you held the stock.basis of your replacement property.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. Within the period beginning 2 years before 1045 Rolloverº in column (a) of the line directlyRollover of Gain
below the line on which you reported the gainand ending 2 years after the stock was
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capital and enter the amount of the postponed gain as aissued, the corporation cannot have
gain from the sale of qualified small business (loss) in column (f).bought more than a de minimis amount of
stock held more than 6 months. This means that, You must make the choice to postpone gainits stock from you or a related party.
if you buy certain replacement stock and make no later than the due date (including extensions)7. Within the period beginning 1 year before the choice described in this section, you post- for filing your tax return for the year in which youand ending 1 year after the stock was is- pone part or all of your gain. sold the stock. If your original return was filed on
sued, the corporation cannot have bought You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis time, you may make the choice on an amended
more than a de minimis amount of its stock of the replacement stock as described in Basis return filed no later than 6 months after the due
from anyone, unless the total value of the of replacement stock, later. This postpones your date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter
stock it bought is 5% or less of the total gain until the year you dispose of the replace- ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2º at the top
value of all its stock. ment stock. of the amended return and file it at the same
You can make this choice if you meet all the address you used for your original return.For more information about tests 6 and 7, see following tests.the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter-
• You buy replacement stock during thenal Revenue Code. Section 1202 Exclusion60-day period beginning on the date of the
sale.Active business test. A corporation meets You generally can exclude from your income up
this test for any period of time if, during that to 50% of your gain from the sale or trade of• The replacement stock is qualified small
period, both the following are true. qualified small business stock held by you forbusiness stock.
more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to• It was an eligible corporation, defined be- • The replacement stock continues to meet 75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009,low. the active business requirement for small and up to 100% for stock acquired after Septem-business stock for at least the first 6• It used at least 80% (by value) of its as- ber 27, 2010, and before January 1, 2011. Themonths after you buy it.sets in the active conduct of at least one exclusion can be up to 60% for certain em-
qualified trade or business, defined below. powerment zone business stock. See Em-
powerment zone business stock , later.TheAmount of gain recognized. If you make the
Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized eligible gain minus your section 1202 exclusionchoice described in this section, you must rec-
small business investment company (SSBIC) is is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain Tax Rates,ognize the capital gain only up to the following
treated as meeting the active business test. An later.amount:
SSBIC is an eligible corporation licensed to op- SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized small• The amount realized on the sale, minuserate under section 301(d) of the Small Busi- business investment company (SSBIC) stock• The cost of any qualified small businessness Investment Act of 1958 as in effect on May you bought as replacement property for publiclystock you bought during the 60-day period13, 1993. traded securities you sold at a gain, you mustbeginning on the date of sale (and did not reduce the basis of the stock by the amount ofEligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor- previously take into account on an earlier any postponed gain on that earlier sale, as ex-poration other than: sale of qualified small business stock). plained earlier under Rollover of Gain From• A Domestic International Sales Corpora- Publicly Traded Securities . But do not reducetion (DISC) or a former DISC, your basis by that amount when figuring yourIf this amount is less than the amount of your
section 1202 exclusion.capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that• A corporation that has made, or whose
gain. If this amount equals or is more than thesubsidiary has made, an election under Limit on eligible gain. The amount of youramount of your capital gain, you must recognizesection 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, gain from the stock of any one issuer that isthe full amount of your gain. eligible for the exclusion in 2010 is limited to the• A regulated investment company,
greater of:Basis of replacement stock. You must sub-• A real estate investment trust (REIT),
tract the amount of postponed gain from the • Ten times your basis in all qualified stock• A real estate mortgage investment conduit basis of your replacement stock. of the issuer you sold or exchanged during(REMIC), the year, orHolding period of replacement stock. Your• A financial asset securitization investment • $10 million ($5 million for married individu-holding period for the replacement stock in-trust (FASIT), or als filing separately) minus the amount ofcludes your holding period for the stock sold,
gain from the stock of the same issuer youexcept for the purpose of applying the 6-month• A cooperative.
used to figure your exclusion in earlierholding period requirement for choosing to roll
years.over the gain on its sale.Qualified trade or business. This is any
trade or business other than: Pass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a How to report gain. Report the entire gain• One involving services performed in the partnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or realized from the sale on Schedule D (Formfields of health, law, engineering, architec- other regulated investment company) also may 1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the lineture, accounting, actuarial science, per- make the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of on which you report the gain, enter ªSectionforming arts, consulting, athletics, financial the postponed gain applies to your share of the 1202 exclusionº in column (a) and enter theentity's postponed gain if you held an interest inservices, or brokerage services; amount of the allowable exclusion as a (loss) inthe entity for the entire period the entity held the• One whose principal asset is the reputa- column (f). If you are completing line 18 ofstock.tion or skill of one or more employees; Schedule D, enter as a positive number theIf a pass-through entity sold qualified small amount of the exclusion on line 2 of the 28%business stock held for more than 6 months and• Any banking, insurance, financing, leas- Rate Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-you held an interest in the entity for the entireing, investing, or similar business; tions. But if you excluded 60% of the gain, enterperiod the entity held the stock, you also may• Any farming business (including the busi- 2/3 of the exclusion.choose to postpone gain if you, rather than theness of raising or harvesting trees); pass-through entity, buy the replacement stock More information. For information about ad-
within the 60-day period.• Any business involving the production or ditional requirements that may apply, see sec-
extraction of products for which percent- tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code.How to report gain. Report the entire gainage depletion can be claimed; or realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of Empowerment zone business stock. You
• Any business of operating a hotel, motel, Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri- can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet
restaurant, or similar business. ate. To elect to postpone the gain, enter ªSection all the following additional requirements.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How to report and postpone capital gain.1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation that Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-
Report the entire gain realized from the sale onqualifies as an empowerment zone busi- erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other-ness during substantially all of the time you ties, through a broker, you should receive Form
wise would without regard to the choice to post-held the stock, and 1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-
pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-2. You acquired the stock after December 21, enter ªSection 1397B Rolloverº in column (a) of ment to complete Schedule D.2000, and before February 18, 2009. the line directly below the line on which you Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of
reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in column
postponed as a (loss) in column (f).Condition (1) will still be met if the corporation (d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,
ceased to qualify after the 5-year period that whichever applies. However, if the broker ad-More information. For more informationbegins on the date you acquired the stock. How- vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossabout this rollover of gain, see section 1397B ofever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu- proceeds (gross sales price) less commissionsthe Internal Revenue Code.sion cannot be more than the gain you would and option premiums were reported to the IRS,
have had if you had sold the stock on the date enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
the corporation ceased to qualify. line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies.
If the net sales price is entered in column (d),Reporting CapitalRollover of Gain do not include the commissions and option pre-
miums in column (e).From Sale of Gains and Losses
Empowerment Zone Assets Example 1. You sold 100 shares of FundThis section discusses how to report your capital HIJ for $2,500. You paid a $75 commission toYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain gains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). the broker for handling the sale. Your Formgains from the sale of qualified empowerment Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds, 1099-B shows that the net sales proceeds,zone assets. This means that if you buy certain etc., and real estate (if not reported on Form $2,425 ($2,500 − $75), were reported to the IRS.replacement property and make the choice de- 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 of Report $2,425 in column (d) of Schedule Dscribed in this section, you postpone part or all of Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include (Form 1040).the recognition of your gain. all these transactions even if you did not receive
a Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state-You qualify to make this choice if you meet Example 2. You sold 200 shares of Fundment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua-all the following tests. KLM for $10,000. You paid a $100 commissiontion schedule to report more transactions.• You hold a qualified empowerment zone at the time of the sale. You bought the shares forBe sure to add all sales price entries in col-asset for more than 1 year and sell it at a $5,000. The broker reported the gross proceedsumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total ongain. to the IRS on Form 1099-B, so you enterline 3. Also add all sales price entries in column $10,000 in column (d) of Schedule D (Form(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. 1040) and increase your basis in column (e) toThen add the following amounts reported to you• During the 60-day period beginning on the $5,100.for 2010 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-Sdate of the sale, you buy a replacement (or on substitute statements): Section 1256 contracts and straddles.qualified empowerment zone asset in the Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from• Proceeds from transactions involvingsame zone as the asset sold. section 1256 contracts and straddles before en-stocks, bonds, and other securities, and tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a
• Gross proceeds from real estate transac-Any part of the gain that is ordinary copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.
tions (other than the sale of your mainincome cannot be postponed and must Market discount bonds. Report the sale orhome if you had no taxable gain) not re-be recognized.
CAUTION
! trade of a market discount bond on Schedule Dported on another form or schedule. (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade
Qualified empowerment zone asset. This results in a gain and you did not choose to
If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andmeans certain stock or partnership interests in include market discount in income currently,
10, attach a statement to your return explainingan enterprise zone business. It also includes enter ªAccrued Market Discountº on the next line
the difference.certain tangible property used in an enterprise in column (a) and the amount of the accrued
zone business. You must have acquired the market discount as a loss in column (f). Also
Installment sales. You cannot use the install-asset after December 21, 2000 and before report the amount of accrued market discount as
ment method to report a gain from the sale of2010. interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040A or
stock or securities traded on an established se- 1040), line 1, and identify it as ªAccrued Market
curities market. You must report the entire gainAmount of gain recognized. If you make the Discount.º
in the year of sale (the year in which the tradechoice described in this section, you must rec-
date occurs).ognize gain only up to the following amount: Form 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora-
tion in which you own stock has had a change in• The amount realized on the sale, minus At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to control or a substantial change in capital struc-most income-producing activities. These rules• The cost of any qualified empowerment ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or anlimit the amount of loss you can deduct to thezone asset that you bought during the equivalent statement from the corporation. Useamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk60-day period beginning on the date of the Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement torules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade ofsale (and did not previously take into ac- figure the gain to report on Schedule D (Forman asset used in an activity to which the at-riskcount in rolling over gain on an earlier sale 1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule Drules apply. For more information, see Publica-of qualified empowerment zone assets). (Form 1040) as a result of this transaction.tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules.
Report the aggregate amount receivedIf this amount is equal to or more than the Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure
shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the grossamount of your gain, you must recognize the full the amount of loss you can deduct.
sales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8amount of your gain. If this amount is less than
of Schedule D, whichever applies.Passive activity gains and losses. If youthe amount of your gain, you can postpone the
have gains or losses from a passive activity, yourest of your gain by adjusting the basis of your
Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold ormay also have to report them on Form 8582. Inreplacement property as described next.
traded reportable real estate, you generallysome cases, the loss may be limited under the
should receive from the real estate reportingBasis of replacement property. You must passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its
person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Realsubtract the amount of postponed gain from the separate instructions for more information about
Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-basis of the qualified empowerment zone assets reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-
ceeds.you bought as replacement property. sive activity.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ªReportable real estateº is defined as any If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or
present or future ownership interest in any of the lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If the
following: explaining the reason for the difference. amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
in parentheses.File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with the• Improved or unimproved land, including air
You combine your share of short-term capitalIRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-space;
gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,nee in 2010, you must file a Form 1099-B or• Inherently permanent structures, including and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossForm 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.any residential, commercial, or industrial carryover, with your other short-term capitalSend the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with abuilding; gains and losses to figure your net short-termForm 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of
capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-• A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
nue Service Center by February 28, 2011tures and common elements, including
(March 31, 2011, if you file Form 1099-B or Form Long-term gains and losses. A capital gainland; and
1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner of or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital(as defined in section 216 of the Internal Form 1099-S by February 15, 2011. On Form gain or loss. You report it in Part II of ScheduleRevenue Code). 1099-B, you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The D. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,
other owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º show it in parentheses.A ªreal estate reporting personº could include On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the You also report the following in Part II ofthe buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or ªFiler.º The other owner should be listed as the Schedule D:escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- ªTransferor.º You do not, however, have to file aker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring • Undistributed long-term capital gains fromForm 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceedsthe biggest interest in the property. a mutual fund (or other regulated invest-for your spouse. For more information about theYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- ment company) or real estate investmentreporting requirements and the penalties for fail-ceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- trust (REIT);ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,low the instructions for Schedule D to report see the General Instructions for Certain Informa- • Your share of long-term capital gains orthese transactions and include them on line 1 or tion Returns (Forms 1098, 1099, 3921, 3922, losses from partnerships, S corporations,8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex- 5498, and W-2G). and fiduciaries;changes on Form 8824 instead.
It is unlawful for any real estate reporting Sale of property bought at various times. If • All capital gain distributions from mutualperson to separately charge you for complying you sell a block of stock or other property that funds and REITs not reported directly onwith the requirement to file Form 1099-S. you bought at various times, report the line 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form
short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line 1040; andNominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain ornominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your • Long-term capital loss carryovers.loss on one line in Part II. Enter ªVariousº inname but actually belong to someone else), column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See thereport on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the The result after combining these items withComprehensive Example later in this chapter.proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- your other long-term capital gains and losses is
lowing amounts reported to you for 2010 on your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 ofSale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- Schedule D).sis any expense of sale such as broker's fees,ments) that you are not reporting on another commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and Capital gain distributions only. You doform or schedule included with your return: option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in not have to file Schedule D if both the following
column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule are true.1. Proceeds from transactions involving D, whichever applies, unless you reported thestocks, bonds, and other securities, and • The only amounts you would have to re-net sales price amount in column (d).
port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (ortions (other than the sale of your main Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or
home if you are not required to report it). loss on the sale or trade of investment property substitute statement).
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2010 to 2011 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, is less than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any
carryovers. 
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............ . 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ............................... . 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ......................................... . 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3 .................................................. . 4.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................ . 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- ................... . 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6 .............................................................. . 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2011. Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 8.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ............................... . 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 .................................. . 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................... . 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ............................................................ . 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2011. Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... . 13.
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next earlier year) can be deducted only on the final
year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can income tax return filed for the decedent. Theor 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute
carry it over to later years until it is completely capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply instatement).
used up. this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de-
duct any of the loss or carry it over to followingWhen you figure the amount of any capitalIf both the above statements are true, report years.loss carryover to the next year, you must takeyour capital gain distributions directly on line 13 the current year's allowable deduction into ac- Joint and separate returns. If you and yourof Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also count, whether or not you claimed it and whether spouse once filed separate returns and are nowuse the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain or not you filed a return for the current year. filing a joint return, combine your separate capi-Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to When you carry over a loss, it remains long tal loss carryovers. However, if you and yourfigure your tax. term or short term. A long-term capital loss you spouse once filed a joint return and are nowcarry over to the next tax year will reduce thatYou can report your capital gain distributions filing separate returns, any capital loss carryoveryear's long-term capital gains before it reduceson line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form from the joint return can be deducted only on thethat year's short-term capital gains.1040, if both the following are true. return of the spouse who actually had the loss.
Figuring your carryover. The amount of• None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute
your capital loss carryover is the amount of yourstatements) you received have an amount Capital Gain Tax Rates
total net loss that is more than the lesser of:in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are• You do not have to file Form 1040 for any 1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for generally lower than the tax rates that apply toother capital gains or losses. the year, or other income. These lower rates are called the
maximum capital gain rates.2. Your taxable income increased by your al-
Total net gain or loss. To figure your total net The term ªnet capital gainº means thelowable capital loss deduction for the year
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capital amount by which your net long-term capital gainand your deduction for personal exemp-
for the year is more than your net short-termgain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term tions.
capital loss.capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on
If your deductions are more than your gross For 2010, the maximum capital gain ratesSchedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are
income for the tax year, use your negative tax- are 0%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-4 formore than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. able income in computing the amount in item (2). details.If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of
Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine theForm 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain If you figure your tax using the maxi-part of your capital loss for 2010 that you canTax Rates, later. mum capital gain rate and the regularcarry over to 2011.
tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP
Capital Losses the regular tax computation applies.Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities in
2010. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofIf your capital losses are more than your capital Example. All of your net capital gain is from$7,000. They had no other capital transactions.gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. selling collectibles, so the capital gain rate wouldTheir taxable income was $26,000. On their jointReport the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040, be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-2010 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-enclosed in parentheses. able income is $25,000, none of your taxableused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),
income will be taxed above the 15% rate. Thecan be carried over to 2011.Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital 28% rate does not apply.If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirloss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.lesser of: Investment interest deducted. If you claim aThey would have no carryover.
deduction for investment interest, you may have• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file Use short-term losses first. When you fig- to reduce the amount of your net capital gaina separate return), or ure your capital loss carryover, use your that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.short-term capital losses first, even if you in-• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gaincurred them after a long-term capital loss. If youSchedule D. you choose to include in investment incomehave not reached the limit on the capital loss when figuring the limit on your investment inter-You can use your total net loss to reduce your deduction after using the short-term capital est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dincome dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. losses, use the long-term capital losses until you Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends andreach the limit. Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-Capital loss carryover. If you have a total net
tion about the limit on investment interest, seeloss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more than Decedent's capital loss. A capital loss
Interest Expenses in chapter 3.the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you sustained by a decedent during his or her last
can carry over the unused part to the next year tax year (or carried over to that year from an
28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or loss
from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gainTable 4-4. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
from the sale of qualified small business stock
minus the section 1202 exclusion.THEN your maximum 
IF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or
loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug,collectibles gain 28% antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati-
num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev-eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the
erage held more than 1 year.section 1202 exclusion 28%
Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale
unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25% of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or
trust due to unrealized appreciation of col-other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% lectibles.or higher 15%
Gain on qualified small business stock. Ifother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower you realized a gain from qualified small businessthan 25% 0% stock that you held more than 5 years, you
generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain1ªOther gainº means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. from your income. The exclusion can be up to
75% for stock acquired after February 17, 2009
(100% for stock acquired after September 27,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2010), and before January 1, 2011. The exclu- Mutual Fund Record. She shows the non- Other 1099s. In June, Emily invested
dividend distributions and the undistributed cap- $3,800 in Mutual Fund R and received 153.16sion can be up to 60% for certain empowerment
ital gains from Mutual Fund S and the reinvested shares that cost $24.81 per share. She re-zone business stock. The eligible gain minus
dividends from Mutual Fund R. She does not quested that all her distributions be reinvested inyour section 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain.
show the exempt-interest dividends from Mutual more shares of the Fund. She then receivedSee Gains on Qualified Small Business Stock ,
Fund X because those dividends do not change $265 of ordinary dividends, including $250 ofearlier in this chapter.
her basis in the shares. She keeps this record qualified dividends, and $61 of capital gain dis-
with her mutual fund documents and uses it to tributions from the Fund. She received FormUnrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally,
report her 2010 sale of Mutual Fund S. 1099-DIV showing these amounts. On Decem-this is any part of your capital gain from selling
ber 29, 2010, she acquired an additional 13.03section 1250 property (real property) that is due Capital gains and losses Ð Schedule D. shares at $25.01 per share from her reinvestedto depreciation (but not more than your net sec- Emily sold stock in two different companies that dividends. She reports the ordinary dividends ontion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the she held for less than a year. In June, she sold Form 1040, line 9a. She reports the qualified28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she dividends on Form 1040, line 9b. She does notGain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions bought in February. She had an adjusted basis report the ordinary dividends on Schedule Bto figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain. of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for a (Form 1040A or Form 1040) because her totalFor more information about section 1250 prop- loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares of ordinary dividends were not over $1,500. Sheerty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of Computer Co. stock that she bought in June. reports the capital gain distributions on Sched-Publication 544. She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000 ule D (Form 1040) because she has other capi-
and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. She tal transactions. She enters the $61 capital gainTax computation using maximum capital reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in distribution on line 13, column (f).gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends and Part I of Schedule D. In April 2008, Emily invested $2,600 in Mu-Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D Emily had other stock sales that she reports tual Fund X and received 87.54 shares at $29.70Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure as long-term transactions on line 8 in Part II of per share. She received exempt-interest divi-your tax if you have qualified dividends or net Schedule D. dends of $92 in 2008, $107 in 2009, and $101 incapital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched- 2010. She chose not to reinvest these and in-In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains. stead received a cash payment. She receivedstock for $5,000. She bought 100 of those
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use Form 1099-INT from Fund X showing this non-shares in 1998, for $1,000. She bought 100
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule taxable amount, which she reports on Formmore shares in 2000 for $2,200, and an addi-
D instructions to figure your tax if: 1040, line 8b.tional 300 shares in 2003 for $1,500. Her total
In 1996, Emily bought 100 shares of com-basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300• You have to file Schedule D, and mon stock in Green Publishing Co. at $10.29 per($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or line share. In 2010, she received $237 in ordinaryenters in column (f) of line 8.
19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), is dividends, including $220 of qualified dividends,In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
more than zero. as a cash payment that was not reinvested. Shestock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-
received Form 1099-DIV showing this amount.ness stock that she bought in September 2005.See the Comprehensive Example  later for an She reports the ordinary dividends on FormHer basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain,example of how to figure your tax using the 1040, line 9a, and the qualified dividends onwhich she enters in column (f) of line 8. BecauseSchedule D Tax Worksheet. Form 1040, line 9b.she held the stock more than 5 years, she has aQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims the Form 6781. On June 2, 2010, Emily had aWorksheet. If you do not have to use the exclusion on the line below by entering $1,500 realized loss from a regulated futures contract ofSchedule D Tax Worksheet (as explained as a loss in column (f). She also enters the $11,000. She also had an unrealized marked toabove) and any of the following apply, use the exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of the market gain on open contracts of $27,000 at theQualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work- 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. end of 2010. She reported an unrealized markedsheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form In October, Emily sold 200 shares of Mutual to market gain of $1,000 on her 2009 tax return.1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax. Fund S for $3,200. She purchased these shares (This $1,000 must be subtracted from her 2010
• You received qualified dividends. (See in 1996 at $10 each. She received some nondiv- profit.) These amounts are shown in boxes 8, 9,
Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.) idend distributions in 1998, 1999, and 2007 that and 10 of the Form 1099-B she received from
reduced her basis in the shares. In 2008 and her broker for these transactions. Box 11 shows• You do not have to file Schedule D and 2009, Emily reported undistributed capital gains her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000 −you received capital gain distributions. that increased her basis in her shares. She re- $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain in Part I(See Capital gain distributions only, ear- ceived no distributions in 2010 before the sale. of Form 6781 (not shown). She shows 40%lier.) She reports the sale on line 8 because she ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4 of Sched-
• Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are both owned the shares for more than 1 year. She ule D and 60% ($9,000) as long-term gain on
more than zero. uses the information from her Mutual Fund Re- line 11 of Schedule D.
cord to complete columns (a), (b), and (e). After The Form 1099-B that Emily received from
adjustment for her nondividend distributions and her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.Alternative minimum tax. These capital gain her undistributed capital gains, her basis isrates are also used in figuring alternative mini- Capital loss carryover from 2009. Emily$1,996 ($9.98 per share). She uses her Formmum tax. has a capital loss carryover to 2010 of $800, of1099-B to complete columns (c) and (d). She
which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500enters her gain of $1,204 in column (f).
is long-term capital loss. She enters theseShe received a Form 1099-B (not shown) amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. Shefrom her broker for each of these transactions. also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-Comprehensive The entries shown in box 2 of these forms total ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-$15,200.Example sheet.
Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-
Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages makes sure that the total of the amounts re- over Worksheet in her 2009 edition of Publica-
from her job, she has income from stocks and ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- tion 550 (not shown), so she could properly
other securities. For the 2010 tax year, she had ule D is not less than the total of the amounts report her loss carryover for the 2010 tax year
the following capital gains and losses, which she shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from without refiguring it.
reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule D her broker. For 2010, the total of lines 3 and 10
is shown at the end of this example. She keeps of Schedule D is $15,200, which is the same Tax computation. Because Emily has gains
track of all her basis adjustments to her mutual amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, she
funds on her Mutual Fund Record, shown later. (not shown). checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes to line
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 of After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13 Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out the
the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18 of her Form 1040, she completes the rest of rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax as
is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box on Form 1040 through line 43. She enters the $2,428. This is less than the tax she would have
line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheet amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of the figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,085.
to figure her tax.
Table 4-5. Mutual Fund Record for Emily Jones
Acquired1 Sold or Redeemed
Adjusted2
Number Cost NumberMutual Fund Adjustment to Basis Per Share Basis Per
Date of Per Date ofShare
Shares Share Shares
12-31-98 12-31-99 12-31-07 12-30-08 8-30-09MUTUAL FUND S 7-12-96 200 10.00 9.98 10-5-10 200(.05) (.02) (.04) .03 .06
MUTUAL FUND X 4-19-08 87.54 29.70
MUTUAL FUND R 6-12-10 153.16 24.81
12-29-10 13.03 25.01
1 Include share received from reinvestment of distributions.
2 Cost plus or minus adjustments.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and Capital
Gain Tax Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or 
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) is zero or less.
 Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (However, if you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44) ............................................. . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or
Form 1040NR, line 10b) ........................ . 2. 470
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used
to figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g ............. . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line
4e* ....................... . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ....... . 5. 0
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 6. 470
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ..... . 7. 11,565
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................. . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 9. 11,565
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ...................................................... . 10. 12,035
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D** ............................. . 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 .......................................... . 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 ............................................................. . 13. 11,035
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................................. . 14. 18,965
15. Enter:
• $34,000 if single or married filing separately;
}
• $68,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
• $45,550 if head of household ....... . 15. 34,000
16. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 15 .......................................... . 16. 30,000
17. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 16 ............................ . 17. 18,965
18. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 18. 17,965
19. Enter the larger of line 17 or line 18 ......................................... . © 19. 18,965
20. Subtract line 17 from line 16. This amount is taxed at 0%. ........................... . © 20. 11,035
If lines 1 and 16 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................. . 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 20 (if line 20 is blank, enter -0-) .............. . 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 23.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) ............................................................. . 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ................ . 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 19 .......................... . 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................ . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- .................. . 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- .............................. . © 29.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) ............................................................. . 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 19, 20, 23, and 29 ............................................... . 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................ . 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) ............................................................. . 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 19. If the amount on line 19 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax.
If the amount on line 19 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet .......................... . 34. 2,428
35. Add lines 24, 30, 33, and 34 ............................................................. . 35. 2,428
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. If the amount on line 1 is less than $100,000, use the Tax Table to figure the tax. If
the amount on line 1 is $100,000 or more, use the Tax Computation Worksheet ............................ . 36. 4,085
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 42). (If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, do not
enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in the
Form 1040 instructions) ................................................................ . 37. 2,428
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
**If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in the Instructions
for Form 1040, line 44, before completing this line.
 
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE D  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Capital Gains and Losses
a Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.   a See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).   
a Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2010
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less 
(a) Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(e) Cost or other basis   
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d)   
1 
2 Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 2 ................. 2 
3 Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 
2 in column (d) .............. 3 
4 Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 . 4 
5 Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ............................  5 
6 Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............... 6 (                                   )
7 Net short-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f) ....... 7 
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year 
(a)  Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(e) Cost or other basis   
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions)   
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d)   
8 
9 Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 9 ................. 9 
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.  Add lines 8 and 
9 in  column (d).............. 10 
11 Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or 
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 .................... 11 
12 Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ............................ 12 
13 Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions .............. 13 
14 Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............... 14 (                                   )
15 Net long-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to Part III 
on the back ..............................
15 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see your tax return instructions. Cat. No. 11338H Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
100 sh Trucking Co. 2-12-10 6-11-10 400 1,150 (750)
25 sh Computer Co. 6-30-10 7-30-10 2,500 2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
5,450
500 sh Furniture Co. VARIOUS 6-30-10 5,000 4,700 300
20 sh Toy Co. 9-29-05 12-15-10 4,100 1,100 3,000
Section 1202 exclusion (1,500)
200 Sh Mutual Fund S 7-12-96 10-5-10 3,200 1,996 1,204
12,300
9,000
61
500
11,565
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 73

Page 74 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 Page 2 
Part III Summary
16 Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result ................... 16
• If line 16 is a gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. 
Then go to line 17 below. 
• If line 16 is a  loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete 
line 22. 
• If line 16 is zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form
1040NR, line 14. Then go to line 22. 
17 Are lines 15 and 16 both gains? 
Yes. Go to line 18. 
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22. 
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the 
instructions ............................. a 18 
19 Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on page 
D-9 of the instructions ......................... a 19 
20 Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44 
(or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below. 
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and 22 
below. 
21 If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller  of: 
• The loss on line 16 or 
• ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) } ............... 21 (                                   )
Note.  When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers. 
22 Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 41. Then complete  the
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Instructions for Form 1040, line 44 
(or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 42). 
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. 
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2010 
17,015
✔
1,000
✔
Page 74 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 75 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain WorksheetÐLine 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1 .......................................................... . 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain .. . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ........................... . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............ . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ............................................................... .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- .................... . 6. (-0-)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................ . 7. 1,000.00
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2010
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2009
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2010
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2010
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 75

Page 76 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the securities. The securities held for investment How To Make the 
must be identified as such in your records on the Mark-to-Market ElectionSpecial Rules for
day you got them (for example, by holding them
To make the mark-to-market election for 2011,in a separate brokerage account).Traders in Securities
you must file a statement by April 18, 2011. This
statement should be attached to either yourSpecial rules apply if you are a trader in securi- How To Report 2010 individual income tax return or a requestties in the business of buying and selling securi-
for an extension of time to file that return. TheTransactions from trading activities result in cap-ties for your own account. To be engaged in
statement must include the following informa-ital gains and losses and must be reported onbusiness as a trader in securities, you must
tion.Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from thesemeet all the following conditions.
transactions are subject to the limit on capital • That you are making an election under• You must seek to profit from daily market losses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenuemovements in the prices of securities and
Code.Mark-to-market election made. If you madenot from dividends, interest, or capital ap-
the mark-to-market election, you should reportpreciation. • The first tax year for which the election is
all gains and losses from trading as ordinary effective.• Your activity must be substantial. gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead
• The trade or business for which you areof as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. In• You must carry on the activity with con-
making the election.that case, securities held at the end of the yeartinuity and regularity.
in your business as a trader are marked to mar-
If you are not required to file a 2010 incomeket by treating them as if they were sold (andThe following facts and circumstances should
tax return, you make the election by placing thereacquired) for fair market value on the lastbe considered in determining if your activity is a
above statement in your books and records nobusiness day of the year. But do not mark tosecurities trading business.
later than March 15, 2011. Attach a copy of themarket any securities you held for investment.• Typical holding periods for securities statement to your 2011 return.Report sales from those securities on Schedulebought and sold. If your method of accounting for 2010 isD, not Form 4797.
inconsistent with the mark-to-market election,• The frequency and dollar amount of your Expenses. Interest expense and other invest- you must change your method of accounting fortrades during the year. ment expenses that an investor would deduct on securities under Revenue Procedure 2008-52
Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a• The extent to which you pursue the activity (or its successor) available at www.irs.gov/irb/
trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit orto produce income for a livelihood. 2008-36_IRB/ar09.html . Revenue Procedure
Loss From Business, if the expenses are from 2008-52 requires you to file Form 3115, Applica-• The amount of time you devote to the ac- the trading business. Commissions and other tion for Change in Accounting Method. Follow itstivity. costs of acquiring or disposing of securities are instructions. Enter ª64º on line 1a of the Form
not deductible but must be used to figure gain or 3115.If your trading activities do not meet the above loss. The limit on investment interest expense, Once you make the election, it will apply todefinition of a business, you are considered an which applies to investors, does not apply to 2011 and all later tax years, unless you getinvestor, and not a trader. It does not matter interest paid or incurred in a trading business. permission from the IRS to revoke it. The effectwhether you call yourself a trader or a ªday
of making the election is described underSelf-employment tax. Gains and losses fromtrader.º
Mark-to-market election made, earlier.selling securities as a trader are not subject to
For more information on this election, seeself-employment tax. This is true whether theNote. You may be a trader in some securi-
Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-election is made or not. For an exception thatties and have other securities you hold for in-
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 atapplies to section 1256 contracts, seevestment. The special rules discussed here do
 www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.Self-Employment Income earlier under Sectionnot apply to the securities held for investment.
1256 Contracts Marked to Market.You must keep detailed records to distinguish
Page 76 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 77 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). • Order IRS products online.
The Low Income Taxpayer Clinic program • Research your tax questions online.serves individuals who have a problem with the
5. IRS and whose income is below a certain level. • Search publications online by topic or
LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most keyword.
LITCs can provide representation before the • Use the online Internal Revenue Code,IRS or in court on audits, tax collection disputes,How To Get Tax regulations, or other official guidance.and other issues for free or a small fee. If an
individual's native language is not English, some • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
clinics can provide multilingual information published in the last few years.Help
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For • Figure your withholding allowances usingmore information, see Publication 4134, LowYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, the withholding calculator online at www.Income Taxpayer Clinic List. This publication isorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- irs.gov/individuals.available at IRS.gov, by callingtions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed byeral ways. By selecting the method that is best
local IRS office. using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)for you, you will have quick and easy access to
Assistant.tax help. Free tax services. Publication 910, IRS
Guide to Free Tax Services, is your guide to IRS • Sign up to receive local and national taxContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The
services and resources. Learn about free tax news by email.Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde-
information from the IRS, including publications,pendent organization within the IRS. We help • Get information on starting and operatingservices, and education and assistance pro-taxpayers who are experiencing economic a small business.grams. The publication also has an index of overharm, such as not being able to provide necessi-
100 TeleTax topics (recorded tax information)ties like housing, transportation, or food; taxpay-
you can listen to on the telephone. The majorityers who are seeking help in resolving tax Phone. Many services are available byof the information and services listed in thisproblems with the IRS; and those who believe phone. publication are available to you free of charge. Ifthat an IRS system or procedure is not working
there is a fee associated with a resource or
as it should. Here are seven things every tax-
service, it is listed in the publication. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-payer should know about TAS:
Accessible versions of IRS published prod- tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM• The Taxpayer Advocate Service is your ucts are available on request in a variety of (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearvoice at the IRS. alternative formats for people with disabilities. forms, instructions, and publications, and
prior-year forms and instructions. You• Our service is free, confidential, and tai- Free help with your return. Free help in pre-
should receive your order within 10 days.lored to meet your needs. paring your return is available nationwide from
IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with• You may be eligible for our help if you Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.have tried to resolve your tax problem help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-through normal IRS channels and have • Solving problems. You can getseling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designedgotten nowhere, or you believe an IRS face-to-face help solving tax problemsto assist taxpayers age 60 and older with theirprocedure just isn't working as it should. every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-• We help taxpayers whose problems are filing and all volunteers will let you know about
plain IRS letters, request adjustments tocausing financial difficulty or significant credits and deductions you may be entitled to
your account, or help you set up a pay-cost, including the cost of professional claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-representation. This includes businesses 1-800-829-1040.
tance Center for an appointment. To findas well as individuals. As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the
the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-• Our employees know the IRS and how to tacts or look in the phone book underest AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 ornavigate it. If you qualify for our help, we'll United States Government, Internal Reve-visit AARP's website atassign your case to an advocate who will nue Service.www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.listen to your problem, help you under-
For more information on these programs, go • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessstand what needs to be done to resolve it,
to IRS.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the to TTY/TDD equipment, calland stay with you every step of the way
upper right-hand corner. 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or tountil your problem is resolved.
order forms and publications.Internet. You can access the IRS web-• We have at least one local taxpayer advo-
site at IRS.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-cate in every state, the District of Colum-
a week to:
 ten to pre-recorded messages coveringbia, and Puerto Rico. You can call your
various tax topics.local advocate, whose number is in your • E-file your return. Find out about commer-
phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer Ad- cial tax preparation and e-file services • Refund information. To check the status ofvocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, available free to eligible taxpayers. your 2010 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 orand on our website at www.irs.gov/advo- 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-• Check the status of your 2010 refund. Gocate. You can also call our toll-free line at mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week).to IRS.gov and click on Where's My Re-1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS ac-fund. Wait at least 72 hours after the IRS1-800-829-4059. knowledges receipt of your e-filed return,acknowledges receipt of your e-filed re-
or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper re-• You can learn about your rights and re- turn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper
turn. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-sponsibilities as a taxpayer by visiting our return. If you filed Form 8379 with your
turn, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filedonline tax toolkit at www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov. return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you
electronically). Have your 2010 tax returnYou can get updates on hot tax topics by filed electronically). Have your 2010 tax
available so you can provide your socialvisiting our YouTube channel at www.you- return available so you can provide your
security number, your filing status, and thetube.com/tasnta and our Facebook page social security number, your filing status,
exact whole dollar amount of your refund.at www.facebook.com/YourVoiceAtIRS, or and the exact whole dollar amount of your
If you check the status of your refund andby following our tweets at www.twitter. refund.
are not given the date it will be issued,com/YourVoiceatIRS. • Download forms, including talking tax please wait until the next week before
forms, instructions, and publications. checking back.
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 77

Page 78 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Other refund information. To check the or help you set up a payment plan. If you DVD for tax products. You can order
status of a prior-year refund or amended need to resolve a tax problem, have ques- Publication 1796, IRS Tax Products
return refund, call 1-800-829-1040. tions about how the tax law applies to your DVD, and obtain:
individual tax return, or you are more com- • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-Evaluating the quality of our telephone fortable talking with someone in person, lications.services. To ensure IRS representatives give visit your local Taxpayer Assistance
accurate, courteous, and professional answers, • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-Center where you can spread out your
we use several methods to evaluate the quality tions.records and talk with an IRS representa-
of our telephone services. One method is for a tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool andsecond IRS representative to listen in on or essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you finding aid.record random telephone calls. Another is to ask can call your local Center and leave a
• Tax law frequently asked questions.some callers to complete a short survey at the message requesting an appointment to re-
end of the call. solve a tax account issue. A representa- • Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-tive will call you back within 2 business sponse system.Walk-in. Many products and services days to schedule an in-person appoint-
are available on a walk-in basis. • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of thement at your convenience. If you have an
U.S. Code.ongoing, complex tax account problem or
a special need, such as a disability, an• Products. You can walk in to many post • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxappointment can be requested. All otheroffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up forms.issues will be handled without an appoint-certain forms, instructions, and publica-
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.ment. To find the number of your localtions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
office, go to stores, copy centers, city and county gov- • Toll-free and email technical support.www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in theernment offices, credit unions, and office
• Two releases during the year.phone book under United States Govern-supply stores have a collection of products
± The first release will ship the beginningment, Internal Revenue Service.available to print from a CD or photocopy
of January 2011.from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
± The final release will ship the beginningoffices and libraries have the Internal Rev- Mail. You can send your order for
of March 2011.enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue forms, instructions, and publications to
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- the address below. You should receive
Purchase the DVD from National Technicalable for research purposes. a response within 10 days after your request is
Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/received.• Services. You can walk in to your local cdorders for $30 (no handling fee) or call
Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD for $30Internal Revenue Serviceness day for personal, face-to-face tax (plus a $6 handling fee).1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters, Bloomington, IL 61705-6613request adjustments to your tax account,
Page 78 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 79 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of the Investment interest: The inter- maker or specialist in listed op-
are the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money tions.
used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable to
a. A straddle, including any Original issue discount (OID):term used in another publication property held for investment.
set of offsetting positions The amount by which the statedmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner redemption price at maturity of aing.
whose participation in partnership debt instrument is more than its is-b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whose sue price.you acquire propertymethod under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively Passive activity: An activity in-your income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the volving the conduct of a trade orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- business in which you do not mate-You generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- rially participate and any rental ac-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially tivity. However, the rental of realthem, rather than when you pay identical property at a price Listed option: Any option that is estate is not a passive activity ifthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of, both of the following are true.
At-risk rules: Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that • More than one-half of the per-amount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- sonal services you performMarked to market rule: Thethe amount you risk losing in the ducing capital gains from a during the year in all trades ortreatment of each section 1256activity. transaction described in businesses are performed incontract (defined later) held by a(1). real property trades or busi-Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as
nesses in which you materi-your investment in property for tax if it were sold for its fair market
ally participate.purposes. The basis of property value on the last business day ofDemand loan: A loan payable in
you buy is usually the cost. Basis is the year.full at any time upon demand by the • You perform more than 750
used to figure gain or loss on the lender. hours of services during theMarket discount: The stated re-sale or disposition of investment year in real property trades ordemption price of a bond at matur-Dividend: A distribution ofproperty. businesses in which you ma-ity minus your basis in the bondmoney or other property made by a terially participate.Below-market loan: A demand immediately after you acquire it.corporation to its shareholders out
loan (defined later) on which inter- Market discount arises when theof its earnings and profits. Portfolio income: Gross incomeest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de-
from interest, dividends, annuities,Equity option: Any option:applicable federal rate, or a term creases after its issue date.
or royalties that is not derived in theloan where the amount loaned is • To buy or sell stock, or Market discount bond: Any ordinary course of a trade or busi-more than the present value of all
bond having market discount ex- ness. It includes gains from the• That is valued directly or indi-payments due under the loan.
cept: sale or trade of property (other thanrectly by reference to any
Call: An option that entitles the an interest in a passive activity)stock or narrow-based secur- • Short-term obligations withpurchaser to buy, at any time producing portfolio income or heldity index. fixed maturity dates of up to 1before a specified future date, for investment.year from the date of issue,property such as a stated number Fair market value: The price at Premium: The amount by which• Tax-exempt obligations thatof shares of stock at a specified which property would change your cost or other basis in a bondyou bought before May 1,price. hands between a willing buyer and right after you get it is more than1993,a willing seller, both having reason-Cash method: An accounting the total of all amounts payable on
able knowledge of the relevant • U.S. savings bonds, andmethod under which you report the bond after you get it (other than
facts.your income in the year in which payments of qualified stated inter-• Certain installment obliga-
you actually or constructively re- est).tions.Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your of interest that would be payable for Private activity bond: A bondexpenses in the year you pay them. any period if interest accrued at the Mutual fund: A mutual fund is a that is part of a state or local gov-
applicable federal rate and was regulated investment companyCommodities trader: A person ernment bond issue of which:
payable annually on December 31, generally created by ªpoolingºwho is actively engaged in trading
minus any interest payable on the funds of investors to allow them to 1. More than 10% of the pro-section 1256 contracts and is regis-
loan for that period. take advantage of diversity of in- ceeds are to be used for atered with a domestic board of
vestments and professional man- private business use, andtrade designated as a contract Forward contract: A contract to agement.market by the Commodities Fu- 2. More than 10% of the pay-deliver a substantially fixed amounttures Trading Commission. ment of the principal or inter-of property (including cash) for a Nominee: A person who re-
est is:substantially fixed price. ceives, in his or her name, incomeCommodity future: A contract
that actually belongs to someonemade on a commodity exchange, a. Secured by an interest inFutures contract: An ex- else.calling for the sale or purchase of a property to be used for achange-traded contract to buy orfixed amount of a commodity at a private business use (orsell a specified commodity or finan- Nonequity option: Any listedfuture date for a fixed price. payments for the property),cial instrument at a specified price option that is not an equity option,
orat a specified future date. See also such as debt options, commodityConversion transaction: Any
Commodity future. futures options, currency options,transaction that you entered into b. Derived from payments for
and broad-based stock index op-after April 30, 1993, that meets property (or borrowedGift loan: Any below-market loan tions.both of these tests. money) used for a privatewhere the forgone interest is in the business use.nature of a gift. Options dealer: Any person reg-1. Substantially all of your ex-
istered with an appropriate nationalpected return from the trans- Interest: Compensation for the securities exchange as a market Put: An option that entitles theaction is due to the time value use or forbearance of money. purchaser to sell, at any timeof your net investment.
Publication 550 (2010) Page 79

Page 80 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
before a specified future date, Commodity Futures Trading under Section 1256 Contracts stock and any dividend on the
property such as a stated number Commission or any board of Marked to Market in chapter 4. stock that has not become
of shares of stock at a specified trade or exchange approved payable.
Securities futures contract: Aprice. by the Secretary of the Trea- 2. The stock:contract of sale for future deliverysury.
Real estate mortgage invest- of a single security or of a nar- a. Is limited and preferred asment conduit (REMIC): An en- row-based security index.Restricted stock: Stock you get to dividends,tity that is formed for the purpose of for services you perform that is Short sale: The sale of property b. Does not participate in cor-holding a fixed pool of mortgages nontransferable and is subject to a that you generally do not own. You porate growth to any signif-secured by interests in real prop- substantial risk of forfeiture. borrow the property to deliver to a icant extent, anderty, with multiple classes of inter-
buyer and, at a later date, you buyests held by investors. These Section 1256 contract: Any: c. Has a fixed redemptionsubstantially identical property andinterests may be either regular or price.• Regulated futures contract, deliver it to the lender.residual.
• Foreign currency contract as Straddle: Generally, a set of off-Regulated futures contract: A Term loan: Any loan that is not adefined in chapter 4 under setting positions on personal prop-section 1256 contract that: demand loan.Section 1256 Contracts erty. A straddle may consist of a
Marked to Market,• Provides that amounts that purchased option to buy and a pur- Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-must be deposited to, or may chased option to sell on the same• Nonequity option, curities at a loss within 30 daysbe withdrawn from, your mar- number of shares of the security, before or after you buy or acquire in• Dealer equity option, orgin account depend on daily with the same exercise price and a fully taxable trade, or acquire amarket conditions (a system period.• Dealer securities futures con- contract or option to buy, substan-of marking to market), and tract. tially identical stock or securities.Stripped preferred stock: Stock• Is traded on, or subject to the that meets the following tests.For tax years beginning afterrules of, a qualified board of
July 21, 2010, a section 1256 con-exchange, such as a domes- 1. There has been a separation
tract does not include certaintic board of trade designated in ownership between the
swaps as listed in Exceptionsas a contract market by the ■
Page 80 Publication 550 (2010)

Page 81 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Build America Bonds ...... . 12 Capital loss carryover ..... . 63, Dealer securities futuresA
69, 70 contracts ................. . 40Capital asset .............. . 51Abusive tax shelters  (See Tax
Worksheet 4-1 ............ . 68Convertible ............... . 49 Debt instruments, retirementshelters)
Coupon ................... . 17 Cash method ..... . 7, 17, 32, 79 of ........................ . 53Accounting fees ............ . 36
Reporting options for savingsEnterprise zone facility ..... . 13 Decedents .............. . 42, 69Accrual method ..... . 7, 17, 25,
bond interest ............. . 8Federally guaranteed ...... . 12 U.S. savings bond interest,32, 79
Identification .............. . 43 Cash-settled options ....... . 40 reporting of .............. . 9Accuracy-related penalty .... . 5
Market discount ... . 13, 32, 45, Casualty losses ............ . 53 Demand loans .............. . 79Acquisition discount ... . 16, 45 53, 67, 79 CDOs (Collateralized debt Demutualization ............ . 49Adjusted basis ..... . 22, 42, 43, New York Liberty bonds ... . 13 obligations) .............. . 26 Deposits, loss on ........... . 5344 Par value ................. . 45 Certificates of deposit Discount on debtAlaska Permanent Fund Premiums on ....... . 34, 45, 79 (CDs) .................... . 14 instruments ........... . 13-17dividends ............ . 23, 33 Private activity ........ . 13, 79 Children: Certificates of deposit ...... . 14Amortization of bond Redemption or retirement Alaska Permanent Fund Election to report all interest aspremium .............. . 34-35 of ...................... . 38 dividends ............... . 33 OID .................... . 17Annuities: Sold between interest Capital gain distributions ... . 33 Face-amount certificates ... . 15Borrowing on .............. . 36 dates ................... . 12 Custodian account for ...... . 3 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 52Interest on ................. . 6 State and local Gifts to .................... . 5 Inflation-indexed .......... . 15Life insurance proceeds used to government ............. . 52 Investment income of .... . 3, 33 Market discount bonds (Seebuy ..................... . 12 Stripped ........... . 12, 15, 45 Qualified dividends ........ . 33 Market discount bonds)Sale of .................... . 53 Tax credit bonds .......... . 12 Savings account with parent as Original issue discount (SeeSingle-premium ........... . 36 Tax-exempt ............... . 52 trustee ................... . 5 Original issue discount (OID))Trade for .............. . 38, 49 Traded flat ................. . 6 U.S. savings bond owner ... . 8 Short-term obligations .... . 16,Applicable federal rate ...... . 6 U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Clerical help ................ . 36 52Appreciated financial bonds) Stripped bonds andCollateralized debt obligationspositions ................. . 39 U.S. Treasury (See U.S. coupons ................ . 15(CDOs) ................... . 26
Arbitrage bonds ............ . 13 Treasury bills, notes, and Discounted debtCommissions .............. . 43bonds)Assistance  (See Tax help) instruments .............. . 13Commodities traders ....... . 79Brokerage fees ......... . 36, 68At-risk rules ......... . 31, 67, 79 Discounted tax-exemptCommodity futures ..... . 54, 56,Build America Bonds ....... . 12Attorneys' fees ............. . 36 obligations ............... . 4579
Automatic investment Dividends  (See also FormCommunity property:
service ............ . 36, 43, 56 1099-DIV) ......... . 20-25, 79U.S. savings bonds ......... . 8CAverage basis: Alaska PermanentConstructive ownershipCalls and puts .......... . 60, 79Double-category method ... . 47 Fund ............... . 23, 33transactions ......... . 50, 54Table 4-3 ................. . 60 Exempt-interest ..... . 5, 23, 56Single-category method .... . 46 Constructive receipt ........ . 17Capital assets .............. . 51 Extraordinary ............. . 58Constructive sales ......... . 39Capital gain Holding period ............ . 20Contractors, insolvencydistributions ...... . 21-22, 24,B Insurance policies ......... . 23of ........................ . 5733, 56Backup withholding ......... . 3 Money market funds ....... . 21ConversionCapital gain tax Nominees ............. . 20, 25Bad debts .............. . 53, 56 transactions ......... . 53, 79computation ............. . 70 Ordinary .................. . 20Bankrupt financial institutions: Convertible stocks and Patronage ................ . 23Capital gains andDeposit in ................. . 53 bonds .................... . 49 Payments in lieu of ........ . 58losses ................. . 51-56Bargain purchases ......... . 42 Cooperatives, sales of stock Qualified ........... . 20, 24, 33Constructive ownershipBasis ................ . 41-50, 79 to ........................ . 64 Qualified foreigntransactions ............ . 54Adjusted ....... . 22, 42, 43, 44 Co-owners of U.S. savings corporation ............. . 21Definition ................. . 51Average .................. . 46 bonds ..................... . 8 Received in January ....... . 20Empowerment zoneCost .................. . 41, 45 Corporate distributions .... . 20 Reinvestment of ........... . 56assets .................. . 67Inherited property ......... . 42 Capital gain ........ . 24, 33, 56 Reinvestment plans ... . 21, 36,Investment property ....... . 51Investment property ....... . 41 Constructive .............. . 22 44Long-term ............ . 58, 68Like-kind exchanges ....... . 48 Dividends (See Dividends) Reporting requirements ... . 20,Long-term debtOther than cost ............ . 41 Fractional shares .......... . 23 23-25instruments ............. . 52REITs .................... . 43 Liquidating ............ . 22, 25 Restricted stock ........... . 24Losses, limit on ........... . 69REMIC, residual interest ... . 26 Nondividend .......... . 22, 25 Sale or trade vs. ........... . 38Passive activities .......... . 67Replacement stock ........ . 66 Return of capital ........... . 22 Scrip ..................... . 23Qualified covered callStocks and bonds ..... . 22, 23, Stock rights ............... . 22 Sold stock ................ . 20options ................. . 6234, 43 Undistributed capital Stock ................. . 44, 56Qualified small businessBasis of shares: gains ................... . 21 Underreported ............. . 4stock ................... . 65Acquired by Corporate Veterans' insurance ..... . 5, 23Reporting requirements ... . 62,reinvestment ............ . 43 reorganizations .......... . 4866, 67 Divorce ................ . 42, 50
Bearer obligations ...... . 14, 53 Cost basis .............. . 41, 45Rollover of gain from sale of Double-category method ... . 47
Below-market loans .... . 6-7, 79 securities ............... . 65 Coupon bonds ............. . 17
Bonds: Short-term ............ . 58, 68
EAccrued interest on ........ . 19 Tax rates ................. . 69
DAmortization of premium ... . 34 28% rate gain worksheet, Education Savings Bond
Day traders ................. . 76Arbitrage .................. . 13 completed sample .... . 69 Program .............. . 10-11
Basis ................. . 34, 43 Table 4-2 ............... . 69 Dealer equity options ....... . 40 Interest excluded under .... . 19
Publication 550 (2010) Page 81

Page 82 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Education Savings Bond Form 4952 .................. . 34 Life insurance companies, Sales and trades .......... . 38
Program (Cont.) demutualization ......... . 49 Services, received for ...... . 41Form 6198 .................. . 67
Recordkeeping Life, paid to beneficiary .... . 12 Spouse, received from ..... . 42Form 6781 .... . 41, 54, 62, 67, 70
requirements ............ . 11 Prepaid premiums .......... . 6 Taxable trades, receivedForm 8275 .................. . 30
Single-premium life ........ . 36Employee stock options ..... . 2 in ...................... . 42Form 8275-R ............... . 30 Trades .................... . 49Employee stock ownership Form 8582 .................. . 27 Veterans' dividends, interestplans (ESOPs), sales of stock Form 8614 ................... . 3 Jon .................... . 5, 23to ........................ . 64 Form 8815 ........... . 10, 11, 19 Joint accounts .............. . 5Interest expenses:Employer identification Form 8824 .................. . 48 Allocation of ............... . 32 Joint and separatenumbers (EINs) .......... . 27 Form 8832 .................. . 27 Investment interest .... . 32, 79 returns ............... . 31, 69Empowerment zone ........ . 67 Form 8886 .............. . 29, 30 Limit on ............. . 32, 33Endowment contracts ...... . 36 Form SS-4 .................. . 27 When to deduct ......... . 32Enterprise zone facility LMargin accounts .......... . 32Form W-8BEN ............... . 5bonds .................... . 13 Life insurance companies:Paid in advance ........... . 32Form W-9 ................... . 4Equity option ........... . 40, 79 Straddles ................. . 37 demutualization ........... . 49Forward contracts .......... . 79Estate income received by Unstated .................. . 41 Like-kind exchanges ... . 48, 50Fractional shares ....... . 23, 56beneficiary ................ . 3 Interest income ............. . 5 Basis of propertyFree tax services ........... . 77Exchanges of mutual Annuity contracts ........... . 6 received ................ . 48Frozen deposits .......... . 6, 19funds .................... . 49 Bonds traded flat ........... . 6 Reporting requirements .... . 48Futures contracts:Exempt-interest dividends on Certificates of deposits ..... . 6 Limited partners ............ . 79Definition ................. . 79mutual fund stock ........ . 56 Condemnation awards ...... . 6 LiquidatingRegulated ............ . 40, 80Expenses of producing Deferred interest distributions ......... . 22, 44Securities ............. . 56, 59income ................... . 35 accounts ................ . 6 Listed options .......... . 40, 79Futures, commodity .... . 54, 56, Dividends on deposit or share Load charges .............. . 4379 accounts ................ . 5 Loans:Wash sales ............... . 58F Frozen deposits ......... . 6, 19 Below-market ......... . 6-7, 79Face-amount certificates ... . 15 Gift for opening account .... . 6
Gift and demand ........ . 7, 79Fair market value ... . 41, 42, 45, Individual retirementG Guarantees ............... . 5779 arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 5Gains on qualified small Term ................... . 7, 80Installment saleFederal guarantee on business stock ........... . 65 Local government obligationspayments ................ . 6bonds .................... . 12 Gains on sales or trades  (See (See State or local governmentInsurance dividends ........ . 6Fees to buy or sell ......... . 36 also Capital gains and obligations)Money market funds ........ . 5Financial asset securitization losses) ............ . 45, 50, 51 Nominee distributions ....... . 5 Long-term capital gains andinvestment trusts Gifts ............. . 5, 42, 56, 79 Prepaid insurance losses ................ . 58, 68(FASITs) ................. . 26 Gifts of shares ............. . 48 premiums ................ . 6 Long-term debtFirst-in first-out (FIFO) ..... . 46 Glossary ................ . 79-80 Reporting .............. . 17-20 instruments .............. . 52Foreign accounts and Government obligations .... . 16 Seller-financed Losses on sales or trades  (Seetrusts ..................... . 2 mortgage ........... . 17, 19 also Capital gains andForeign currency Tax refunds ................ . 6 losses) ................... . 51transactions ............. . 40 H Taxable ........... . 5-6, 11, 12 Amount calculation ........ . 45Foreign income ............. . 2 Hedging transactions ..... . 40, Tax-exempt ........... . 12, 17 Carryback election .... . 40, 4141, 54Forgone interest ........... . 79 U.S. savings bonds, person Mutual fund or REIT stock heldHelp  (See Tax help)Form: responsible for tax (Table 6 months or less ........ . 56Holding period:1066 (Schedule Q) ........ . 36 1-2) ..................... . 8 Passive activities ... . 27, 31, 33Investment property ....... . 55 Underreported ............. . 43115 ...................... . 8 Related parties ............ . 50Replacement stock ........ . 66 Usurious interest ........... . 64952 ..................... . 34 Section 1244 (small business)Shares acquired by VA insurance dividends ..... . 5Form 1040 .............. . 17, 23 stock ................... . 54reinvestment ............ . 56 Investment clubs ........ . 27-28Schedule B ............... . 17 Small business investmentStraddles ................. . 63 Investment counsel and company stock .......... . 55Form 1040, Schedule D .... . 57,
advice .................... . 36 Wash sales ............... . 6259, 66, 70
Investment expenses .... . 31-37IForm 1040A ................ . 17
Allocated ................. . 26Income from sources outsideForm 1040X ................ . 39 At-risk rules ............... . 31 MU.S. ....................... . 2Form 1041 .................. . 28 Deductible ................ . 35 Marked to market rules .... . 40,Income tax treaties (TableForm 1065 .................. . 27 Limits on deductions ....... . 31 76, 791-3) ...................... . 21Schedule K-1 ............. . 27 Nondeductible ............ . 36 Market discount bonds .... . 13,Indian tribal government ... . 12Form 1066, Schedule Q ..... . 26 Pass-through entities ...... . 36 15-16, 32, 45, 53, 67, 79Individual retirementForm 1096 ........... . 19, 25, 68 Reporting requirements .... . 37 Accrued marketarrangements (IRAs):Form 1099-B .... . 38, 67, 68, 70 Investment income .......... . 3 discount ................ . 16Interest income ............. . 5 Children ................ . 3, 33Form 1099-CAP ............ . 67 Mark-to-market election .... . 76Inflation-indexed debt General Information ........ . 3Form 1099-DIV ... . 3, 20, 23, 25 Maximum rate of capital gainsinstruments .............. . 15 Net income ............... . 33Form 1099-INT .... . 3, 5, 10, 18, (Table 4-2) ............... . 69Inherited property: Records to keep ............ . 319, 25, 26 Mechanics' and suppliers'Basis ..................... . 42 Reporting of (Table 1-1) .... . 4Form 1099-MISC ........ . 20, 58 liens ..................... . 57Holding period ............ . 56 Investment property ........ . 32Form 1099-OID ... . 5, 14, 18, 25, Meetings, expenses ofTransfer by inheritance .... . 38 Basis ..................... . 4126 attending ................. . 36Insolvency of Definition ................. . 38Form 1099-S ........... . 67, 68 Missing children, photographscontractors .............. . 57 Gain or loss treatment ..... . 51Form 1120 .................. . 27 of ......................... . 2Installment sales ........... . 67 Gift, received as ........... . 42Form 2439 .................. . 21 Mixed straddles ........ . 58, 63Insurance: Holding period ............ . 55
Form 3115 ............ . 8, 35, 76 Money market funds ....... . 21Borrowing on .............. . 36 Liquidation, received in .... . 44
Interest income ............. . 5Form 4684 .................. . 53 Dividends, interest on .... . 6, 23 Nontaxable trades, received
More information  (See Tax help)Form 4797 ........... . 48, 54, 55 Interest option on .......... . 12 in ...................... . 42
Page 82 Publication 550 (2010)

Page 83 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgages: Reporting requirements: Seller-financedP
mortgages ............... . 19Revenue bonds ........... . 13 Bad debts ................. . 57Passive activities ........... . 79
Secondary liability on Bond premium Short sales .............. . 57-58Gains and losses ...... . 27, 31,
home ................... . 57 amortization ............ . 35 Adjusted basis ............ . 4433, 67
Seller-financed ............ . 19 Capital gains and Defined ................... . 80Pass-through entities:
losses ........... . 62, 66, 67 Expenses of .............. . 37Municipal bonds  (See also State Rollover of gain ........... . 66
Dividend income .......... . 23 Extraordinary dividends .... . 58or local government Patronage dividends ....... . 23
Exempt-interest dividends ... . 5obligations) ........ . 12, 17, 52 Puts ...................... . 60Penalties: Interest on U.S. savings Small business investmentMutual fund, defined ....... . 79 Accuracy-related ........ . 5, 30 bonds ................. . 8, 9 company stock .......... . 55Mutual funds .... . 21, 31, 33, 36, Backup withholding ......... . 5
Investment expenses ...... . 37 Short-term capital gains and43, 56 Civil fraud ................. . 31
Like-kind exchanges ....... . 48 losses ................ . 58, 68Individual retirement Early withdrawal ......... . 6, 20
Options ................... . 60arrangements (IRAs) ..... . 2 Short-termFailure to pay tax .......... . 31
Original issue discount ..... . 14 obligations ..... . 16-17, 45, 52publicly offered ............ . 36 Failure to supply SSN ...... . 3
S corporation income, Interest deduction, limitSubstantial
deductions, and on ...................... . 33understatement ......... . 30
N credits .................. . 27 Single-category method .... . 46Valuation misstatement .... . 30
Section 1256 contracts .... . 41New York Liberty bonds .... . 13 Sixty/forty rule ............. . 40Political parties:
State or local governmentNominee distributions: Debts owed by ............ . 57 Small business investmentobligations .............. . 12Dividends ............. . 20, 25 company stock ....... . 55, 66Portfolio income ........... . 79 Straddles ................. . 67Interest income .......... . 5, 19 Reporting requirements .... . 55Preferred stock: Substitute payments ....... . 58Original issue discount ..... . 14 Small business stock ...... . 44,Nonqualified .............. . 49 Tax-exempt interestNominee, defined .......... . 79 55, 56, 65Redeemable at a income ................. . 17Nonbusiness bad debts ... . 53, premium ................ . 22 Social security number (SSN):Trades .................... . 7656 Stripped .............. . 25, 80 Custodial accounts ......... . 3Wash sales ............... . 59Noncapital assets .......... . 51 Premiums on bonds .... . 34, 45, Joint accounts ............. . 3Repossession of real79Nondeductible investment Requirement to give ........ . 3property .................. . 56expenses ................ . 36 Private activity bonds ..... . 13, Specialized small businessRestricted property ......... . 4279Nondividend investment company
Restricted stock ........ . 24, 80distributions ............. . 22 stock ................. . 44, 66Public utility stock
Retirement of debtreinvestment ............. . 44Nonequity options ...... . 40, 79 Spouses:
instrument ............... . 53 Transfers between (See alsoPublications  (See Tax help)Nonqualified preferred
Return of capital  (See Related partystock ..................... . 49 Puts and calls .......... . 60, 79 Nondividend distributions) transactions) ........ . 42, 50Table 4-3 ................. . 60Nonresident aliens:
Revocable trust, trustee's State or local governmentBackup withholding ......... . 5 commissions for ......... . 36 obligations ............ . 12-13Nontaxable return of Rollover of gain from sale:Q Market discount bonds (Seecapital ................... . 22
Empowerment zone Market discount bonds)Qualified dividends ......... . 24Nontaxable stock rights .... . 56 assets .................. . 67 Private activity bonds ..... . 13,Qualified small businessNontaxable trades ...... . 48, 56 Securities ............. . 65, 66 79stock .............. . 44, 56, 65Notes: Registration requirement ... . 12Gains on .................. . 65Individuals, bought at Taxable interest ........... . 12discount ................ . 53 S Tax-exempt interest ....... . 12U.S. Treasury (See U.S. S corporations ......... . 27, 44R Stock:Treasury bills, notes, and Safe deposit box ........... . 36Real estate investment trusts Basis .......... . 22, 23, 43, 66bonds) (REITs) ............ . 21, 43, 56 Sales and trades of investment Capital asset .............. . 51
property ............... . 38-76 Constructive ownership .... . 50Real estate mortgage
Definition ................. . 38 Convertible ............... . 49investment conduitsO
Corporate ................. . 48(REMICs) ....... . 25-26, 36, 80 Savings bonds  (See U.S.Office expenses ............ . 36 Dividends (See Dividends)Regular interest ........... . 25 savings bonds)Options ................. . 59-60 Fractional shares ...... . 23, 56Residual interest ...... . 26, 59 SBIC stock  (See Small businessCalls and puts ......... . 60, 79 Identification .............. . 43Recordkeeping ............. . 55 investment company stock)Cash settlement ....... . 40, 60 Installment sales .......... . 67Recordkeeping requirements: Scrip dividends ............ . 23Dealer equity .............. . 40 Nonqualified preferredEducation Savings Bond Section 1202 gain .......... . 66Deep-in-the-money ........ . 62 stock ................... . 49Program ................ . 11 Section 1244 stock ......... . 54Employee stock ............ . 2 Options for employees ...... . 2Investment income ......... . 3 Section 1256 contracts .... . 39,Equity ................ . 40, 79 Public utility,Small business stock ...... . 55 56, 60, 67, 80Gain or loss ........... . 59, 62 reinvestment ............ . 44Redemption of stock ....... . 38 Net gain on ............... . 40Holding period ............ . 56 Redemption of ............ . 38Redemption or retirement of Net loss on ............... . 40Listed ................ . 40, 79 Replacement stock ........ . 66bonds .................... . 38 Reporting requirements .... . 41Nonequity ............. . 40, 79 Restricted stock ....... . 24, 80Regulated futuresQualified covered call ...... . 62 Securities: Rights ............. . 22, 44, 56contract .............. . 40, 80Reporting requirements .... . 60 Holding period ............ . 55 S corporations ............ . 44Reinvestment rights ........ . 43Section 1256 contracts ... . 39, Installment sales .......... . 67 Sales to ESOPs or60 REITs  (See Real estate Lost, stolen, etc., cost of cooperatives ............ . 64investment trusts (REITs))Wash sales ............... . 58 replacing ............... . 36 Small business ........ . 44, 56
Rollover of gain fromRelated partyOptions dealer ............. . 79 Specialized small business
sale ................ . 65, 66transactions ...... . 37, 50-51Ordinary gains and investment company .... . 44
Traders in ................. . 72Related persons ............ . 61losses ................ . 51, 53 Splits ..................... . 44
Worthless ............. . 39, 57REMICs  (See Real estateOriginal issue discount Straddles (See Straddles)
Securities futuresmortgage investment conduits(OID) ....... . 12, 13-15, 45, 79 Stripped preferred stock .. . 25,
contracts ...... . 40, 56, 59, 80(REMICs))Adjustment to ............. . 20 80
Self-employment income ... . 41Reporting requirements .... . 14 Surrender of .............. . 38Reorganizations,
Rules ..................... . 14 corporate ................ . 48 Self-employment tax ....... . 76 Trades .................... . 48
Publication 550 (2010) Page 83

Page 84 of 84 of Publication 550 15:46 - 21-JUN-2011
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stock: (Cont.) Tax help .................... . 77 Like-kind .............. . 48, 50 Tax, responsible person (Table
Trust instruments treated Nontaxable ........ . 42, 48, 56 1-2) ..................... . 8Tax rates:
as ...................... . 39 Reporting requirements .... . 76Capital gain and losses .... . 69 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and
Stock ..................... . 48Straddles ................ . 61-64 bonds ....... . 6, 11-13, 50, 55Tax refunds:
Taxable ................... . 42Defined ................... . 80 Interest on ................. . 6 Undistributed capital
U.S. Treasury notes orHolding period ............ . 63 gains ..................... . 25Tax shelters ............. . 28-31 bonds .................. . 50Interest expense and carrying Penalties ................. . 30 Usurious interest ............ . 6
charges ................ . 37 Treasury bills, notes, and bondsReporting requirements .... . 29
Loss deferral rules ......... . 61 (See U.S. Treasury bills, notes,Rules to curb abuse ....... . 28 VMixed ............. . 58, 63, 64 and bonds)Taxable income, expenses Veterans' insurance:Reporting requirements .... . 67 Treasury inflation-indexedof ........................ . 37 Dividends on .............. . 23Stripped bonds and securities ................ . 15Taxes:coupons .......... . 12, 15, 45 Treasury inflation-protectedState and local transfer .... . 36
Stripped preferred stock .. . 25, securities (TIPS) ..... . 11, 15 WState income .............. . 37
80 Treaties, income tax (Table Warrants ................... . 59Tax-exempt bonds ......... . 52
Substitute payments ....... . 58 1-3) ...................... . 21 Wash sales .......... . 58-59, 80Tax-exempt income:
Trust income received by Holding period ............ . 56Expenses of .............. . 37
beneficiary ................ . 3 Loss deferral rules,Interest on ............ . 12, 17T straddles ............... . 62Trustee's commission forTax-exempt obligations ... . 12,Tables: Reporting requirements .... . 59revocable trust ........... . 3615, 45Capital gains maximum rate Withholding, backup ........ . 3TTY/TDD information ....... . 77Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 77(Table 4-2) .............. . 69
Worksheets:Income tax treaties (Table Taxpayer identification Capital gains, 28% rate1-3) .................... . 21 numbers (TINs): U worksheet, completedInvestment income, reporting of Aliens ..................... . 2 U.S. savings bonds  (See also sample ................. . 75(Table 1-1) ............... . 4 Term loans ............... . 7, 80 Education Savings Bond Capital loss carryover ...... . 68Puts and calls (Table Trade or business .......... . 31 Program) ......... . 6, 7-11, 11 Worthless securities ... . 39, 574-3) .................... . 60 Reporting interest on ..... . 6, 7Traders in securities ....... . 76U.S. savings bonds, person Retirement or profit-sharing ■Trades:responsible for tax (Table plan, distributed from .... . 10Insurance ................. . 491-2) ..................... . 8 Worksheet .............. . 19Investment property ....... . 38Tax credit bonds ........... . 12
Page 84 Publication 550 (2010)